Story_ID: 636408
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and observing today are Marta Grabowski, G-A-R- G-R-A-B-O-W-S-K-I and Shelby Clemons.  And I'd like to have you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us--your full name.
Speaker 2: And spelling it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I'm Joseph Christopher Simmons, known as [HistoryMaker] Chris Simmons; it's J-O-S-E-P-H, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E-R, S-I-M-M-O-N-S.
Speaker 1: And can we have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 7, 2012.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 15, 1957.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: At The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: At The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 2: My occupation is professional services accounting firm business executive.
Speaker 1: But if you--if you had one word to describe what you do, what would you describe yourself as?
Speaker 2: I lead (laughter).  You want a normal word?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: You want a title or you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A title (unclear).
Speaker 2: You want a title.  Okay.  Well, I'm the managing partner for PricewaterhouseCoopers in the Washington [D.C.] metro region, and I'm also the chairman of the partner admissions committee at PricewaterhouseCoopers, and I'm also the president of the PricewaterhouseCoopers Charitable Foundation [PricewaterhouseCoopers Charitable Foundation, Inc.].
Story_ID: 636409
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, and you're only gonna look at me; do not look over--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know where we are, but don't look at--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--just short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Favorite food is salmon.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year would be Christmas.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation would be Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase is a quote by Oscar Wilde.  "Most people are other people. Their thoughts are someone else's opinion, their lives are a mimicry, and their passions are a quotation," ['De Profundis'].
Speaker 1: I guess that was excellent.  Okay, we're gonna get started.  That's the first time someone has said Vietnam (unclear), and that quote was wonderful.
Story_ID: 636410
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start, and I want to start out by asking you about your father.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'd like you to tell me--give his name--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then I wanna know what you know about his growing up.
Speaker 2: Sure.  My father's name is Joseph Simpkins Simmons [Joseph Simmons].  I was saved by my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] from being a junior 'cause I really wouldn't have wanted to go through life being Simpkins.  My father grew up in Mississippi on farms, picking cotton.  He was from a large family; they were poor, but they had a lot of direction in terms of self-sufficiency--accountability for themselves.  And I think early on in his life, his father had decided that one of his brothers was going to be the one that they were going to put resources behind to educate; my father was not the one chosen for that, so my father ended up only getting to go to college because he went to World War II [WWII] and the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] put him through college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and I think my father graduated from high school after coming back from the war at age twenty-seven.
Speaker 1: So let's--did he talk about that period of coming back from the war at age twenty-seven and--
Speaker 2: I think he graduated from high school at twenty-seven.
Speaker 1: At twenty--
Speaker 2: I think he got back a little before that.  He talked about being older and, you know, people looking at him a little oddly at times, you know, kind of, "What are you doing here, old man?"  But he also talked about the fact that he felt a tremendous sense of opportunity because now he could get his education; he didn't have to rely on somebody else to choose him out of the brood of children.  And I just recall a lot of focus on his part about when you get opportunities, you take advantage of them; that was the number one message that he delivered to all of us about that period of his life, that he was just excited to be able to go to school and better himself.
Speaker 1: Now do you know where in Mississippi the family, you know, his family is from--do you remember where, or do you know how--
Speaker 2: Well, my father's father was adopted, so he wasn't exactly sure about his lineage.  I know my father's father had spent some time in Arkansas, I know my father's--my father will tell you he's from around Oxford, Mississippi; then there was a place called Robinsonville [Tunica Resorts] in Mississippi that my father will talk about having spent time in as a young boy, but I think they moved around Mississippi and Arkansas quite a bit, in part, because my grandfather, my father's father, was a very proud person--a very smart person for his time; he was educated in the sense that he could read and write.  (Cough) And he was a minister.  I think at various points in time he sold insurance, and he was not a person who accepted easily the second class status of blacks, and my father has a story he tells about the fact that they had to leave some part of Mississippi or Arkansas in the middle of the night because some white man had disrespected the family and my (laughter) grandfather threatened somebody with a shotgun, or something to that effect, and then they had to go.  So I might have inherited some genes from my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Yes, he--his last name was Simmons [Robert Simmons].
Speaker 1: Simmons, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just like my father's, yeah.
Story_ID: 636411
Speaker 1: Now did your father share any other stories of growing up in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: My father didn't share a lot of stories about growing up; he has shared a lot of very impactful stories on my life about his early professional working days, and I often tell people that--two things--that a lot of who I am is a function of those early stories he told me about his early working days, and my leadership approach is definitely a function of how my father--the stories my father conveyed to me.  In fact, I often say, when I give speeches that, "If you think I'm smart, you should thank my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons]; if you think I'm savvy, you should thank my father."
Speaker 1: So who--
Speaker 2: My father basically had a leadership training institute in the house.
Speaker 1: So what age were you hearing those stories.
Speaker 2: Oh, seven, eight, nine.  One of my father's favorite stories was one that I now have told my sons--I have three sons [Christopher Simmons, Joseph Simmons and Anderson Simmons], and I've told my sons repeatedly, and that--it's actually a useful story in today's day and age when so many children, once they graduate from college, are still staying at their parents' houses.  When I was, I don't know--around seven, my father told me the story of when I was born.  I was the third child, first boy, and it had been a long wait between my second oldest sister [Valerie Simmons] and me--seven years.  So I'm told that my arrival was heralded as somewhat like the (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: My arrival, when I was born, was heralded as somewhat like the coming of the, you know, the blessed arrival, or something like that, and so my father went out for a drink with a friend of his and my father did not drink often, so this was a big deal.  And his friend had had a son three days prior and, so they were celebrating the fact that they had sons, and so the other gentleman said, "Well," to my father, he said, "Joe [Joseph Simmons], when my boy turns twenty-one, he is going to be on his way to UCLA law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]," which, if you think about it, a conversation between two black men in Memphis, Tennessee in 1957, that would have been a big deal.  He said, "What's your boy going to be doing?"  And my father told me he said, "Well, Melvin [ph.]--," his friend's name was Melvin.  He said, "Melvin, I don't know what he's gonna be doing, but if he's twenty-one, he'll be a man."  At that--, "And if he's a man, that means he'll be off my payroll."  And so every year, as I got older, I thought, "Oh, my goodness, I'm getting closer to twenty-one; I gotta get a job because I gotta be off his payroll."  He instilled in me a sense that if I wasn't off his payroll, I really wasn't a man, and therefore I couldn't really respect myself.
Story_ID: 636412
Speaker 1: So that was one of the first things and, but his biggest impact on me is just how he taught me to handle people.  And I remember we'd be driving around someplace maybe when I was ten, and my father [Joseph Simmons] would wave at some total stranger, and I knew he didn't know these people.  And I'd say, "Dad, do you know that man?  Why are you waving at him?"  He said, "Boy, it's just nice to be nice."  And not long after that, I was walking through a neighborhood that I didn't walk through often, and I saw an older guy--I was probably at this time thirteen or fourteen.  I saw an older guy walking through and I--he was maybe eighteen, and I said hi to him, and the next day I went through the same neighborhood, and three boys closer to my age decided they were going to jump me and beat me up, and I wasn't really the best fighter.  And just as they were about to lay into me, that guy from the day before somehow appeared and he said, "Leave him alone."  So, after that, I've been waving and saying hi to everybody (laughter). 'Cause my father's guidance, it really saved me.
Story_ID: 636413
Speaker 1: My father operated in a very political environment because he was a school principal, so he had to deal with the central office people, he had to deal with the teachers, he had to deal with the parents, he had to deal with the students, community leaders, and at night he would tell me these stories about how he placated each of them, how he negotiated truces and compromises amongst them, and I was really listening to those, to those stories, but probably the best thing he ever told me from a work usage is how to make your bosses love you.  And he told me that when he was still a teacher and he wanted a principalship that there was a principal's job that was open, and back then in the black community in--around Memphis [Tennessee], a lotta times the white business leaders in the community basically decided who the next principal of the Negro school was going to be.  So one of his friends evidently had a in with one of the leading white businessmen and was supposedly-sort of had a lock on this next principal's job, so my father gets called down to the school board by the school superintendent, and he says to my father, "Joe [Joseph Simmons], you know there's a opening at such and such school; are you interested in it?"  My father says to the school superintendent, "Well, I could be interested in it but word has it that my friend So and So is gonna get that job because, you know, the rich, powerful businessman--white businessman--wants him to have it."  And the school superintendent told my father, "Well, last time I looked on the door outside, it's my name under school superintendent.  I make those choices."  So, my father basically knew how to--I don't really wanna use the word, but it's probably the accurate word--manipulate the mindset of his boss to make it not be about whether I get the job about, but about whether you get to prove you have the power versus that white businessman having the power, and guess who got that principal's job--my father did.  So he taught me never to go around demanding things, but to create a situation where people satisfy their own objectives by satisfying yours.  And so I've been using that guidance for a long time.
Story_ID: 636414
Speaker 1: What kind of person would you describe him--because--
Speaker 2: My father [Joseph Simmons]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because he sounds, he sounds like a deep thinker in many ways.
Speaker 2: My father is loyal, kind, dedicated, dependable, and he thinks about the importance of maintaining the long term relationship with another human being.  He's never in a rush, and it's never all about him.  He would never articulate it this way because words are really not his number one forte; they're actually more the forte of my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons].  But if he could articulate it this way, he would say it the way I say it, which is that, "If you want it to be about you, make it about the other person first; don't worry about you, you will eventually be taken care of."  That's just his mindset.  He was often the source of advice for other people.  One of the things I remember-- because he was also a minister in his spare time--he was always like the number two minister at the church [New Little Rock Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee], but he was always a person that people would come by the house and ask him for advice and trust him with their secrets.  And by talking to him, one of the things I figured out was that one of the reasons that people would ask him for advice is that he's totally non-judgmental.  So you might ask him how to do something that really wasn't consistent with his own beliefs.  He might point out, "Well, you know I don't agree with that, but I'm gonna tell you how you can do it if that's what you wanna do."  And, so people came to really respect him for his balance, and it became a source of pride for me that I knew that people were coming over to my house to ask my father for advice, and I started to try to dissect why, and when I figured out why, I tried to imitate that.  So I've always prided myself on I don't tell secrets and I don't judge, and when you don't tell secrets and when you don't judge, people confide things in you.  I often say to young professionals now when I'm talking to groups, I say, "You know, if you wanna be the person who's going to get promoted out of your work group, ask yourself this question.  If everybody in your group had a secret that they needed to tell to somebody who they thought could help them, would they come to you?  If you're not convinced that you're the number one person that the people in your circle would come to, you're not gonna be the boss one day.  Whoever's, whoever's name goes with the answer to that question, they're gonna be the boss because the people are going to let the powers that be know that's who they trust."  So, I learned a lot about creating trust through my father and the way his personality attributes worked out.
Story_ID: 636415
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, quickly then, his--he comes back, he goes to--he goes, he goes to--
Speaker 2: He goes to high school.
Speaker 1: --to school.
Speaker 2: He meets my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] who's sixteen when he's twenty-seven, as he's leaving high school which, you know, that's--was sort of normal back in the day.  And then they get married; he goes off to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] for college as an agricultural major, you know, has side jobs milking cows and stuff at Tennessee State.  They leave Tennessee State, my father gets a job as a teacher.  Interestingly enough, he got the first job as a teacher because he was doing handy work and yard work for a somewhat well to do white woman in Memphis [Tennessee] who knew and was friends with that school superintendent my father was later having that conversation with, and she told the school superintendent that she knew this nice man.  Probably back then she probably said she knew a nice boy named Joe Simmons [Joseph Simmons] (laughter), and that's how he got the interview, I think, to get the school teaching job.  Again, relationships; he made her like him enough to recommend him.  And I also remember what he told me about that interview.  He told me he got there a couple hours early 'cause he wanted to make sure he wasn't late; now I remember that about that first job.  So then he was a teacher for a while, then they made him a principal.  He, at one point, was principal of a, of a fairly good size high school.  My father had a, had a somewhat--a famous incident occur.  This was back in the time when they were sending secondhand books to the black schools, and I'm pretty sure I'm accurate when I tell this--that at some point, my father burned a bunch of the books when they got to his school because he didn't want his students studying somebody else's castoffs, and when he was burning them, somebody saw the fire and called the authorities, and he end up having to explain why he was burning these books.  But as the story goes, he got his students the better books because he had discarded the ones they sent him.  But my father had some--a little bit of a defiant streak in him; he mainly operated within the system, but I remember also as a principal, he was one of the few principals that actually joined the teachers association because he felt, you know, some camaraderie with them; very few principals were willing to do that at that time--may be more standard now, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So what was the school that he was principal of?
Speaker 2: He was principal of a school called Capeville High School in Shelby County [Tennessee]; he was part of the county system.  I pretty much always went to school in the city school system, but he was principal of Caperville High School, and then later on a smaller elementary school nearer, nearer the end of his career.
Speaker 1: And he's still alive now.
Speaker 2: He's still alive, he's--my father today is ninety-two years old; he goes to the gym a couple times week, my father still drives himself, my father--if I called him right now and said, "Be at the airport in four hours and join me in Rome [Italy]," my father would be on that plane.  He's--I think God (laughter) rightfully gave him extra years 'cause my father knows how to use them.  He doesn't miss a family event--he's a great, great, energetic person.
Story_ID: 636416
Speaker 1: So your mother--can you give me her name and--
Speaker 2: Dorothy Anderson Simmons.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me about her background and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother grew up in--she was born in Yalobusha County, Mississippi--down in the southern end of the state, then later on they moved to the northern end of the state, and she grew up in and around Senatobia [Mississippi], Holly Springs [Mississippi], and my mother was the oldest child of, I think, nine or eleven.  My mother was sent off to go to high school in Memphis [Tennessee] when she was a teenager, which was a big deal for a girl--a black girl born in 1929.  I have a great picture in my house that my brother [Bryan Simmons] got out of my grandmother's picture folio--a picture taken in about 1940 in front of their shack, you know, up on, you know, supported by some rocks--my mother when she was eleven, with my grandmother [Zenora Jackson Anderson] and the family and I keep it in a room in--sort of in an opulent room in my house to sort of strike the contrast between where she started off and where her son is.  But my grandmother's in that picture and it's sort of my way of bringing my grandmother into my life currently.  But my mother was always a top student, I'm told.  My mother then, when my--when she and my father [Joseph Simmons] went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]--she went to school for a brief period of time, but like many women of her time, she stopped going to school and she started having children.  But academically, my mother--let's just say that if my mother and my father had both been in school at the same time, my mother would have had a higher GPA [grade point average], you know.  She's very well read, loves to read, loves to discuss world events.  I often tell people, "If you were to talk to my mother, you might think you were talking to Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]."  So my father--our interaction was more around people and situations; my mother and I discussed like what was happening in the world, and policy issues, and who should, who should win the presidential election and why; we had those conversations.  But my mother, you know, mainly a homemaker, very involved in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  She had leadership positions in the community through the PTA.  My neighborhood high school [Hamilton High School] in Memphis got a new school--one of the few black schools that kind of got modernized in the early '70s [1970s], largely on the backs of a lot of community agitating that my mother led as the president of the PTA.  My mother, later on, held statewide positions in the PTA, then she got in a parliamentary procedure and a number of years ago years ago became the parliamentary procedure expert for the Memphis city school board.  So even today, if you are in Memphis and you go to a school board meeting, there will be sitting my mother at age eighty-two, dispensing the Robert's Rules of Order to the school board without a college degree but explaining Robert's Rules of Order to people who do.  I think she really enjoys that, too, actually, because I think my mother has a lot of--she's probably got some issues with the fact that she never had a chance to get the certification, you know; the degrees that say you're a smart person, when in fact my mother's brilliant and, but, you know, I would say my mother--now there's six of us.  My mother was very good at some things.  One, she made all six of us think we were the special child, but the other thing she did, and she definitely did this for me--and she sometimes suggests she overdid it--she imbued us with a tremendous confidence and a mission.  My mother had me convinced, when I was six or seven, that I could or should be president if I wanted to be.  And honestly, when I saw Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] being inaugurated, most of America was thinking, how wonderful; we have a first black president.  Yeah, I was thinking that, too, but I was also thinking, yeah, that could of been me, because my mother had me thinking that from the time I was literally this high (gesture), and I really enjoyed having some success in life as a reward to her for giving me that.  So, yeah, my mother was a great mother. She gave you the sense that you were never alone in the world, you know.  If she was alive, you were okay--just call Mom.  The Michael Jackson song comes to mind, "Just call my name, I'll be there" ['I'll Be There']?  That's kind of how I thought about my mother as a, as a person--very nurturing, but gave you a big challenge, and you were supposed to go do things in the world; you weren't just gonna be sitting around watching the world go by.
Story_ID: 636417
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her growing up?
Speaker 2: (Crying) Get a little emotional when I talk about my mom [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  That's--I know; that's so nice.  That's nice, that's nice.  But did she talk about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean my mother's growing up was--and I spent a lotta time with her parents [Zenora Jackson Anderson and Lucious Anderson]--a lot more than I did with my father's parents [Nona Buford Simmons and Robert Simmons].  My father's mother had died when he was relatively young and my father's father died when I was about ten, but I heard a lot about my mother's growing up days.  I mean it was all about, you know, working on the farm, picking cotton, going out to the field, and going to church.  That's what they did; it's norm- normal lives of, you know, black people in Mississippi with not a whole lot of opportunity in the 1930s and '40s [1940s].  And I think she had some dreams of breaking outta that, which she, you know, got down that path a little bit by going to school in Memphis [Tennessee], which was a big deal to leave Mississippi and go up to Memphis but, you know, it was really more about the farm and stories about doing what you say you're gonna do, doing your work well.  My mother's big on work ethic.  I thought it was a little funny.  When I got to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I (laughter) had a job cleaning other students' bathrooms freshman year, and they had a little training hour or something and I laughed.  I say (laughter), "I know how to clean lots a things; my mother made sure I did."  So that--those were the stories we heard, and we definitely got that, you know, sort of conveyed to us.
Speaker 1: Since they're both from Mississippi, are they far from--'cause you said your father [Joseph Simmons] was near, you know, around Oxford [Mississippi].  I mean, so what about your mother's people?
Speaker 2: Nor- Nor- well, started in southern Mississippi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mississippi.
Speaker 2: --then moved to the north.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Both of them?  No--your mother started--
Speaker 2: My mo- yeah, my mother did, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Started in southern and moved to the north--okay.
Speaker 2: And then moved to the north, yeah, to northern Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 636418
Speaker 1: When did your parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] meet?  Did they meet--
Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee] when my father came back from the war [World War II, WWII], was in high school, and my mother had been sent to Memphis to go to high school.  And I--honestly, I think--the story I've heard is that when my mother showed up at my grandparents' [Zenora Jackson Anderson and Lucious Anderson] house to basically let them know that she was marrying this twenty-seven year old man, I think the word has it that my grandfather really wanted to shoot him because, you know, if you think about it, he has--my grandfather has sent his oldest daughter, who's fifteen or sixteen at the time when she went up there, off to do this very unusual thing--get more education--and what did she do?  Meet some man, some older man and wants to get married which, I'm sure they knew, probably meant her education was now going to take a backseat; they probably weren't happy about it.  And again, given how smart my mother was (background noise), I'm sure they had big dreams for her.  So, yeah; I think, you know, it all sort of seems kind of cute looking back on it, but I'm sure, at the time, there were some, some words being exchanged (laughter) about, "What do you think you're doing?"
Story_ID: 636419
Speaker 1: Do they talk about the moment they met?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Know that story?  They don't tell that story, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Never, never heard that; that's a good question.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.  I want you to give your siblings' name, and birth order, and where you fit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So 'cause you're the third (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So I have five siblings.  My oldest sister is Evelyn [Evelyn Simmons], and she's born in 1947; then came Valerie [Valerie Simmons], born in 1954; then came me, '57 [1957]; my brother Bryan [Bryan Simmons], born in '61 [1961]; and then in '66 [1966], my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons], at about age thirty-six or so, had twins; first came--out came Alexis Faye [Alexis Simmons] in 1966 and six minutes later, out came Dara Kaye [Dara Simmons Redwine].
Speaker 1: That's funny.  That was a surprise in the family.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And actually, I will tell you.  I was nine, and I was not your normal nine year old; I was aware of some things, and I was aware that my two older sisters were about to leave home, and my brother and I were going to be the only two remaining, and I was smart enough to know that this meant better toys and more good stuff for me.  And when my sisters came, I was not happy, and I was very vocal about it.  And when people would come to the house when they born, and they would look into the crib and they'd say, "Oh, they're so cute; I'd like to take 'em with me," I would actually say, "Please do; you can have them."  And the irony is, of course, that, you know, a year later, who was doting on those two little girls more than anybody else?  I was, and I am so close to them that we talk all the time, you know; it was like the best gift God could have given me, but I didn't think so in 1966 (laughter).
Story_ID: 636420
Speaker 1: So Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], what is your earliest memory of growing up--earliest?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory growing up.  I think one of my earliest memories has to be--I think I remember sitting in my parents' house on Corry Street [sic. Corry Road] in Memphis [Tennessee], where we lived until I was five.  And I remember being around four, making mud pies with a boyhood friend of mine name Jimmy Bolden [ph.], whose family lived across the street, and their family went to church with my family.  The Boldens were, you know, deacons in the church [New Little Rock Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee], and my father [Joseph Simmons] was one of the ministers; my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] ran Sunday school, so we were very close with the Bolden family, and I remember making mud pies with Jimmy (laughter).  It's one of my first memories.
Speaker 1: And, so that's about age five, you're saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah, four or five--somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: And you lived on Corry Street how long?
Speaker 2: Until I was five years old; then we moved to a better neighborhood--newer homes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know where Corry Street is--what part of Memphis?
Speaker 2: It's in South Memphis, right off of Elvis Presley Bou- Boulevard, and it's actually near the old drive-in theater that was on Elvis Presley Boulevard in Memphis.
Speaker 1: And where you moved then--'cause you went to Corry Middle School [Corry Junior High School; Corry Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Corry Street was right near Corry Middle School.  When we moved, we moved about a twelve to thirteen minute walk, still in the Corry school district but, again, new- newer homes and a different group of people.  In the Corry Street neighborhood [Prospect Park, Memphis, Tennessee], it was more working, working class blacks.  The neighborhood we moved to was predominantly schoolteachers.  I would say at least half of the people in our neighborhood were schoolteachers.
Speaker 1: So your father--at this time that you moved, is your father then a schoolteacher at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact--and interestingly enough, when I was born, I believe, that was when my father got his first principal's job, and the joke in the family is that I chose not to come along 'til he was making more money (laughter).  So, yeah, he had a principal's job about the time I was born, then a few years later we moved out to this other neighborhood.  Now, again, it wasn't a fancy neighborhood; we were still lower middle class, but we had a brick house as opposed to a wooden house; it's probably thirteen hundred square feet.  We actually did have a--we actually had a pretty good size backyard, though.  We, we played back there a lot.
Story_ID: 636421
Speaker 1: Can you describe the community at that point?  You know, that you moved to?  What was the address of the house you lived in?
Speaker 2: That was 2381 Bridgeport Drive, and on Corry Street [sic. Corry Road] was 2021.  It's amazing what you don't forget but, yeah, 2381 Bridgeport Drive.  So when we moved into that house--we moved into that house when I was five--1962--and this neighborhood [Prospect Park, Memphis, Tennessee] was mostly people from Mississippi, some from Arkansas.  They were this whole generation--the parents were this whole generation of first generation college; mostly small black college [HBCUs].  People went to colleges like Mississippi Industrial, MI [Mississippi Industrial College, Holly Springs, Mississippi]; they call it Rust College in Mississippi [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  I don't remember the names of the ones from Arkansas, but it was those types of places.  They weren't going to the white schools 'cause they couldn't get in--wouldn't let 'em in.  And I tell you (laughter), the in- the average intellectual level of those parents (crying) and I really hadn't thought about this.  When I think about the intellectual quality of people I deal with every day today, who supposedly have their acts together, they were certainly no better, maybe--in many cases, not as good, as all those schoolteachers that were in my neighborhood, but no opportunity.  That's all they could do was go teach school--all society would let 'em do.  So the environment in that neighborhood was very focused on there're new opportunities opening up for black people, and you better be ready, and you better go get 'em.  And the beauty of my neighborhood was that I could go randomly from house to house and hear the same speech from the mother and the father; that's all everybody was focused on.  So the reinforcement of, "There's opportunity--go get it" was just tremendous.  And frankly, as I started accomplishing things, I felt as much sort of a lifting from all those neighbors as I did from my own parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] because that's just what the whole community was into.  So I never had the--I had, I had to deal very infrequently with this, you know, "Oh, you're the smart guy; you're studying too much."  No, it was, "Keep doing that."  Whole neighborhood was proud of you.  And I--as I got into high school, I was in the newspaper a lot for different things.  All the neighbors, "Oh, Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], oh, that was great."  That the unity in support of our performance and success was--it was just permeating the air.  And I was also shaped, too, by a couple of other things back then.  I'm getting emotional about this stuff, but--I was not your standard six year old even.  I read the newspaper; I know I read the front page of the paper when I was seven, but when I was six, you know, I'm sitting in my parents' little family room, and I'm watching Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I Have a Dream speech, and I'm thinking, okay, there's some change happening in the world; I need to be, I need to be ready.  And then, when I was ten--I'm pretty sure it was 1967--when the movie, 'In the Heat of the Night' came out.  And this is a very defining thing, but consistent with the culture of the neighborhood.  And you may recall 'In the Heat of the Night;' you know Sidney Poitier is a black detective comes down from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to visit his parents and his family in Mississippi.  They suspect him of committing a crime, but then they discover not only did he not commit it, but he can actually help them solve it, and there's this classic moment between him and the racist sheriff in town when the sheriff, played by Carol O'Conner [sic. Rod Steiger] says, as he's gaining respect for Sidney Poitier, who was the actor playing the role of Virgil Tibbs, when he asks Virgil Tibbs, "So what do they call a black boy who's a detective up there in (pronunciation) Philadelphia?"  And Sidney Poitier says, "They call me Mr. Tibbs!"  Now, I can remember that like it's yesterday because I remember sitting there--and Sidney Poitier had on a, you know, a black suit and a white shirt, and crisp looking, you know, man--articulate, proud, educated, and I remember thinking, I'm gonna study, I'm gonna work, and one day they're gonna call me Mr. Simmons.  That's what I was thinking.  And then I had a community that helped me believe, yeah, that can happen for you.
Story_ID: 636422
Speaker 1: My second grade teacher, Miss Scott [ph.], she used to tell me all the time, "Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], you can be anything you want to, son."  Always getting me up talking in front of the class, you know, so that's giving me opportunities to be a leader.  My first grade teacher, Miss Branch [ph.], same thing.  My third grade teacher, Miss Reid [ph.]--still go see her occasionally when I go to Memphis [Tennessee].  My fourth grade teacher, Miss Ingram [ph.], who I actually had a crush on, but that's a whole 'nother story.  She was really cute.  My fifth grade teacher, Miss Williams [ph.].  I mean I remember these people because they were such great role models.  So it was the community, the teachers--I was just getting filled up with the (gesture)--what it took--the energy to just go try to make something.
Speaker 2: So that's--Chris, that--so you talk about really a community that is very supportive and wholesome.
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, it's really a true community.
Story_ID: 636423
Speaker 1: I'd like to have you--take you back to that time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --period and ask you what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Smell--freshly cut grass 'cause I had to cut a lot of it (laughter).  I cut other people's yards for extra money, and I cut mine 'cause my father [Joseph Simmons] made me.  Sounds are yelling, you know, playful yelling in the street--kids.  You know, those were the days when kids were outside all the time; we weren't inside watching television that much--we were outside playing ball.  I do have a clear recollection though of having to run a lot because that neighborhood I lived in [Prospect Park, Memphis, Tennessee], my two or three streets were the schoolteachers, but around us were more the laborers' children.  And I have to tell you, the laborers' children didn't like the schoolteacher children that much, and they used to like to beat us up.  And (laughter) I remember a couple of families who had a lotta sons who really liked to beat people up, and I generally had to get past them to get to my street, so I had to be very alert, and I had to be ready to run.  And, you know, I don't, I don't miss that part of growing up (laughter).  And I just remember the laughter of my friends, you know, out playing basketball, shooting the bull with each other.
Speaker 1: Smells.  Well, you said grass.
Speaker 2: Chitlins.
Speaker 1: Chitlins.
Speaker 2: In terms of food, that was my favorite food, and I carried the chitlins with me.  In fact, when I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a freshman or as a sophomore, I moved into a dorm that had a kitchen on every floor 'cause I've always liked to cook.  And I used to make chitlins in the dorm, and for those who don't know, chitlins have a very pungent odor, and I educated some preppy girls from New England about the smells of chitlins while I was at Harvard.
Story_ID: 636424
Speaker 1: Before I go to church, I wanna go back to school.  Now you said your mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] was active in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], but did she become active during that time period, or was it later?
Speaker 2: No, she was active--from the time my oldest sisters [Evelyn Simmons and Valerie Simmons] were in school, she was active.  By the time I got to school--by the time I got to my high school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee], everybody in the high school knew my mother; she had been active in the PTA for years, even then.  I think she may have been active in the Memphis [Tennessee] PTA by that time and like Memphis wide leadership positions.  And then when--as my younger sisters [Alexis Simmons and Dara Simmons Redwine] came along, she continued to stay active and got active at the statewide level.
Story_ID: 636425
Speaker 1: Let's talk about in the house.  So do you have any specific memories?  You know, you shared quite a bit but, you know, of growing up, and what were, what was the household like, you know?  Were--you know, what chores?  You said, you know, you had the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're the, you're the first boy.
Speaker 2: First boy in--
Speaker 1: So that--no wonder your father [Joseph Simmons] was celebrating, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was definitely treated like the Messiah arriving.  I didn't have a problem with it either.  But we all had to do a lotta work around the house.  We had hardwood floors; we later had them covered with carpet, but I learned a lot about waxing hardwood floors.  In the su- (laughter), in the summertime, I remember my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] would have us clean the windows, and she would make a mixture of water and vinegar and soap, and you'd clean the windows.  My mother was particularly detailed, and she did not like streaks being left, and she would--if you were cleaning the outside windows, she would come on the inside and look at it and she didn't like a certain area, she would tap on the window--a very irritating sound.  When you're outside in 90 degree heat in Memphis [Tennessee] in the summer and somebody's inside in the air conditioning tapping on the window to tell you where you need to repeat work--there were some days when I wanted to take her out but, you know, my father would of taken me out, so, you know, couldn't get away with that, you know.  Took out the trash, washed the dishes--we never had a dishwasher.  I remember at one point saying something about, "You know, Mother, people are getting dishwashers."  She said, "Oh, I have several of them--Christopher [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], Bryan [Bryan Simmons], Alexis [Alexis Simmons], Dara [Dara Simmons Redwine]," you know; that was her comment.  "I got plenty of dishwashers, and they will be working until they leave the house."  So, yeah, we had to clean up.  The house was very orderly.
Story_ID: 636426
Speaker 1: There was no confusion in the house.  My parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] were in charge, you did what they said or you died, you know.  We had corporal punishment.
Speaker 2: Were there switches?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, my mother liked to use switches and or belts; my father, since he was a school principal, he was more orderly about his punishment, so my father would take his belt and he'd hit you on the hand.  My mother--let's just say that it was up to you to defend yourself, and she would just sort of start swinging in space, and whatever part of your body that belt happened to connect to, that's what happened.  As a result, you didn't mess with them.  And I remember telling my wife [Allison Arnold Simmons], when we got married and hadn't had kids yet.  I said, "You know, fear is a powerful motivator you need to have on your side when you're dealing with children.  I know how this works."  So, you know, I never felt like we were abused; I felt like the rules had been made clear, and if you broke them you pun- you got punished.  In fact, one of my favorite punishment stories--there was a new neighborhood that they were building for sort of the next wave of up and coming younger black professionals in Memphis [Tennessee] on the other side of a very busy road.  Alcy Road goes past our neighborhood, and on the other side of Alcy it was trees when we first moved in, then they gutted the trees and built more houses.  Well, my father had told me, you know, "Do not cross that busy street; do not go down there."  But we liked to go down there because they had big mounds of dirt and we could roll down the hills and all that stuff.  And I'll never forget, one of my best friends growing up was a guy named Jerry Roberts [ph.]; he lived about five doors up.  Jerry was two years older than me, great guy--lives in New Jersey now; has done well for himself, as did many of the people from my neighborhood because of the upbringing that the parents gave them.  Jerry had a cousin that visited him one summer from New Jersey.  Now this all happened when I was about eleven.  Jerry--his cousin's name was Joan [ph.], and Joan was really good looking and I had a crush on Joan.  And one day, a bunch of the kids, including Joan when she was visiting, they went down to this other neighborhood across the road, and I was not going to be left behind without being able to be around Joan, so I went with them.  And I'm standing up on the hill of one of these dirt mounds with my best friend growing up, Parnell Holly [ph.], who's a minister in Memphis now.  And Parnell looks down to the street level and he says, "Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], ain't that yo' daddy's car down there?"  And I looked down there, and sure enough, there was my father's black Valiant [Plymouth Valiant], and I was like, "Oh, yeah, that's my father's car."  And he said, "Chris," he motioned me down off the hill.  And I went down, he rolled down the window and he said, "Do you know where you are?"  And I said, "Yeah, Dad, I know where I am."  He said, "Good, I'm just making sure that you know where you are."  And then he rolled the window back up and he drove home.  So when I got done playing that day, I went into the house and I'm thinking I'm gonna get a whipping.  Nope, nothing happened, nothing.  The next night, I took a bath, and I was just about done with my bath and I was getting outta the bathtub, and as I was getting outta the bathtub, the door opened to the bathroom and there was my father standing with belt in hand, and all I have to tell you is whipping on wet skin is particularly painful, but I deserved it and I knew it, and I knew it was coming because my father was never going to give me a moment where there was a gap between what he had made us to expect to happen if we screwed up versus what was gonna happen.  He just tortured me for a day with it, to let it sink in what I had done.
Speaker 2: Now how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 1: Eleven.
Speaker 2: Eleven.  Okay, so you're eleven, so that's really 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Si- '68 [1968].  That's--
Speaker 1: But, yeah, I mean we--but it was a loving house, but it was a firm house, you know.  You just didn't, you didn't do bad stuff and expect that, you know, something bad wasn't gonna happen.
Story_ID: 636427
Speaker 1: So what about any celebrations--Christmas or, or you know, other times--
Speaker 2: Well, Christmas was first all about church.  We'd go to a church service on Christmas Eve; usually it'd be a visiting minister.  Actually, I've got some complicated views about religion, but I always enjoyed going to church.  I love the camaraderie, I love the family feeling of the other people, and that love I described that my neighbors and teachers had for us as a family, so did all the other families at church.  It was very close knit.  We went to Little Rock Baptist Church [New Little Rock Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] from the time I was a little boy.  And, so we would, you know, go to church on Christmas Eve, and then on Christmas Day, you know, we'd do the normal gift opening, but instead of the twenty-three gifts then, on average, I think my children got each, during, you know, Christmas--I got maybe three.  Usually, it might be a sweater, some socks, and then I'd get my, one favorite toy, and I remember being really excited about getting that one favorite toy.  But, again, it was, it was more about family and closeness, and we'd almost always go down to my mother's parents' [Zenora Jackson Anderson and Lucious Anderson] house--big, some kind of big family gathering.  And normally would, you know, have some really good food 'cause we got a lotta good cooks in the family, so I have a lotta good recollections of large family gatherings with my uncles and aunts.  And on my father's [Joseph Simmons] side I've got a lotta uncles and aunts, several of whom still living, in their nineties, and the same on my mother's [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] side--lots of uncles and aunts and cousins.  We had great family events all the time.
Story_ID: 636428
Speaker 1: So Little Rock Baptist Church [New Little Rock Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] was where you were, where you went.  Now were you req- did you go, did you belong to B-Y--there's a B-Y--Baptist--you're Baptist, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a BYP [Baptist Young People's Union of America] or any of the youth organizations for Baptist youths, or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I didn't do anything outside of my church.  Yeah, we didn't, we didn't do anything outside of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a song that you think of, or a hymn that reminds you of church and growing up, you know? Is there a song that you associate?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, interesting.  I've got a couple that I really like, and then I've got one that makes me remember that church.  'Near the Cross' for some reason, is one that makes me think of that church, I think, because we often would sing it without musical accompaniment, and there were a lotta bad voices that you could hear while (laughter) that song was being sung.  But probably my favorite, my two favorite church songs are 'Order My Steps,' which was my father's brother--I had an uncle on my father's [Joseph Simmons] side, Uncle David [King Simmons], who was a pretty significant minister in Detroit [Michigan], and my uncle David loved that 'Order My Steps' song, and I love it.  And then my grandmother, my mother's mother [Zenora Jackson Anderson], loves 'His Eye Is on the Sparrow,' and that's one of my favorites, too.  And when my [maternal] grandmother died about six or seven years ago in Mississippi, you know, in Mississippi there's this tradition--oh, in a lotta places this tradition of, you know, the car--a group of cars traveling through town.  And in Mississippi, they really, you know, the people honor it, they--the opposing traffic pulls over, they stop; they're very respectful, and we--by the time my grandmother had died, she had moved into the little town of Senatobia [Mississippi], as opposed to being out on the farms.  And that procession started in town, and it wove its way through these back roads past the farms that I had visited her on when I was a little boy; it was very moving.  And my brother [Bryan Simmons] and I rode together to the, to the church.  We rented a convertible, and Patti LaBelle has a great version of 'His Eye Is on the Sparrow' that I love, and we put that CD [compact disc] in and I put it on repeat, and we let that top down and we turned that volume up as high as it could go, (crying) and we played my grandmother's song all the way.  So, yeah, I got a song or two I love, and they connect me to people.
Story_ID: 636429
Speaker 1: --Grandmother on your mother's [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] side, what is her name again?
Speaker 2: Zenora [Zenora Jackson Anderson].
Speaker 1: Zenora.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Lucious.
Speaker 1: Lucious.
Speaker 2: Zenora and Lucious Anderson.  Again, leaders.  See, I come from a family of leaders in their own way.  My grandfather was one of the first black men in--
Speaker 1: Lucious.
Speaker 2: Lucious was one of the first black men in their little part of Mississippi who got the white man in charge to let him control his own piece a land.  He also is one of the first ones to have a truck.  What I'm told my Grandfather Lucious did once he got that truck was he gave transportation to other black men who were limited to work for really low wages for the people whose farms they could walk to.  So my grandfather would drive them further away to people who would pay them more money.  Little, little acts of changing the system like that.  My grandmother, very active, Zenora, very active in the church.  So when I was a boy, I remember going to church and watching Zenora stand up in church and talk, and she was a leader in the church.  She also, was one of the top ranked Mary Kay [Mary Kay Inc.] salespeople--no, not, not Mary Kay; there, there was another cosmetic company.
Speaker 1: Avon [Avon Products Inc.].
Speaker 2: Avon, Avon.
Speaker 1: At that time.
Speaker 2: At that time.  And my grandmother, she knew everybody in town; she's one of those people that can talk to everybody--a lot like my father [Joseph Simmons].  People just trust her implicitly.  So, again, my leadership training (laughter) was Lucious, Zenora, both my parents.  I had a lot of that around.
Story_ID: 636430
Speaker 1: Then my uncle, James Herschel Anderson [James Anderson], my mother's [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] brother, was one of the first blacks admitted in the early wave of blacks to Ole Miss Law School [University of Mississippi School of Law, Oxford, Mississippi].  For some reason, he didn't finish; I never understood why.  James was smart as--hm, he's smarter than me--could talk about any and everything; died in his late forties of leukemia, unfortunately.  But what did he do with that one year of legal training he got?  Well, he ended up being a long haul truck driver.  He organized a lawsuit because the trucking company was discriminating in its awardance of the routes.  So, again, he was an agitator--a little bit of a troublemaker, but he--through that lawsuit, they had to change the seniority list at the trucking company and put all these black guys who were way down the list up higher on the list and, I think, maybe paid 'em some money.  But I've just got a lotta people in the family who, again, didn't sit and let life kind of go by; they did things.  And at family reunions, we would often discuss political things, societal things, and it was always a sense in the room that we assess, we analyze, we come up with a new approach, and then we go do something about it.  And that was just sort of the family ethos.  We never talked about it being the ethos, but it was inherently the message.
Story_ID: 636431
Speaker 1: I'd like to explore what you were like.  And because when you were five--was John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] killed when you were five?
Speaker 2: John Kennedy was killed when I was six.
Speaker 1: Six, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember the day clearly.  I was in first grade at school, and all of a sudden they said, "School's gonna be let out," so they sent us all home.  And back then, most of our mothers were at home, so we could just go home and our mothers were there.  And I remember crying all the way home 'cause they told us the president had been killed.  And I don't know what my connection was with the president (laughter) at the time, but I remember being upset that the president was dead.  And I remember my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] was just bawling like a baby when I got home because, of course, black people in the South viewed the Kennedys as part of the group that was gonna save them and, so saying, "Oh, Kennedy's dead?  What, what's gonna happen to us now?"  I remember that day very clearly.
Speaker 1: And were there discussions around the dinner table about what was sort of happening?  Do you remember there being any discussions at your dinner table?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  I remember discussions about James Meredith marching in Mississippi, and the danger that he was under.  You know, interestingly enough I never, I never did ask, though, why we weren't more involved in it.  As I got older, I--honestly, I--that bothered me a little bit because I felt like other people were kind of left to sort of take some of those risks.  Now would I have wanted my father [Joseph Simmons] to risk getting killed?  No, to be honest, but, so we talked about it but I never really linked in my mind, "Okay, well that's how--happening out there kind of.  Where is our role in it?"
Speaker 1: But what--isn't--at--but there were a lotta people in the black community.  Black community tended to be more conservative by nature, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't think it was that we were conservative.  And honestly, I've never really asked my parents exactly what they participated in and what they didn't.  I think they participated--I know they participated in some things, but I think it was more gatherings in churches in Memphis [Tennessee].  I don't, I don't think they were ever out, like down in Mississippi actually on a march where the physical danger level was really high or anything like that.  But no, we had a lotta discussion about it in the house.  And again, it was always with the view of the world is slowly changing and you need to be ready when it does.
Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in a household that children were supposed to be seen but not heard?  Was that ever--do you remember (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we--it wasn't quite that way.  My parents encouraged conversation and debate as long as it was respectful debate, but once they had decided what you were going to do, (laughter) you were going to do it.  But we were actually encouraged to have opinions and articulate those opinions and to be able to articulate your opinion.  Most of my siblings are actually well above average public speakers, and I think part of it's because that debate, challenge culture was pretty evident in the house and pretty active in the house.
Story_ID: 636432
Speaker 1: So how is the young [HistoryMaker] Chris Simmons?  And I'm talking around seven and eight time period, you know.  What are you thinking?  How would you even describe--
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how you were as a young--?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter), I can tell you.  I was thinking I was number one, and I was going to prove it to you.  I spent a lotta time in the library.  My father [Joseph Simmons]--when I was seven, I went--my father was working on his master's [degree] by this time at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I spent, I think, at least a couple of weeks, maybe longer, up there with him at one point, and he would drop me off in the library while he went to class, and I remember the librarian being amazed; I remember her telling him when he picked me up after the first session.  She was like, "Oh, he can stay here anytime he wants because all he does is just read book after book after book, and I'm amazed at the advanced type books he was reading."  And so I learned very early on that I could distinguish myself from my peers by being the smart one, by being the one who read more than they read.  And so the more reinforcement I got from that, the more I did it, which then I started reading encyclopedias.  And I actually read--
Speaker 1: And what age are you reading this kind of--
Speaker 2: Oh, eight, nine, and I'm reading like the entire book A, then B, then C.  I went through three sets--Compton's [Compton's Encyclopedia and Fact Index], World Book [World Book Encyclopedia], and Britannica [Encyclopedia Britannica].  I think one of 'em I--all--basically authorized the purchase of with very little consultation from my parents because--and this is one of the beauties of growing up in my house.  Education was so hallowed that I knew I could probably authorize that purchase because there was never any question.  If it related to making you smarter, my parents were totally for it.  And, so, yeah, the, the seven or eight year old--I remember my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] brought me back a tee-shirt from some PTA [Parent Teacher Association] convention she went to, and the shirt said something like, "Why should you try harder?  I'm number one."  And I remember I cherished that shirt 'cause like, yeah, that--that's my mindset.  I'm going to beat you.  Not because I'm necessarily inherently smarter than you; I'm gonna out work you, I'm going to out study you, I'm gonna out read you.  So that was my mindset.
Story_ID: 636433
Speaker 1: Now, and I also had big ears when I was young--still have, I guess--I don't know; other people have to judge that now.  But back then, I had ears that, roughly the size of my head, definitely stuck out, and I was teased about it and I didn't like it, and I remember one of the chanting taunts and I'll never forget it.  It was the airline, TWA at the time--Trans World Airlines--and they would say to me, "Oh, there's TWA--fly, fly away with those big ears," right?  And I remember thinking, yeah, your punishment is gonna be you're gonna have to watch me be way more successful than you.  And that was a motivator.  So, you know, I--like all children, I had my sensitive areas, my sensitivity points--that was mine, you know.  Athletically, I was good, not great, so I could always make the sports teams; I was, you know, very competitive in pick up sports in the neighborhood [in Memphis, Tennessee] but I wasn't like the big dominant superstar guy.  And there were people who could beat me up, and I didn't like being vulnerable at all to anybody who could beat me up, so I learned very early to form alliances with the guy who could beat everybody up; I was very cognizant of that (laughter), so that I kind of had protection.  So I had a sense of political alliances (laughter), even that young, to kind of protect my body, and I knew where I was going to distinguish myself.  I knew it wasn't going to be sports; I knew it was going to be through learning and reading and talking and ideas.
Story_ID: 636434
Speaker 1: So (cough) were you getting A's in school, was that it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got straight A's.  I mean I was--I--academically, I was the superstar kid.  I remember one of my proudest moments when I was seven--second grade--Miss Scott [ph.], who loved me to death.  I've taken--Miss Scott died a few years ago, but I took my family to see Miss Scott after I started having children; it was a lot longer--lot later than being seven--to meet Miss Scott.  I mean we--we're close--we were close.  Miss Scott told the third grade teacher--I don't know how this happened.  I--they must have been discussing some problem that the third graders couldn't solve in math in the teachers' lounge or something because all I knew was that Miss Scott came over to me in the second grade class and she said, "Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], I'm gonna take you up to the third grade room; there's a problem they can't solve but I think you can solve it."  Now my cousin Janine, Janine Holmes [ph.], who I'm still close to, was in that third grade class, and I remember walking in that room and I was thinking, boy, now this is a opportunity, and this is how I thought.  I thought, hm, if I solve this third grade problem, and I'm a second grader, my rep's gonna be huge, and Janine is gonna tell the whole family that her cousin was the one that did it.  And I remember they put the problem up and I looked at and I immediately knew--yeah, I know the answer to that.  I was very careful in giving the answer 'cause I wanted to make sure I didn't slip 'cause I didn't wanna make Miss Scott look bad, and I wanted to look good.  So, yeah, I, I was sort of that student--and I was that student.
Story_ID: 636435
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was always that star student.  I remember in ninth grade at Corry Junior High [Corry Junior High School; Corry Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee], they gave out awards in assembly for each of the subjects, and I think there were maybe seven awards, and I'm pretty sure I got all of them.  And I remember I always had a sense for the drama of the moment, too, because they would, they would say, "Okay, now for the top math student."  And then I would--I was sitting way up in the bleachers, and I would have to come down and walk across the gym floor and I'd get that ribbon or whatever it was, and then I would walk all the way back up and then I'd sit, and they'd call out, "And the top English student."  And then I'd have to come back down.  Now I could have sat near the bottom and shortened the distances, but I was aware--no, if I sit up top, they have--this has the--this has longer to sink in.  So, again, I was fourteen but I was aware, I was cognizant of these types a things and I was greedy, too.  I remember thinking, they don't dare give one of these awards to somebody else just to diversify; I earned them all.  I've always (laughter) been one--I want what I earn; I want it all, and so that was that way.  But I tell you the other thing I always knew.  I knew I wasn't competing with the best people yet, and therefore--I remember saying, "I'm in an all-black high school, in a public school, and I don't even have to take a book home to get these A's, and I know I'm not that brilliant.  There must be some work that would be harder that would make me work harder."  And that's why, at the end of ninth grade, instead of going to Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee]--my neighborhood high school--right away, I came up with the idea, told my parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] that this was what I was planning to do; they supported me.  I asked my father, I said, "Dad, what are the tough white schools in Memphis [Tennessee]?  'Cause I'm not training to operate in an all-black world.  When I turn on the television, I don't see black people running America, I see white people running America.  I need to be training to deal with them, and compete with them."  So he gave me the names of a few schools; I chose one of 'em, Hillcrest High School [Memphis, Tennessee].  So in tenth grade, I transferred myself to Hillcrest High School.  I convinced four of my better friends, who were also very academically strong, to go with me.  There was maybe five--there were maybe five blacks already down there; they were not high performers--I brought the high performers with me.
Story_ID: 636436
Speaker 1: Funny thing happened.  I signed up for all the advanced track classes.  A few weeks into the school year, my father [Joseph Simmons] went to a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting.  When my father came home, he said, "Boy, I got some good news for you and some bad news for you."  He said, "The bad news is your math teacher--," who was the one black teacher I had--he said, "Your math teacher says that you've been falling asleep in class."  He said, "The good news is she says despite that, you have 103 average.  She's wondering why you don't get yourself in the advanced class."  And I said, "Well, Dad, I thought I was in the advanced class.  I signed up for all advanced classes."  He said, "Well, they obviously didn't give you advanced classes."  And we immediately knew what had happened.  The racists in the guidance department decided they weren't gonna put the black boy in the advanced classes.  So my father told me, he said, "Well, you go to school tomorrow and try to deal with this, but if you need help, call me."  Because, remember, this is the same principal who burned the books, and this school was in the county, and my father was the principal in the county.  So the principal of my school [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee] knew my father (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This school was in Shelby County [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: That's right, it was in Shelby County.  So I go to school the next day; I go down to the guidance office, and I ask the guidance counselor, you know, why I wasn't in advanced classes--I--'cause I had signed up for them.  And she goes and she gets my forms out and she looks at 'em.  She says, "Yeah, you did sign up for advanced classes, but you know, we don't get that many students from your school--from your junior high school, Corry [Corry Junior High School; Corry Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee], so we didn't know how to interpret the meaning of all these A's you had."  And I said, "I can understand that."  I said, "But you know, if I got a student from a school I wasn't familiar with, and saw I wasn't sure how to interpret the A's, I would look for some other metric."  And then I demonstrated what a smart aleck I was at fifteen.  I said to this white guidance counselor, I said, "You know, is this school in the State of Tennessee?"  And she looked at me quizzically and she said, "Well, yes, it is; why are you asking me that?"  I said, "Well, because I recall in the ninth grade I had to take the Tennessee Achievement Test [Tennessee Comprehensive Assessment Program Achievement Test], and I figure that's a statewide test that measures you're a master of certain knowledge and I presume that the students in your school were given the same test, too, and if I saw a student from another school asking for advanced classes, I would have looked to see what he got on that test-sort of like you compare SAT scores."  I said, "And if you had looked, you would have noticed that I was in the 99th percentile of test takers in the State of Tennessee."  And then I got a very stern tone and I said, "And I am very certain you don't have five other students in the tenth grade here who scored that well."  And she got this look of panic on her face and she left the room, and she came back with the principal.  And the principal sort of looks at me 'cause he's looking at my file and he says, "Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons].  You go by Chris, but your first name's Joseph."  I said, "That's right, sir."  "Joe Simmons?  You Joe Simmons' boy--the principal out at such and such school?"  I said, "That's right, sir; that's my father."  "Well your father should of let me know he was gonna send you down here to my school; I would of taken care of you," at which point I said, "Oh, sir, so, I have to know somebody to get fair treatment at your school?"  And then he turned to the guidance counselor and he said, "You need to give him whatever classes he wants."  And he got outta there quickly 'cause he knew staying longer was only gonna get him in more trouble.  So by 2:15 in the afternoon, I had a brand new schedule a classes--all advanced classes.  And then I asked the guidance counselor, I said, "Oh, by the way, what about my four friends?  They signed up for advanced classes, too."  And she said to me, "Well, their situation's a little different than yours."  And I said, "Their situation won't be any different from mine if I have to call my father."  And the next day they had brand new schedules, too.  And the five of us marched into all these advanced classes--
Story_ID: 636437
Speaker 1: It was--an interesting thing was we had no trouble outta any of the teachers; the teachers were totally supportive and, as I told you, I was an okay athlete.  I was on the football team; I was ineligible because I had practiced with the other school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] for a couple of weeks--it's a long story.  But Coach Ken Neveland [ph.], the white coach of the football team, was one of the most nicest people to me, treated me with love, tried to help me fit in, and he wasn't doing it because I was gonna help his football team; I wasn't that good.  I was lucky to make the team.  I got inducted into the Memphis City Schools hall of fame [Shelby County Board of Education] in 2007, I believe.  I mentioned three or four people as people I really remember from high--from my school days.  I mentioned--Coach Neveland was one of them because he had no reason to be nice to me, and he was.  So my point with that is most of the people that were at that school [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee] embraced me with open arms.  But had a couple in the guidance office, in the wrong place, trying to keep me out.  That year, I wasn't the smartest kid in school; I was the second smartest kid in school.  The smartest kid in that school, academically, was a kid--I can't remember his name; he was Jewish.  He was one of these rocket science smart people; I think he ended up going to Rice [Rice University, Houston, Texas].  His talents were very much in the quantitative arena.  But I learned something that year that gave me even more confidence because one day the math teacher decided--it was a nice day outside, and he was gonna have math class outside under a tree, and we were going to discuss the world; we weren't just going to discuss math.  We all went and sat under that tree except for this one kid that was--had better grades than me; he went and sat under a different tree 'cause he couldn't handle talking to people.  And I remember thinking, you know, I don't have to be the smartest at everything, I just have to be the one that's good enough at more things.  I'll be in charge and he'll be working for me 'cause he can't talk to anybody.  And, so I learned early in life that you have to find a different way to compete with people who are better at you than one narrow thing and, so that was a great experience.
Story_ID: 636438
Speaker 1: I transferred myself back the next year.
Speaker 2: Why, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]?
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Why, Chris?  And who--what about the others?  Did they--?
Speaker 1: Only one person stayed down there, and he was probably the weakest student of the group but a really good football player (laughter), and he like--and he had a home down there--he did well.  What happened was busing started the next year, and the busing--
Speaker 2: Okay, so busing started--this is 19--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: Seventy--
Speaker 1: Two [1972]--
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-three [1973], yeah.  So busing started my junior year.  The way the busing rules were written in Memphis [Tennessee], you couldn't transfer from your neighborhood school if your school was part of the busing program.  Now that was designed to stop white people from fleeing the black students.  But since my school was in the busing program, the rule applied to me, too.  I could have gotten, probably, an exception to it because I was trying to go to a minority--from a majority to a minority situation, but I didn't fight it, and the reason I decided to go back to my neighborhood school was this.  I was already thinking about my college applications, and I knew my SAT scores were going to be pretty good.  I--my grades were great, but I needed leadership roles (laughter).  I knew that at my neighborhood school I had always been the leader.  I was president of the freshman class in middle school, and vice president of the student council and all that stuff.  I knew I would run a lotta stuff if I went back to my neighborhood school.  And as I like to tell people, my majority white classmates in 1972, '73 [1973] at the Hillcrest School [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee], they weren't prepared to elect me dogcatcher; that just wasn't gonna happen.  I hadn't grown up with them, and I was black.  So I decided--for purposes of my resume--go back to your home base.  And actually (laughter), I had a meeting in my living room the summer before junior year as I'm going back to my neighborhood school.  I met with the two--well, one guy from my junior high who was the other leader, along with me--Michael Allred [ph.]--who ended up going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with me as a freshman, and I also met with a guy name Rayvin Hawkins [ph.], and Rayvin Hawkins was the leader of the kids from Airways Junior High School [Airways Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee].  So my high school had kids from three different feeder schools--Airways Junior High, Corry Junior High [Corry Junior High School; Corry Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee], and Hamilton Junior High [Hamilton Junior High School; Hamilton Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee], and then we fed into Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee].  We had this meeting and we divvied up all the leadership spots.  We basically decided we were going to form a little triumvirate, and we were gonna back each other for the roles that we had agreed each would have, and we essentially ended up having most of the leadership roles junior and senior year.  So I was cutting deals at sixteen.  And the meeting was held in my living room because it was my idea to have the meeting.
Story_ID: 636439
Speaker 1: How do you think that your way sort of changed you, and do you remember anything being well, discussed?  Did--like how was the year?  How was that year in the white school?  It was Cart- you said it was Cart-.  What's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Hillcrest [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Hillcrest, right.
Speaker 2: You know, academically, it was much tougher than any year I'd ever had.  Actually, I had to take my books home and do homework, and I didn't get A's all the time, so that was a bit of a wakeup call; it--but it con- it convinced me of what I knew that I hadn't been in the most challenging, competitive environments, and it influenced my view about where I would send my children to school later on because I'd sent them all to private school because I, I didn't want them to ever be in a situation again where they weren't being fully challenged.  Not that there aren't some great public schools that challenge you, but mine didn't; the bar was set too low.  So it was more academically rigorous.  Socially, it was a bit awkward at times 'cause I was used to being the man, and I didn't know anybody, and I was black, and from a socially romantic perspective, it was frustrating.  'Cause there were some cute little white girls down there that I liked and, you know, I definitely got the vibe from them that there was no way (laughter) they were talking to me--not in Memphis [Tennessee] in 1972 they weren't--because Memphis has some racial history that is a bit more pronounced than a lot of other places in America.  But, again, the teachers were very supportive and the football team--I had a great time on the football team.  I couldn't play that year, but I was--I dress out for games.  We were ranked in the top ten in the state; we had a great team, lotta great camaraderie.  I had a lotta great memories of going into big stadiums 'cause we played in front of big crowds and just being part of all that was a lotta fun.
Speaker 1: So how many, how many blacks were on the team then?  You and--
Speaker 2: Oh, there were probably about five of us on the team because the--of the group that went down there, it was one girl, Annie Brown [ph.], and then a guy, Reggie Brayon [ph.], Chester Hawkins, Lawrence Maulden [ph.].  I think that was all.  And Lawrence, Reggie--Lawrence and Reggie were actually really good football players.  Chester and I were okay (laughter).  If Chester ever watches this, he'll shoot me, but (laughter).  I'm saying it about myself, too; we were just okay.  Reggie was always like one of the star players on every team he played on through the end of high school and, so was Lawrence.  They were, they were stronger than us.
Speaker 1: So did Reggie stay?  Is he the one who stayed?
Speaker 2: No, Lawrence stayed.
Speaker 1: Lawrence stayed?
Speaker 2: And Reggie ended up going to another high school for a year, but actually we ended up being back at Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] together for senior year in high school.
Story_ID: 636440
Speaker 1: And then Annie [Annie Brown (ph.)], as part of the busing program, she got sent to a school called Overton [Watkins Overton High School, Memphis, Tennessee], where most of the blacks from my neighborhood who got bused they got sent to Overton.  So a lot of the kids that I went to junior high with [at Corry Junior High School; Corry Middle School, Memphis, Tennessee] I didn't go to high school with because they got sent over to this other school, Overton.  And, interestingly enough--you'll find this interesting.  My high school, Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee], was supposed to be a large receiver of white students.  Our high school was about twelve hundred students.  We were supposed to get four hundred white students--three showed up--three.  They formed all these overnight church schools, and the white kids went to that one.  And the funny thing was Overton wasn't one of the more competitive white schools, so academically, Hamilton, my high school, was no worse than theirs, and I always thought it was a bit, kind of funny--ironic that they thought that they were too good to come to school with us.  I'm pretty sure if you were to go back and compare the life success of a lot of my classmates in Hamilton to the white kids from Overton, Hamilton probably wins that one.
Speaker 2: So I have (unclear) questions about that, and then I wanna go back a few years.  But what busing things were interesting to me, so you're saying--so, what was the school population?  If the students--if students were bused out, and the students that were supposed to be bused out were bused in, were those black students then not bused out from Hamilton?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Ours were bused out, so the ones from Hamilton--the ones that were, that were--normally would of been at Hamilton who were told to go to Overton, they went.
Speaker 2: They went.
Speaker 1: Because black people weren't ha- well, they weren't fighting integration, and we weren't setting up schools as all, you know, we didn't have alternative schools to go to, but number one, we weren't fighting it; we were happy about it, right?  We weren't happy that we were being separated from our lifelong friends, but we were happy that we were finally getting a chance to go to school with these white people because we had been relegated to this all-black world, and we knew (laughter) that wasn't good for us.
Speaker 2: Now what were the--were the physical facilities different, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]?
Speaker 1: At most schools they were, but remember I told you my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] helped get a new school at Hamilton?  So by the time I got to Hamilton, it was one of the most modernized high schools in Memphis [Tennessee], so we actually had really good facilities (laughter); better than a lot of the white schools.
Speaker 2: So, but the question--so did the school population go down then at Hamilton, or not?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it went down because we didn't get all the students (laughter) we were supposed to get.
Speaker 2: Now were the teachers--what were the--what was the--at Hillside you--
Speaker 1: Hillcrest [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee], yeah.
Speaker 2: Hillcrest, sorry.  It was primarily all black--white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right--primarily white.
Speaker 2: And, but a few blacks?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then at Overton, what was the teacher dynamic there?
Speaker 1: Mostly white.
Speaker 2: Most--at Hamilton?
Speaker 1: No, no, Overton is the school that my Hamilton friends got bused to.  At Hamilton, where I went to school, the black school--oh, predominantly, predominantly, predominantly black.  There were a couple of white teachers at Hamilton--not many.
Speaker 2: So what are the things that are--you're hearing being discussed with your parents about school systems and PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and, you know, what's going on?  What are those things?  Do you remember things being discussed?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I remember lots of debates around whether the teachers were of similar quality or not.  I remember people having political issues because they had been--maybe like--'cause some of the teachers got moved, too, and, you know, they felt like they had a good--some of the black ones felt like they had a good community, and they were supported when they were at the black school and, now they're at some white school where they're in the minority and nobody really cares about them in their view, and I remember lots of discussion about whether people were going to have joint social events or not.  So even though you're in the same school, but are you gonna party together or not?  And a lot of schools had a lot of parallel events--separate proms and all that kind of silliness.  The--I will say the three whites who showed up at our school were, you know, fully integrated--never, never had a problem at school.  We--I guess maybe we loved 'em 'cause they were willing to come (laughter).  But, yeah, they were--I think, I think two of 'em might have been voted amongst the class superlatives, actually.
Speaker 2: What--class superlatives--what is that?
Speaker 1: You know, most likely to succeed, smartest, most loquacious, you know--a sort of honors senior year.  I'm pretty sure that two of the three white classmates (laughter) got class superlative honors.
Story_ID: 636441
Speaker 1: So I wanna talk about, you know, 'cause Memphis [Tennessee]--you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], he was killed there at the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about that day?  And I'm very interested in that day, but the aftermath.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The day Martin Luther King was shot and killed in my hometown in Memphis is one of those days that just stands clearly in my memory.  I remember I was outside playing on the street with some friends, and then somebody said, "Oh, my god!  Martin Luther King got shot!"  And I remember we all ran home.  And I walked into the house and my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] was basically half lying across the kitchen table just bawling--crying, and I think that the report at first was that, you know, they didn't know whether he was dead or not, and then, you know, the reports came through and then they said he was dead.  And I remember everybody just felt--and what was being discussed was this sense of depression--of, you know, really worrying that the progress was just gonna stop because we knew that he had a special power to coalesce blacks to work together, and we also knew that he had a special magic to convince white people to follow the movement and to, and to think about how that we were being treated.  And we knew there was nobody else who had that gift.  An- anybody who watched him give speeches knew that that was a special thing that would move white people, and that nobody else had it, and so it was very depressing.  I also remember, you know, the National Guard in the neighborhood, and there was a curfew.  You couldn't go, you couldn't go out on the street for--I don't remember how long, but I remember there was a period of time--a day or two; you couldn't really move around much and--because people were looting and rioting, and I remember there was a, there was a store right--maybe two, three blocks down from our house that, you know, got burned out, and I remember being afraid; I remember being afraid that, you know, if I went out and gotten in the wrong place, maybe somebody was gonna shoot me, I was gonna get bayonetted, you know; you just thought the world was like under siege.  And then, you know, in the weeks after that, things calmed down, but then you were left with this what's the pace of progress going to be now?  It was very discomforting.
Story_ID: 636442
Speaker 1: So what do your parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] saying, or what is the conversation that you're hearing afterwards?  Because some people felt that Memphis [Tennessee], you know, that--you know where someone is killed, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Often, that's a bad place, or people feel guilty, you know, that that happened.  But what are you--what is, what is the discussion occurring during that time and--
Speaker 2: You know, I don't, I don't think that it changed our view of Memphis or really our view about the situation in any unique way because I mean the reason that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in Memphis in the first place was that the sanitation workers, who were predominantly black, were not being treated well, and black people in Memphis, we knew we weren't being treated well before he got there, and, so I, you know, after he died we knew we were just gonna continue not being treated well.  And I think we felt like, you know, the location of the murder was a random thing, you know, 'cause if you were following the movement, you knew people had made attempts on King, you know.  Medgar Evers was already dead, so I don't really think we, we sort of took that on in any kind of special way, and we still had to deal with the problems.  I mean Memphis is one of the few cities that I have been blatantly discriminated against since I was grown.  In 1983, I went out on a dinner outing with a bunch of executives from Holiday Inns [Holiday Inn]; Holiday Inns was headquartered in Memphis at the time.  And ironically, earlier in the day they had asked me what it was like growing up in Memphis, and what they really meant was what was it like growing up black in Memphis--this is a bunch of white guys asking me this question.  And I told 'em, I said, "You know, it's a little bit interesting being a smart black kid who knew you were going places, and constantly being surrounded by a society in Memphis that was telling you you weren't going to."  And they were reassuring me how, you know, Memphis has changed now; in 1983 it's better.  And I said, "No, I still have relatives who live here full time, and I don't think it's that much better."  Well, that's the same night we went out to--tried to go out to this nightclub.  They all walked in; they wouldn't let me in.  They asked me for three forms of picture ID--three.  Now who carries three forms of picture ID?  And after some discussion, they all came out 'cause the guy would not let me in.  I had a driver's license and a passport on me.  So we get back in the van and the Holiday Inn executives are apologizing profusely, and I said, "Hey, you guys don't have any need to apologize to me; you've been really nice to me all summer."  I was working for them in the, in the summer.  I said, "But remember that conversation we were having earlier today, and I was trying to tell you what it was like to be black in Memphis and you were trying to tell me that I didn't know what it was like to be black in Memphis today?"  I said, "Here's what I want you to do for me for the rest of your life--don't apologize for tonight.  Remember, you're not black and you don't know what it's like to be black, and when somebody who is black tells you, listen to them."  And then I asked 'em a question.  I said, "Has anybody stopped to ask why I had my passport on me in the first place?"  I said, "Because the last time I got discriminated like this, they said they wanted two forms of picture ID, so I started carrying my passport with me everywhere I go; I didn't realize that the quota on being black had been raised."
Speaker 1: So what you're describing, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], is a place where it's a very loving, supporting environment but you're very aware--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) also, of the race issue.
Speaker 2: Yes, very aware.
Speaker 1: And that--very aware.  It's around every--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --every--
Story_ID: 636443
Speaker 1: I'll tell you.  When I, when I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: So that's what I wanna understand.  Can we straighten your tie a little bit on the--yeah, just a little.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that better?
Speaker 2: Yes, better.  Okay, good.  All right, okay.  So when you applied to Harvard--can we--well, I--before we get to applying to Harvard, where are you thinking you're going in the first place--I mean to school?  And what are people telling you?  And, you know, is there a guidance counselor?  You know, and is--
Speaker 1: Well, again, my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] had convinced me from the time I was this high (gesture) that I should do anything I want, and I'll be running some part of the world in some way.  And my father [Joseph Simmons], in his own way, reinforced the message; he was just less obvious and prescriptive about it.  So, when I was eleven, I read Compton's Encyclopedia [Compton's Encyclopedia and Fact Index] H; there was an article about Harvard in it.  It said in the description--in the article; it had a reference to "Harvard is home to many of America's best and brightest."  And I turned to my mother in the kitchen at age eleven and I said, "Ma, that must be where I'm supposed to go," 'cause that was how we thought in the house.  My sister, oldest sister [Evelyn Simmons], had gone to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1964, which is like the Harvard for black women at that time.  My second sister Valerie [Valerie Simmons] could of gone a lotta places, but she was really into the black thing and so she wanted to go to Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], but she was in the honors program at Tennessee State.  So high academic achievement was--it was expected.  And I was competitive with my older siblings and I wanted to do something nobody had done, so I got it in my head that I'm going to Harvard.  That's why I transferred myself to the white school [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee]; I wanted to challenge myself a little bit more.  And, so that's really where the Harvard thing came from.  And when I was in high school, I was really driving my ship, you know.  I got guidance counselors to do what I needed them to do for me, but they weren't, they weren't driving my ship; I was driving my ship--my parents will tell you that.  So--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So I had this idea to go to Harvard and my parents will tell you I drove this.  I sent off for the applications two years early because I wanted to know what questions they were going to ask so I could be ready for them.  And I remember having a conversation.  They asked some questions about certain of the great literature works that you had read, and I remember thinking--well, at my black high school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] that I had gone back to, we weren't reading those books.  And I asked my AP [advanced placement] English teacher why we weren't reading those books.  And the answer she gave me will not reflect (laughter) well on her, but I'm just gonna tell it the way it happened.  She said, "Well, Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], there's about four or five of you in this class who would read those books if I assigned them, and the rest wouldn't read it."  And I said, "Well, then you should assign it and flunk them because I'm getting ready for some things, and I need to be reading those books."  So I was trying to manage all aspects of my environment to sort of get to my goal.
Story_ID: 636444
Speaker 1: So senior year [at Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee], I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  My--
Speaker 2: No southern schools?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Those are the only four places I applied.  I hadn't visited any of them.  I hadn't been north of D.C. [Washington, D.C.]; I hadn't even been to D.C. on the East Coast.  I had been to the Midwest--Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan].  I didn't ever go on any school visits; I considered the visit a total irrelevancy.  It wasn't about liking the places, it wasn't about being happy there; it was about getting the label and the experience.  Harvard, Princeton, and Yale, they collaborate on financial aid awards, and they basically told my parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] they had to pay about a quarter of the cost.  U Chicago doesn't collaborate; it didn't collaborate at the time, and they gave me a full ride.  My father and I had a very interesting discussion because my brother [Bryan Simmons] got an opportunity to go to Phillips Exeter Academy [Exeter, New Hampshire] at 'bout the same time that I was getting into Harvard.
Speaker 2: Your younger brother.
Speaker 1: My younger brother.  My younger brother was a good student at that time, not a star student.  My brother later has been phenomenally successful, but at the time, he wasn't performing at the level I was.  And I had actually wanted to go off to a New England prep school or some kind of prep school, and my parents really didn't get it at the time; they didn't know how that fit in, in part because they weren't really thinking about the world I was planning to live in.  I think my father would've been happy had I come back to Memphis [Tennessee] and maybe become the school superintendent or something like that.  And they were educators.  They really didn't know much about the business world; they knew a lot about the educational world.  But I watched movies a lot and I watched TV a lot, and I was learning about the white business world by watching those movies.  I remember watching 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner,' and movies with Steve McQueen where he--or Paul Newman where--'Philadelphia Story' ['The Philadelphia Story']--stories of people rising up the corporate and societal ladder, and that was the world I was planning for.  So, and I understood the power of labels, and I understood--and I will say something; it may be controversial, but in the American educational context there is no label that rivals Harvard's.  It's the thing that every--anything else gets compared to, so I thought, that's the label I want; if I can get it, why not have it?  So my father, though, decided that it would be a good idea, and he discussed this in front of the whole family at dinner one night, that I would go to Chicago--take the full ride, it'll facilitate him letting my brother go to Exeter who he had now learned, he had now learned that that was a good idea because when we would go over to the Harvard, Princeton and Yale soirees with the alums in Memphis, they learned about this other world, and I told my father--and I won't go into all the detail (laughter), but I told my father, in very clear terms, that I was going to Harvard, that somebody was going to pay for it, and essentially that if he didn't, he'd never see his grandchildren that were born through me.  And I was very serious when I said that because I had a fanatical focus on where I was headed, and nothing was gonna stop me.  And about an hour later my father told me, he said, "Well, boy, if you ever talk to me like that again, I'm gonna knock you out."  And I kind of said, "Yeah, that's fair."  And he said, "But your mother and I have talked about it and we're gonna figure out a way for you and your brother to both go."
Story_ID: 636445
Speaker 1: So in the fall of 1975, we loaded my two younger sisters [Alexis Simmons and Dara Simmons Redwine], my brother [Bryan Simmons] and I in the family station wagon, we drove through D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and then we drove up the East Coast, and on pretty much the same weekend, they dropped me off in Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and my brother off at Phillips Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire].  My brother, by the way--
Speaker 2: And your brother was in what grade at that time?
Speaker 1: He was going into the ninth grade, I was going in the first year of college.  My brother, by the way, ended up going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as well--class of '83 [1983]; I was class of '79 [1979].  When you graduate from Harvard, your classmates, senior year, choose thirteen people to sort of manage the class' business into the future--it's called, class marshals, you're ranked by the number of votes you got.  My brother was the second class marshal in the class of 1983--very proud of him.  But back then, at that dinner table that night, my father's [Joseph Simmons] plan was getting in the way of my plan for me (laughter), so I wasn't having that.  But I'm glad it all worked out for both of us.
Speaker 2: So tell me your first day there, when you--your parents dropped you off.  Okay, 'cause you're going there sight unseen really and it's not like today where you can look at videos set up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know.  I went sight unseen, too, but--I mean--so you get dropped off.  So explain what that experience, 'cause it's one thing to vi- envision it; it's another--
Speaker 1: Well, the positive thought I remember having was, I am here (laughter).  I'm like here.  I've been thinking about this since I was eleven.  Wow!  And then I thought, hm.  I thought Harvard was gonna look more like Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], you know, rolling green hills, pretty; you get dropped off in Harvard Yard--and I remember we were coming down Massachusetts Avenue in the, in the station wagon, and I'm sort of looking like where is Harvard?  I'm looking for this oasis, and I stop this young white girl walking down the street, and I said, "Can you tell me where Harvard Yard is?"  And she said, "Right inside there," and she's pointing at these big stone walls and I'm like, hm, okay, that's not exactly what I had in mind.  And, so, you know, we park and we get out, and inside the yard was pretty nice, but it still wasn't exactly what I was, you know, envisioning.  Princeton's campus [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] honestly looks more like what I had in mind, you know, Princeton and Wellesley, but I got over that pretty quickly.
Story_ID: 636446
Speaker 1: So this is a time, though; it's 1975 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a time that black students are, you know, being admitted to schools in--
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: --greater numbers.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And for the most part, a lot of them are from public schools, you know, like Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: And, but I--before I go there, I wanna ask you about the application process.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who interviews you and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a great story about the interview process.  You--so you send in your application, and the alums do the interviewing in the local cities, so the alumni association [Harvard Alumni Association] does it.  They assign an alum.  Well, the people who ran the Harvard Club of Memphis [Harvard Club of the Mid-South, Memphis, Tennessee] were Ned and Jean Dreyfus [ph.].  I've taken my whole family to visit them in the last seven to eight years 'cause I love the Dreyfuses--Jewish family--really nice people--showed me so much affection.  Well, they assigned somebody to interview me, a much older guy, and he said to me during the interview, just about three times too many for my taste, some reference to how, you know, "We really didn't have many people like you when I was there."  And by his tone, I didn't get the sense he was happy that it was changing (laughter).  Now, you know, I'm seventeen, and it's a little bit, you know, unusual, but I called Ned Dreyfus [ph.] up, who ran the club, and I said, "Mr. Dreyfus, I just wanna let you know I didn't feel comfortable during my interview.  I don't feel like that person was really gonna be fair to me."  And he just kind of said, "Yeah, I'll get back to you."  And then, next thing I know, I've got a second interview with a twenty-eight year old recent graduate of the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Totally different feel, and as soon as I sat down, I knew I'm on fair ground here.  Well, when I later went to visit the Dreyfuses a few years ago--much older, in my forties, we recounted that situation and the Dreyfuses then divulged that, "Yes, we had our own concerns about that particular alum, so when you called us, we knew, yeah, he probably wasn't really okay with the black kid," and that's why they immediately got me another interview.
Speaker 1: So that's what happened.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 636447
Speaker 1: So you get in.  So you arrive at Harvard Yard and Square [Harvard Square, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and--tell me what is the process?  What--where are you living?  You know, who's your roommate?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: This is really the first time you're up north.
Speaker 2: Right.  So the first thing that happens is we stayed in the Holiday Inn on Massachusetts Avenue, a little north of Harvard Yard.  And one of the reasons I remember that is because I met a Japanese girl, Asami Ishimaru, who was being dropped off by her parents.  Her parents did something with the Japanese embassy.  Asami is one of the most beautiful women that God ever made, so that's one reason that I remember this.  And we became very good friends; we actually lived in the same dorm, and I remember thinking, it's happening already.  I'm here first day, and I'm meeting this person from Japan.  This is cool!  There are no Japanese people running 'round Memphis [Tennessee] (laughter).  Now in Memphis, we had two types of people--black folk and white folk.  So then a few days later they opened the dorms.  I got there early because--I had to be there early because I had--my job to pay for some of my tuition was I cleaned other students' bathrooms, and we had to be there early to get indoctrinated--not like I needed to be taught how to clean a bathroom--my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] had seen to that.  So I--as a result, I get to my dorm, Wigglesworth K, K-21--still remember--which is one of the dorms--it's actually on Massachusetts Avenue as you drive into Harvard Yard, so you--I'm up in my room and I can look down onto Massachusetts Avenue.  And since I got there early, we had--there were three of us in the room, and we had a small bedroom, a big bedroom, and a middle open space.  And, of course, I took the big bedroom, and when my roommates got there, then the second one got the small bedroom and the third one, he got the middle room, and we said we were going to rotate, but somehow we never quite got around to doing that.  And my roommates--one of my roommates was, in freshman year, was a guy name Michael Allred [ph.] who grew up with me, who went down to the white school [Hillcrest High School, Memphis, Tennessee] with me that year.
Speaker 1: So that, so that was unusual, too, right?  'Cause the two of you ended up there at the same time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was unusual.
Speaker 1: And that you knew each other, too.
Speaker 2: But my high school [Hamilton High School] was considered the best black high school in Memphis, and we were both National Achievement scholars [National Achievement Scholarship Program], you know; we had pretty good scores.  Michael was from a much poorer family than mine and raised by I think his uncle and aunt, had a much harder life than I did.  So, Michael was one of my roommates.  And interestingly enough, when I got the housing form from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they asked me what type a roommate I wanted, and on one side of the sheet a paper I wrote what described me.  I wrote, "Black, from the South, public school, no money."  And on the other side, I wrote, "White, private school, from the North, with money."  And I asked for the opposites; 'cause, again, I've always been about I wanna embrace the unknown, I wanna be enriched by what I haven't experienced, what I don't know.  Michael, later on, said he wanted to room with me, so then I agreed to have my form be sort of subservient to what he had asked for.  So we ended up with three black guys (laughter) in the room.  My third roommate--my second roommate, Eric Winter [ph.], from New York, actually did qualify for some of that; he was somewhat better off.  He had gone to a private school in New York--the Fieldston School [Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York, New York].  He was from the North, and oddly, as life works out, I don't talk to Michael, the one I grew up with, that often at all, and Eric and I have sort of become close, lifelong friends.  He lives in Charlotte [North Carolina] today; he's a doctor.  So I guess I got attracted to the opposite again.
Story_ID: 636448
Speaker 1: So what was your four years like there [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  And what is, you know, because these are, you know, how many, how many blacks--how many students were in the--
Speaker 2: There were sixteen hundred students in the freshman class.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--then Radcliffe--
Speaker 2: Radcliffe had just ceased to be separate.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My entering class was the first year that Radcliffe and Harvard were comingled.  So that's sixteen hundred students in the entering class, about 120 blacks, so about 8 percent or so--7, 7, 7 or 8 percent.  Twice as many girls as boys, is my recollection.
Speaker 1: Really?  Then?
Speaker 2: Amongst the blacks.
Speaker 1: Amongst the blacks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or do I, do I have that reversed?  I can't remember; I shouldn't speculate on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I know that's now but--
Speaker 2: But it was a hundred--it was roughly 120.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so what are you--like, what was your first year like?  And what are you going to major in at that point and--
Speaker 2: Economics.  I always knew I wanted to be in either business or law and, so I majored in economics.  My first thought was, I need to see where I am relative to these other people who've gone to better schools.  And what I figured out was that I was at a bit of a competitive deficit that, in terms of the hard sciences and the languages.  What I also figured out was that in what I will call the liberal arts--things that just require thinking and speaking and defending a point of view; I was ahead of most of them.  And I remember we had this class freshman year, expository writing, where you wrote on various topics, and you had to discuss your views in class.  And Caro- (cough) Caroline Kennedy was in my class.  When she was in my class, she was in this course with me, and I--and there were a bunch of people from various prep schools and, and I remember having a--some debates with some of them early on, and I remember thinking to myself, little black boy from Memphis [Tennessee] doing okay up in here; I think I'll be fine.  So it was very sobering on some fronts, but also very reassuring because what I knew pretty early on was that a lot of that detail quantitative stuff wasn't going to be what you deal with every day once you actually get out into the real world.  So I had a, I had a comfort very early on that on the stuff that mattered, I was better than them and, so I kind of relaxed.  I didn't go to class as much, I spent most of my time hanging out with my friends.  I was one of the biggest party throwers on campus, I talked to everybody--I had lots of friends.
Story_ID: 636449
Speaker 1: I got myself elected co-president of the dorm I lived in [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] s- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what?  You were in what dorm?
Speaker 1: So after freshman year, you know, you go to a dorm, and when I got there freshman year, there were two houses on campus that were sort of where the blacks were concentrated because you could sort of pick your dorm; you had a lotta choice in it, and the blacks were in Leverett House and Mather House.  Well, I had a particular issue about where I wanted to live because I didn't find--I didn't really like living with multiple people; I liked my privacy, and I also thought it was better for dating, too; fewer people know your business--Currier House, up at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where the women used to stay when it was separate--Currier House was a newer dorm, and every room was a single or they--not every room, but a lotta rooms were singles, and you only had to share a bathroom with one other person, and I don't really like sharing bathrooms with a lotta people, so I decided early, I'm going to Currier House.  And then I decided that I was going to lead an exodus or a movement--a migration of the blacks to Currier 'cause my view was, I wanna be with my, with my folk, so if they're not there already, I'm gonna--well, I'm gonna move 'em there, so I talked to a bunch of the guys--the ones who were more fun--and we got a block of us who moved to Currier, and then we convinced a bunch of girls to move--black girls to go to Currier.  The two following years, my junior and senior year, Currier was the number one choice of black students for housing on campus because we had made it the party house, we had made it the fun house.  It was where the wild and crazy black guys lived.  And by the way, my biggest partner in crime in throwing those parties at Currier House was a guy name Bill Aulene [ph.], who's a successful doctor in Charlotte [North Carolina].  So my point is we had a good time, and we still took care our business, too.  Bill went on to NYU medical school [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York].  And, so we had a good time.  I--we had about--we had a large Jewish population in the house, a large Asian population, and a large black population.  And again, I got myself elected co-president of the dorm, and I negotiated some little truces between those three groups, and I got them to expand our ability to have late, raucous parties.  I also got the administration to extend the hours for the shuttle bus because people didn't wanna come up to where we were living in the winter for parties because they had to walk back, so under the ruse that I was concerned about the safety of women students having to walk back and forth late at night, I got them to extend shuttle bus hours, and once they extended shuttle bus hours, people were willing to come up to our dorm for the parties, and we kind of became party central.
Story_ID: 636450
Speaker 1: So this is 1975 to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine [1979].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '75 [1975] to '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Nine [1979]--'75 [1975] to '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I wanna also ask what are you--so where are you spending your summers?
Speaker 2: Good question.  The summer before my fre- freshman year [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and the two summers after freshman and sophomore years, I worked in Schlitz [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] and Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies] beer plants.  My oldest sister [Evelyn Simmons] was working at Schlitz beer.  Those summer jobs at Schlitz beer back then were golden.  They were unionized.
Speaker 1: Now is this in Memphis [Tennessee] or--
Speaker 2: The first summer, I worked--first couple summers I worked in Memphis, and then one summer, my sister had moved to Upstate New York to a--right outside Syracuse [New York], so she got me a job (laughter) as a forklift driver in the plant in Syracuse [sic. Baldwinsville, New York], and I had never driven a forklift before, but there was a black manager in the plant who took me aside on my first night and basically taught (laughter) me how to drive the forklift, so I was able to cover my weakness pretty quickly.  But that job paid something like ten or twelve bucks [dollars] an hour in 1975, which was a really good job in 1975.  And then, there were lots of opportunities to work overtime, and if you worked on holidays, I remember you got triple time, and other times you got double time.  So I worked all the time and made all this money in the summers at the beer plants.  And then--and it's interesting because some of my friends were working at nice white collar jobs those--some of those summers.  As it turned out, when I applied to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], working those beer factory jobs made me different.  So when the business school wants you to write about your managerial knowledge and understanding, I was able to tell stories emanating from watching blue collar guys in a plant that my friends couldn't describe, so it was actually a very good, diversifying experience for me.  And I guess the lesson for people in that is, you know, the path isn't like following everybody else; you see the uniqueness in the experience.  I learned a lot about--what's the mindset of a guy without a college education who's gotta work in a plant every day?  And how do you motivate him to do his job every day?  Then one summer I worked at Chemical Bank in New York City [New York, New York] 'cause I decided I needed to get, you know, something kind of more official looking on my resume.  But most of the summers I worked in the beer plant.
Story_ID: 636451
Speaker 1: So can you say who else was in your class, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Some of my classmates in the class of '79 [1979], Debbie Wright [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright], who was in Currier House [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with me, Willie Lawrence [Willie E. Lawrence, Jr.], who's a cardiologist and won some, won some national recognition, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] who's global head of investment banking at Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.], countless other very successful doctors and lawyers and engineers, and community activist types.  And being around that group of people had a very positive, reinforcing impact on your vision of what you needed to do with yourself because you don't sort of wanna be the slacker (laughter) amongst your group, and when you're around people who have big plans, then you know you need to have big plans, too.  So it was a, it was a great group a people; we had a great time together.  And I remember--and this was at a time when the blacks definitely hung together, and I was always--I always had a lotta other friends, too, but my central social group was the black students.  And we had a dinner, I remember, right before graduation, and we had a theme for the dinner, and the theme was a take on the Sister Sledge song [sic.], and the theme was: ain't no stoppin' us now.  And that was our mindset.  Okay, we got this diploma, now we gotta go do stuff, and we gotta do stuff that people haven't done before.
Speaker 1: Now were you--so you stayed true to your economics major the whole time through, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a teacher or were there mentors for you or--during that time, or is it more your social sort of coming out and, you know.
Speaker 2: More my social and leadership.  As I said, I had this leadership position in the dorm and it, and it's kind of funny, but even, you know, I talk about the partying and people said, "Oh, that's kind of funny," but we were organized.  We threw these huge parties, and I had people assigned to go recruit people to attend the party from various universities around the Boston [Massachusetts] area, and if I wasn't happy with who you brought, I essentially fired you and assigned somebody else to that school.  And you had to know--you had to bring, you know, you have to bring, you know, a mix of people--interesting people.  So, yeah, I think I spent a lot of time just learning to be able to talk to any and everybody.  I spent a lot of time talking to people from foreign countries that were there in school, you know.  I spent a--you know, I spent time with the Jewish kids, spent time with the Indian kids.
Story_ID: 636452
Speaker 1: In terms of instructors, at the undergraduate level [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], no.  I--'cause I did most of my learning through reading.  A lot of times, I would get the reading list, and I would get the notes from my classmates about class.  I wouldn't even go; I don't necessarily recommend that for everybody (laughter).  Sometimes I would show up for exams and my classmates would say, "You take this class, Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]?"  You know, 'cause I hadn't been, but I had read everything.  And I had, you know, talked to some of them about what the main things were from the class, and I used it to think about life a lot.  I think it's helped me actually; I think I've developed a better sense of kind of where I wanted to go.  And I was thinking about law school and business school still, even up through senior year.  I took the LSAT, did well on the LSAT, but I remember thinking--and I, and I remember this logic because I told this to a number of people.  It was bad logic that I used to make my final decision, and what I said to myself was if I'm going to be a lawyer, I wanna be a courtroom kind of a guy; I don't wanna be behind the desk looking at contracts.  And, so I'll probably go back to Memphis [Tennessee], take me five years to sort of become the man--I'll be thirty, you know; get outta law school at twenty-five, take me to be thirty years old before I'm the man.  So, if I go to business school, it's only two years, then some big company'll pay me a lot of money at twenty-four or five--it seems better.  And I remember my thirtieth birthday like it's yesterday.  I was sitting on a plane in first class, working for Bankers Trust company of New York.  I was doing an international M and A [mergers and acquisitions] deal, and I was sitting there thinking, life's pretty good.  I'm in first class, I got a great job, I'm going to Holland [the Netherlands]--I was on my way to Amsterdam [the Netherlands].  And then I thought, but you know, you could be the hotshot lawyer of Memphis by now.  And thirty came fast.  And I always share that with young people to say, don't make lifelong decisions based on the speed of getting to a certain place, because whatever you choose to do, you're gonna have the whole rest of your life to be that thing.  It's not that I, I'm--it's not that I'm unhappy with my choice, I just realized that the way I made the choice was very short sighted.
Story_ID: 636453
Speaker 1: So now you decide that you're going to apply to business school and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, I only applied to one (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that was--
Speaker 2: Harvard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what is your strategy in getting into the school then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a great question because I've always had a different strategy about everything and, so I said, "Well, my grades are okay; they're not great." It was around a 3.0 [grade point average], but I knew I would test well, I always have scored in the upper percentiles on the GMAT [Graduate Management Admission Test].  But the essays were very important, and what I decided to do was to paint myself as a future leader who would be enhanced by going to Harvard Business School but who didn't need it to be successful 'cause my view was that the Harvard Business School was in the business of selecting people who they thought would be successful so that they could make it look as if at least Harvard had a lot to do with it but, you know, half of Harvard's reputation is picking the right people who later make them look good, too.  And, so I wanted to display a certain confidence in my essays and, so my essays were written with the underlying theme of I'm gonna do great 'cause I always have and I always will because I always think of a way to approach things differently, but I'll get there faster if you guys let me in and I could learn what, you know, you guys have to teach me.  And I, you know, I had some good raw material because I had, had some different experiences.  I had worked in the beer factory, you know.  My parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] were from Mississippi and grew up on the farm, and I talked about all that stuff, and I think a lotta people try to hide those aspects of themselves.  I knew how it enriched who I was, and I sort of shared that.
Speaker 1: So you went straight in.
Speaker 2: Well, it's an interesting story, too.  I--back when I applied, if they let you in at all, 97 percent of the people they let in were told, "You're admitted to the class two years from now."  But 3 percent of the people who they let in were told, "Well, you can come right away."  And I must say, much to the shock of many of my classmates who didn't think I was studying enough, I was in the 3 percent that was told that I could come right away.  Because I had a better understanding of what Harvard was really looking for, and it came across in my essays.  My discussions of my life up to that point demonstrated a maturity and an insight about situations and people that frankly made me an adult, not a graduating college student in the admissions committee's eyes.  I'm convinced that's why they let me in.  And then I wrote them a letter, and the letter basically said, "If I'm half as smart as you seem to think I am, you won't be surprised that I'm not coming right away because I have things I need to learn still," and I gave myself a deferral.  So I ended up coming with all my friends who were deferred but by my choice.
Story_ID: 636454
Speaker 1: Then what did you do in that year?  That's when you worked for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to work for IBM right outta college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So IBM, at this point, is still the go to company?
Speaker 2: The go to computer company.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) PCs [personal computer] haven't come out, big mainframe computers that take up a whole room.  And again, I told you I always have a different strategy.  So IBM recruiter comes on campus, there're about twenty of us at a dinner; he's, you know, taking questions, and I had a strategy for the dinner.  My strategy was not to ask the same type of predictable questions that my classmates were asking, and they were asking questions like, "Well, what do you think the future of the computing industry is, and who are IBM's three biggest competitors?"  I pur- I purposefully acted disinterested throughout most of the dinner.  And then, right at the end when he was wrapping up, and he kind of did the perfunctory, "Well, unless anybody else has another question," I was waiting for that moment; when it came, I said, "Oh, I'm sorry, sir; I actually do have a question," first thing I had said all night.  He--and he kind of looked like, "Oh, this guy's alive."  And I said, "Yeah, my question is how much does this job pay?"  'Cause nobody had asked that.  And he sort of looked at me a little oddly and he said, "Well, you know, we're competitive with the market and a commensurate salary range," and he said, "Well, does that help?"  And I said, "Well, I was kind of looking for a number."  So he kind of looks at me like, this guy's kind of got some nerve, and he throws a numerical range, and as we're leaving, he asks me if he can buy me a drink 'cause at this time, drinking age was eighteen.  And I said, "Sure."  And he asked me, he said, "Well, you know, do you wanna work for IBM?"  I said, "Yeah, I wanna work for IBM."  He--and earlier that evening he had said that if you wanted the job, you had to have an interview and take a test.  And I said, "Yeah, I think I do wanna work for IBM."  He said, "Well, you can.  You just need to tell me what city you wanna work in."  And I said, "Well, what about the interview and a test?"  He said, "Based on my conversation with you, you don't need an interview, and I know you'll pass the test.  You just need to tell me where you wanna work."  Everybody else at that dinner had to do the interview and a test because they had done the predictable thing; they had come across like students.  I came across like an adult.  Adults wanna know how much the job pays, but I did it in a sufficiently respectful way that didn't turn him off; but again, I had a strategy for going into that dinner of how I was gonna be viewed differently than they were.  And so I worked for IBM for two years, and got the sales training.
Story_ID: 636455
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what did you learn?
Speaker 2: By working for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because they say that they have really good training.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I learned the importance of how you present yourself physically, how you speak, and the art of questioning people to get them to tell you what their real needs are, and then being able to respond in a way that makes 'em feel like you're going to take care of what they said their need was.  They had a phrase for--at IBM, it was called an initial benefit statement.  So you had to know how to unearth their need, and then tell them how something you were gonna do was gonna benefit them and address their need.  So your elevator speech--you got a lotta, you got a lotta practice at your quick three-minute elevator speech.
Speaker 1: And what--did you also know that you were meant for Corporate America?  Is that--do you think that--was anything about it that was different or odd?  Or did you feel like a fish in water?
Speaker 2: I felt like a fish in water, and as soon as I got to IBM (laughter), I saw the importance of social networking and politics.  One of the things I noticed--and whenever we had training classes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you say social networking you're talking about networking with other people (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, like talking to people, and knowing people in the office, and--but your first image, you know; I forgot how important that was because--in fact, we used (laughter), we used to have a little betting pool in the office because when interviewees would come into the office--we had three divisions at IBM: Data Processing Division, called DPD, General Systems Division, GSD, and Office Products Division, OPD.  General--DPD sold the biggest computers to the big companies; General Systems Division sold medium size computers that ran departments; OPD sold typewriters.  Usually, your more sophisticated, more elite, educated people, they were in DPD and they were clear class patterns.  I had a very high hit rate on the betting pool.  When a interview came in, we would bet which division they're gonna be sent to.  I could tell by how they walked through the office, how they were dressed, how they carried themselves, and if I got 'em to talk, I was like 100 percent accurate.  And what I learned from that was veneer matters--what you look like, how you speak--it dictates which path put--people put you on.  The second thing I learned was making friends in the office matters a lot--what opportunities you get.  Does So and So recommend you?  'Cause I saw it; I saw when we came outta training who got put on the star accounts where they could basically wake up and fall outta bed and make their numbers because the account was gonna generate X amount a money anyway versus the people who were told, "You know, we got these eight new accounts; you go try to see if they'll buy from IBM; never bought from us before but you go try to do that."  There was a direct correlation between how many--how people were connected, and how they presented themselves and which opportunity they got.  And because of the training my father [Joseph Simmons] had given me mostly, on how to connect with all types of people, I knew--I can really be good at this.  I'll be connected to the most people in the office and my name'll come--my name'll come up more.  And I'm gonna out work everybody, too, by the way.
Story_ID: 636456
Speaker 1: Because, by the way, just to clear up the record, once I got to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] and ever since, I was one of the hardest working people; college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was sort of a--I sort of took it easy for a while.  When I got to the business school, I got to class two hours early on the first day to pick out the seat I wanted because I was like, I'm here--I'm here to compete.  And on my first day of work at Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers] in 1992--I know I'm skipping ahead but it links to the sort of work ethic thing, I brought a pillow with me to the office and put it next to me, and the signal was, I would be sleeping here sometimes to get the job done, and if you work for me, you might wanna get one, too, 'cause you're gone be here with me.  So it wasn't--I say that because I, I don't wanna overemphasize; it's not just schmoozing, it's schmoozing combined with working your tail off.
Speaker 2: So describe Harvard Business School of 1984--'5 [1985], '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Well, '81 [1981] was when I entered (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, you entered in 19--I'm sorry, 19--
Speaker 1: Yeah, entered in '81 [1981].  Intense, you know; the political correctness period had not arrived yet, you know.  The first thing that happened was you were encouraged to form study groups of four to six people.  Right there, that was jockeying--who was going to choose you?  And were you gonna be a chooser or a choosee?  And how do you navigate that?  But again, if you've been social a little bit, right off the bat, some people got to know you, you were more likely to be chosen, right?  So, and I think even in that way, Harvard was trying to teach you a lesson about what really matters (laughter)--that, you know, who you connect with matters, and now you're in a group, and maybe you're in a group of really smart people, or maybe you're in a group of not so smart people and that's who you get your help from to do the cases.  It was a mixture of fun; I mean everybody was--everybody knew that they were being made privy to a life changing experience, and we were, we were hungry for it.  I mean people were eager to come to class; we liked engaging with each other, we--most of us.  I mean there were a few who were--really shouldn't have been there, but 85 percent of the people really loved the mixing it up and we could disagree but do it agreeably most of the time.  You did have a few people you didn't like, and sometimes you would send 'em a little zinger in class.
Speaker 2: So your--how large is each class?
Speaker 1: 'Bout ninety in each section (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety?  And how many sections?
Speaker 1: Eight or so, and about 720, 750 students.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you really--first year, you don't really know the people outside your section all that well unless you go drinking with them.  Your family, who you really get to know, are the people in--those ninety people in your section.
Speaker 2: So how many blacks were in your, in your section?  Did you--
Speaker 1: In my section?  I think there were maybe--I'm gonna say five or so.  Debbie Wright [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright] was in my section.
Speaker 2: Oh, so she was in your--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's kind of funny; we were in the same dorm [Currier House] at college, and then we were in the same section, and she was in my study group.  Joe Steele [ph.], who was a banker at Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.] for a long time, was in my section--also a Harvard undergraduate classmate of mine, and Michelle Morris [L. Michelle Morris], who's an investment banker in New York [New York], who had gone to Penn undergrad [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I think, was in my section, and there were maybe one or two others, that I don't recall, as well.
Story_ID: 636457
Speaker 1: So what do you do after your fir- your fir- after your--between your first and second year?  Where are you working?
Speaker 2: At Holiday Inns [Holiday Inn] in Memphis [Tennessee] for the summer.  But then I had a unique thing that happened.  I had a unique thing that happened.  I ended up taking several years off because I had--
Speaker 1: That's where I'm wondering about the timeline (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so--
Speaker 2: So I didn't graduate until the class of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I was thinking--
Speaker 2: Yes, because I had spent too much money and done some foolish things partying with some money, and as a result of what I did, they restricted my financial aid to the point where I couldn't come back second year.  So, and it was a very embarrassing thing, mainly because Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] had a practice of if you didn't perform academically, you'd call--you hit the screen--you went in front of the screening committee, and the screening committee would tell you you had to take time off.  So since I took time off for financial reasons, it would've been very natural for some people to assume I had hit the screen.  And as you've probably figured out, I have a lotta pride around my intellectual and academic performance.  So I actually used to walk around with a copy of my first year grades from the business school in my wallet, and if I got any hint that somebody thought I had hit the screen, I actually would pull it out and show it to them.  And I actually remember one man--one person who was in our circle, I had heard was sort of going around telling people I had hit the screen, and I cornered him at a party one night, and I think the statute of limitations has run out on this 'cause I threatened him, so that--it's a--it's a threat assault (laughter), so--and I showed him the grades, and I said, "Now that you've seen the truth, if I ever hear that you told people this lie again, I'm gonna come get ya."  So that was a difficult period for me.  I was still in the area--I worked for Wang computers [Wang Laboratories] 'cause IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] was competing with Wang, so Wang really wanted my experience, so I took time off, I saved up money during that period, and went back.  And I can tell you I paid a lot of attention when I went back 'cause I paid for it when I went back.
Speaker 1: So you worked for Wang, and did you work for Bankers Trust during that time or--
Speaker 2: No, Bankers Trust was once I graduated.
Speaker 1: Graduated.  Okay, so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but--yeah.  Wang was--Wang was my interim place between the two years of business school when I had to work my way outta this financial hole I had dug myself, dug myself.
Speaker 1: How much was the financial hole?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean it was probably, I don't know, sixteen thousand dollars, something like that.
Speaker 1: But that's a lot of money to owe back then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lot of money back then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636458
Speaker 1: Now Black Enterprise is sort of a critical thing.  Is it a critical thing in your, Black Enterprise magazine?  Are you reading that?  Are you looking at Forbes?  Are you looking at--looking at The Wall Street Journal?
Speaker 2: No, I'm looking at all of them.  I'm reading Black Enterprise and Ebony and Jet because, you know, role models in those things.  And I met Governor Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] of Virginia recently, and I told him, I said, "You know, it's really cool for me to meet a person who was inspirational to me, you know, as an adult even."  And so I'm reading the black publications for role models, and I'm reading Forbes and Businessweek for what I'm gonna talk about when I go to dinner at, you know, this fancy place that black people don't normally go to--whatever that happened to be that month.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so when you decide where you're going--so who were you interviewing with?  Or who did you want a job with?
Speaker 2: When I'm getting outta business school?
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I had a very confused set of options because I had a information technology interest--information technology strategy interest from my IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and my Wang [Wang Laboratories] time, and I was a big disciple of Professor Warren McFarlan [F. Warren McFarlan] and James Cash [James I. Cash, Jr.], the black professor at Harvard--read all their stuff.  And actually, at Wang, I got involved in something where I was traveling around the country giving speeches on how to use technology as a strategic weapon, and I was using a lotta my learning from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] while I was in that little hiatus period--that little interim period.  But I also was very cognizant of how much money people were making in the finance side of things and, so since some of my friends had already graduated in the class of '83 [1983]--Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] and Debbie [HistoryMaker Deborah Wright] and others, Ray was working on Wall Street, and Ray McGuire, who's one of the best friends I could have ever, ever have had, he told me, he said, "You know, you need to stop doing that marketing stuff; you're a deal guy, you've got exactly what it takes.  You should be in finance."  So I said, "Okay, I'll try that."  So I interviewed with a bunch of banks and finance houses.  I also interviewed with some of the strategy consulting firms 'cause strategy was one of my better courses at business school.
Story_ID: 636459
Speaker 1: You asked me earlier about professors from undergrad [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; really didn't have one, but business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], Malcolm Salter [Malcolm S. Salter], who ran the strategy department, was a big--because I worked a lot harder at the business school so I was really close to my instructors.  So, Malcolm Salter for strategy, and then Barbara Toffler [Barbara Ley Toffler], who taught the organizational behavior class, we had a friendship and I'll never forget; Salter took me to lunch as I was about to graduate, and I had gotten one of the top grades in his class.  And Malcolm Salter's Jewish, and he sat me down at lunch in the university dining club or whatever, and he said to me, he said, "You know, you're really smart; you're gonna accomplish a lotta great things," he said, "and there's some--gonna be some people who are gonna try to stop you.  Don't let 'em."  And I just remember thinking, wow!  The power.  I've got this very reputable guy telling me I'm good, and I'm gonna do great things.  And I had similar conversations with Toffler.
Story_ID: 636460
Speaker 1: So I talked to some strategy houses--McKinsey [McKinsey and Company]--those types of people; for whatever reason, I didn't make the cut with the big strategy folks.  And because I had never worked in finance, the banks were rejecting me.  So (laughter) I was interviewing with Scientific Atlanta [Scientific Atlanta, Inc.], the company that makes electronic devices down in Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause I was also very focused on going back to the South--I wanted to be in Atlanta.  So I basically told everybody, "I'll work for you if you have a job in Atlanta."  I interviewed with Deloitte [Deloitte Haskins and Sells; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] in their IT [information technology] consulting area; got way down the path with them, found a partner there I really liked, I was kind of excited about working for him.  I happened to call one of my (laughter) classmates--talk about relationships--from my first year section at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], 'cause, again, they've all graduated now.  Called up a guy, white guy from my section, named Michael Jacobs [ph.].  I didn't know where Michael was working, but I just knew he was in Atlanta.  So I call Michael up, and I had, I had a interview with Bankers Trust company in New York [New York] but had been sent a rejection letter.  I call up Michael and I say, "Mike, you know, I wanna come to Atlanta; I'm looking at some things in Atlanta."  I also was interviewing with SunTrust Bank [SunTrust Banks], which was a good regional bank but it wasn't on the level of the Bankers Trust and the Drexels [Drexel Burnham Lambert, Inc.] and all those places.  And Michael says to me, "Well, you know, you should interview with my bank."  I said, "Well, I don't know which--where you work."  He said, "Well, I work for Bankers Trust in the Atlanta office."  And I said, "Well, I've already interviewed with them in New York and they rejected me."  He said, "Well, they don't tell us who to hire in Atlanta."  Next thing I know, I got--I have a perfunctory interview at the Atlanta office and I have a job offer from Bankers Trust in Atlanta, same people (laughter) who rejected me.  But because my buddy from section basically said, "I saw--I've seen this guy in class; he's smart, he works hard--should let him in."  So that's how I ended up working at Bankers Trust, and--just kind of--the right phone call.
Story_ID: 636461
Speaker 1: Like I said, I had done [HistoryMaker] Deborah Wright's interview, and I'm wondering if any of these dynamics are going on.  So, you know her, her--I had also interviewed her aunt, who was Marian Edelman [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And she talks about, you know, her family saying, "How could--why would you not go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], you know?  And you're going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  What's that?"
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And then, when she went into investment banking, they were like, "What kind of job is that?"  And her mother [Joan Bell Wright] kept saying, "Please quit, quit," and was so happy when she quit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So are any of these dynamics going on?  Do your parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] know what you really wanna do?  And how are you doing what you're doing?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think my parents always had a lotta confidence that I was doing my homework, but I do recall two significant moments on this topic.  My father really never has tried to get in my business on that level; it's not his way.  My mother, you know, tends to be--she'll make more comments.  When I was leaving IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], my mother said to me--and I, and I didn't go back to IBM 'cause I had--and I could have gone back to IBM.  My--when I got outta school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], my mother said, "Son," you know, "that's a good company."  'Cause the word for her generation's, you know, work for the good, stable company.  And she say, "You know, that's a good company.  Why would you leave there?"  I said, "Mother, there's other opportunity."  And I remember thinking that day, when she said that to me, that I couldn't really rely on her for career guidance because I was in a space that she just didn't know that well.  And I also remember one weekend when I was working for the bank [Bankers Trust], the whole--all the siblings hadn't been home, all at the same time, for a long time, and she wanted to take a family photo--it was on a Saturday, and I had some deal that was going on--I had a mergers and acquisition deal.  And I basically said, "Look, you know, I'm gonna be working.  I could fly into Memphis [Tennessee], and I'll land at this time, and four hour later, I'm gonna be flying out 'cause I gotta go back to the office and do more work."  And I remember my mother saying to me, "Son," you know, "they working you that hard?"  And I said, "No, Mother, I'm working me that hard because there's some stuff I'm gonna accomplish at this bank."  So I think the world of like 'round the clock white collar work, you know, she didn't really understand that.  I think she understands now what I was up to, but it was a little bit--a different world for her.
Story_ID: 636462
Speaker 1: So when you went to Bankers Trust, how did that differ from IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]?  And what are you--what area are you in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So I'm in the leverage buyout finance group, which meant that we were the bank that loaned hundreds of millions--sometimes over a billion dollars--to a private equity group that wants to do a--generally, in most cases, hostile takeover or otherwise buy out generally, a public company.  So these are high stakes deals; there are generally about four or five of us looking at the deal to decide whether the bank should loan this three, four, five, six, seven, eight hundred million dollars or not.  So it was tremendously exciting work because there's a lotta money riding on your assessment of their ability to pay this loan back or not.  We also typically didn't have a lotta notice, and we oftentimes hadn't worked in that particular industry much, so you have to be, to be quick; you have to study a whole industry in a matter of days and figure it out.  So I used a lotta tools I learned at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  The thing was, though, we (laughter)--the PC [personal computer] is out now, and we did a lotta financial modeling and I hadn't really done any, and I wasn't good at it.  My peers, most of them had worked for a bank before they went to business school, so they were ahead of me.  I was behind when I got to the bank, and it was frighteningly--I was frighteningly behind; like I didn't know what I was doing and I wasn't good at it and I kind of--honestly, I kind of hid out.  I was praying that they weren't (laughter) gonna ask me to do much because I didn't know what I was doing.  And there came a point in time--again, talk about relationships.  I made friends with a woman named Jan Bowen [ph.]--never forget her--nice woman.  She kind of ran the administrative side of the office; the secretaries worked for her in the office at Bankers Trust in Atlanta [Georgia].  Oh, by the way, shortly after I got there, my friend Michael [Michael Jacobs (ph.)], who had got me in, he left and went someplace else, so I was there by myself--okay.  Jan comes to my desk one day, she says, "We need to talk."  And she takes me off, she says, "You know, they don't think you're doing that well; they're wondering like when you're gonna do something," (laughter), "that like works around here."  But luckily, by that time, I had, by dint of hard work--I was catching up.  There was a room in the back of the office where they kept all the old files of announcements.  At night, when everybody else would go home, I was in the file room reading old analyses, so I was teaching in myself, and I was teaching myself the computer stuff and, but Jan told me, she said, "You know, they don't like you.  They didn't--." Well, she said, "They think you're an arrogant Harvard guy.  Not because you are, but because that's just what they think about Harvard guys."  She said, "They thought that about your buddy, who's gone, and now they think it about you."  And I've always been one--I don't let the little thing in the air like fester, so I went down to the guy who ran the offices' office, and I shut his door.  Jim Zielinski [James D. Zielinski] was his name, and Jim and I hadn't really worked on anything together, and I said, "Jim, I understand that, you know, people weren't fans of my friend, and that they're now not fans of mine," I said, "but you need to understand something; I'm loyal to who's in charge.  Last time I looked, that's you."  And after that conversation, our relationship changed itself, and he said, "I'm gone let you work on a project for me."  Well, I had just gotten my act together, and I worked on that project for Jim and I did a bang up job, and a few months after that, I had become Jim's boy, basically.  The other people in the office who had the prior experience, they were not Jim's first thought when he had a new transaction in the office--I was.  I was the only black person, I was the only one who didn't have prior experience, and I was the first person Jim called.  Then I started getting invited to Jim's house socially--not the rest of my peers (laughter), just me.  And part of it was Jim came into the office early a lot; he was the son of Polish immigrants.  And see, I learned how to connect based on our backgrounds, and Jim came to the office one morning--he probably got there around seven [o'clock].  Well, I had been there since 5:30.
Story_ID: 636463
Speaker 1: Let's start (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, so Jim Zielinski [James D. Zielinski], who ran the office, he's a son of Polish immigrants, and Jim will come in the office fairly early.  Well, Jim came in the office one morning around seven [o'clock], but I was already there.  I had been there since about 5:30 because this was in the phase when I was still trying to catch up on my learning curve, and Jim asked me, he said, "Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]," you know, "what time did you get here?"  I said, "I got here at 5:30, Jim."  And he was like, "I can't believe you get in early."  And I said, "Well, Jim," I said, "let me, let me explain something to you."  I said, "My [maternal] grandfather, Lucious Anderson," who we discussed earlier, "when I would visit him in Mississippi, he would get up at 'round 3:30 in the morning to feed the chickens and the pigs for no money--to just eke out a bare living.  If all I have to do is get up, get in my 190 Mercedes-Benz [Mercedes-Benz 190-Class]," which I had at the time, "drive down in my air conditioned car, sit in your air conditioned building and do paperwork and run numbers, that's easy; do that all day long."  And I think that was when he was like, okay, this guy is like me.  We're about the opportunity, and we're gone work for it.  And, so we just had this bond and, basically, I worked on all the best transactions with Jim.  And I remember another conversation Jim and I had.  I had a trip planned to Brazil with my wife [Allison Arnold Simmons], my best friend from college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--or one of my best friends from college, Bill Aulene [ph.] and his wife.  Bill's the doctor in Charlotte [North Carolina] I mentioned--the one I used to throw the parties with.  And there was this deal that kind of kept starting up, then it would die, start up and die, and it was possible that it was going to rear itself while I was in Brazil and my vacation could be interrupted, although in most cases, arrangements would have been made and somebody else would have worked on the deal.  So I went down to Jim's office and I said to Jim, I said, "Jim, just curious.  What are you going to do if that deal comes back while I'm on vacation in Brazil?"  And Jim made the normal assumption that I was there to make sure my vacation didn't get interrupted.  He said, "Oh, Chris, you know, we'll be fine; I can get somebody else to do it, you know.  You deserve a break."  And I laughed for effect 'cause I've always been able to, you know, maximize the drama of the moment, and I said, "Jim, you confused.  Here's why I came down here.  That's my deal; that's gonna be the best deal that's gonna be done in this office [of Bankers Trust] this year, and whoever works on it is gonna be the man for a while."  I said, "Let me give you some instructions.  If I have landed already in Brazil and I'm there, and the deal comes back, I want a note sent to my hotel and I will be back on the next plane.  If I'm in the air en route to Brazil, I want a message waiting for me at the airport so I can hop the next plane back."  He said, "Well, what are you--what's your wife gonna do down there by herself with your friends there?"  I said, "That's her problem, but I'm working this deal with you."  And he told me later (laughter), he said, "You know, I knew I was gonna be doing some good things for you in your career when," (laughter), "you came in and told me the instructions for, you know, the Brazil trip, because most people aren't that loyal to the mission; they're loyal to their personal agenda."  And it just, it just created a different kind of relationship with me and Jim.
Story_ID: 636464
Speaker 1: Now you were there how long?  You--
Speaker 2: I was there from '86 [1986] to '91-ish [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Michael Milken got in trouble, the junk bond market went under (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--and that's what--I was just gonna ask about the leverage buyouts.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --when you got involved with them, how long had they been a tool?  When was the beginning part?  I should know this but--
Speaker 2: It was early '80s [1980s], so they had been a tool for about five or six years when I got involved in it.  I wish I had gotten in on the earlier stage; I'd probably be wealthy now but--
Speaker 1: But banks--also, for banks--now this is the other thing I wanna ask.  Was Bankers Trust--were all the banks involved in leverage buyouts at this point or just some banks involved?
Speaker 2: Bankers Trust was one of the more aggressive.  We and Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.] were probably the two leading banks involved in this--in the financing end of it.  Of course, the big investment banks that were advising on the deals and in raising public monies were, you know, First Boston [First Boston Corporation], Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.]--people like that but--Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  But in terms of the commercial banks who were very involved in this, we were one of the giants--one of the two or three giants.  And then a lot of the regional banks were participating, but we would sell off participation in the deals to them, so that was one of the things I did a lot; I would--we would underwrite the deal, and then we would reduce our risk by getting other banks to take pieces of it, and I was actually pretty good at that--convincing people that it was safe to be part of our deal.
Speaker 1: But isn't that sort of what just happened with the most recent financial (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean it's another version of that, now that you explained that.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I will tell you that on one occasion, I was working at the bank, we looked at a credit and, in my view, nobody on the team understood the credit and how it worked, and then I went on vacation to Hawaii, and I remember calling back to the office while I was on vacation and I said, "Did we approve that deal?"  And they said, "Yeah, we approved it."  And I said, sarcastically, "Well, who got brilliant after I left?  Because when I left, nobody in that room understood how that credit worked."  And the answer I got from my colleague was, "Well, the private equity firm--the leverage buyout agent, if you will, they were comfortable with it; they convinced us."  And I'm thinking, well, they're putting in 10 percent, maybe, of the purchase price, we're putting up the other 90, and we let them (laughter) convince us?  So some of what happened in the financial downturn didn't surprise me because the greater fool theory has been in operation for quite a time and, so what you had then was people participating in deals based on somebody else's comfort, not their own comfort, and essentially, you had a lotta that in this recent downturn as well.
Speaker 1: So basically, what I hear you saying is that the most recent financial turndown--that its beginnings really had its beginnings really in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Or maybe even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean with the--
Speaker 2: --or maybe even earlier.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean there've been times in stock market history, even in the '60s [1960s], when you had massive run ups in valuation because somebody else said it was worth that, right?  Go back to my quote, "Most people are other people. Their thoughts are someone else's opinion," ['De Profundis,' Oscar Wilde] et cetera, et cetera--happens in finance.
Story_ID: 636465
Speaker 1: So Mike Milken [Michael Milken] has his--
Speaker 2: His problems (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I wanna ask you before we get there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what was the deal that you most--you learned the most from with--at Bankers Trust?
Speaker 2: Probably--there was an acquisition that my client, Interface, Inc., then known as Interface Flooring Systems [Interface Flooring Systems, Inc.; Interface, Inc.], the interface group from $150 million revenue company when we first started doing business with them, to a billion dollar plus company.  I think they were, if they're not still, a Fortune 500, and they did it through a series of acquisitions.  But they had won their biggest acquisition, at least during the time I was involved with them, was with this Dutch company, and they had tried to buy this Dutch company four or five years previously, but they hadn't managed the politics of the Dutch business environment, and they had run afoul of some power that the Dutch workers association had.  And the CEO--for several years after that, they got sold to some Italian chemicals company instead of coming to him.  He developed relationships with the Interface executives, and five years later--I'm sorry, with the, with the Dutch company executives; it was company called Heuga, H-E-U-G-A [Heuga Home Flooring].  And when the Italian chemical company later decided they didn't wanna have that entity anymore and they sold it again, he had relationships with the Heuga people this time, that helped him buy it.  So it taught me the importance of relationships in a deal doing environment, which a lotta people don't understand; they think it's just about the numbers and the money.  No, it's about relationships there, too.
Story_ID: 636466
Speaker 1: Michael Mil- Milken [Michael Milken] has this, you know--
Speaker 2: Flames out--right.
Speaker 1: Flames out, but that's the beginning of other things in (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The junk bond market goes down, and the junk bond financing was a big piece of a lot of the, you know, so, earlier, when I said, you know, we get 90 percent, most of the time the structure was the commercial bank would put in 60 percent, you'd have junk bonds of around 25, 30 percent, and the equity was about 10 percent.  Well, once that junk bond layer went out, we couldn't do the deals at the level we had been doing 'em, so the market dried up, there were virtually no deals being done, the bank [Bankers Trust], headquartered in New York [New York], decides they're gonna shut down the Atlanta [Georgia] office, and what they--and by this time, I've made vice president.  And by the way (laughter), of the people who started with me as associates in that pool, the--and remember I told you I, who was the least experienced of all them--the only one that had made vice president by this time, was me.  There was another person in the Atlanta office who made vice president before me, but he had come down from New York.  So I'm a vice president and they came down and they said, "Look, we got this severance deal, and the severance deal is this.  Everybody gets three months, but we'll pay you, and if you're a vice president or above, we'll pay you an extra month for an additional five months, for a total of eight, for each month you haven't found a job."  Now at this time I've got a two year old son [Christopher Simmons].
Speaker 1: Now when did you get married [to Allison Arnold Simmons], Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons]?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had my first son in 1989; now it's 1991.
Speaker 1: Now when did you marry?  You got married while you were in business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I got married in that interim period--
Speaker 1: Interim period (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) while I was in between, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, so I got a two year old son at home (laughter).  As soon as she said, "I heard you could get eight months' pay and not be working," I thought, hm, how many men get a chance to spend eight months with their two year old son?  And I said to her, "You might as well write out all of my eight checks right now."  And she said, "Well, I don't understand," you know.  "You have great educational credentials, you are one of the star people in the office; you should be able to get a job."  And I said, "Yeah, but I won't be looking for one because I'm gone take your money, and I'm gonna bond with my son."  So that's what I did.  And I also didn't wanna be looking for a job in one of the worst financial markets and be going around Atlanta with my hat in my hand; I wanted to wait, hopefully, you know, the economy would start to get better, it would be a more robust hiring environment.  What I did do was (laughter)--I was very good friends with all the other senior guys in the office, the ones above me; several of them tried to start businesses and do different things.  I got asked by--and these are all white guys--I got asked by three different ones of them to go do different things with them.  Well, right near my eighth month, one of those senior guys--a guy name Richard Hew [ph.], who was a managing director in the office, who I never actually worked for; he just knew about my work from the other senior guys, but we were friendly with one another.  He got a job offer to work for Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers] to help start up a corporate finance merger and acquisition group.  Rick's first phone call, after he got his job offer, was to offer me a job to work for him based on what he had heard about me at the bank, and that's how I got to Price Waterhouse.
Story_ID: 636467
Speaker 1: What happened to Jim [James D. Zielinski] in the process?
Speaker 2: Jim, before the office closed, got a promotion and got transferred to New York [New York] (laughter), which also triggered a very difficult chapter for me because this was before I made vice president.  And Jim's successor had a view that anybody who hadn't worked in New York was a total and complete idiot--essentially, as good as told us that when he showed up.  Told me I should go to law school and not be a banker, made me work as a--like on a co-piloting basis with somebody at my same level who was from the New York office.  I remember going to his office and telling him that I didn't co-pilot, because Jim had been letting me run stuff, and this person told me, in no uncertain terms, to do what he blankety blank said and, but I got my revenge on that one because we got put on a very important transaction under the supervision of somebody even more senior than this person, who had come down to run the office based in New York.  And I had had a disagreement with this co-pilot person I had been assigned and a person up one level above him about the right way to go about looking at this transaction.  And very late--and I had made it clear to the--my new boss in Atlanta [Georgia] that I disagreed, and he told me again to, you know, just do what they said.  And we had this very famous phone call where the senior guy from New York finally shows up 'cause he's running a bunch of deals, and he looks at how we're doing the deal and he says, "This is all messed up.  Why are you doing it this way?  You should be doing it that way."  And he happened--I happened to be talking when he said it, so he addressed it to me, and I said, "No, I think you should ask all of them that question."  And he said, "Well, I'm asking you."  I said, "No, no, no; I really think you should be asking all of them," including my guy who now runs the office in Atlanta who--they were good friends from New York.  And then the guy--I admit, to his credit, the guy who was running the office in Atlanta at that point said, "Well, I think the reason Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons] won't answer the question is that he tried to tell everybody to do it your way and we told him no."  Well, after that, I was okay again.  But I went through a period, after Jim left, where my stock fell because this new guy didn't wanna accept, you know, who I was.  And, in fact, during that period, they put another person on top of me from a managerial perspective, a woman, and I won't say her name, but (laughter) we did not get along; that would be the greatest understatement of the 21st century.  And she had me doing a report, and she kept telling me there was something wrong with the report.  And then she started contradicting herself on successive iterations of the report, and this was actually my first breakthrough--well, my next big breakthrough moment with this new person running the office [of Bankers Trust] because I sent her successive iterations of feedback to this new person in charge of the office, and I didn't accuse her, I just said to him, "Here are the successive iterations of feedback I've gotten; they're confusing me.  I want you to look at 'em and see if you can help me understand what's happening here."  And this new person in charge of the office came by my desk.  He said, "We need to talk first thing in the morning."  At that moment, I knew I had her.  And when I got into his office, he said, "She's clearly out to get you.  She's contradicting herself, she just wants to keep telling you you're wrong."  And then he went on to say, "And I think she's doing it 'cause you're black" (laughter) which, you know, any lawyer knows, a person in charge should never volunteer if they think another person in charge is discriminating, but he did it.  And I remember that day 'cause I said, "No, So and So, I don't think she's doing it 'cause I'm black, I think she knows I'm smarter than she is and she just can't handle the fact."  But, anyway, I got outta that.  I made vice president under this second person who, you know, came to run the office and Jim and I have--I haven't seen him in a while, but we've seen each other long since that period a time; we're still friends.  He was a great mentor, great supporter.  I just wish he had never been transferred out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, those things happen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  And you--and the lesson in that is, you know, I could have overreacted and done something really crazy with this woman; I just decided to keep working hard to try to handle it, and luckily, she made a mistake that allowed me to expose just the extent of her dislike for me.
Story_ID: 636468
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you joined Pri- (cough) Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers] in 1992, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, April 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rick [Richard Hew (ph.)] had joined in March.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so (coughs) this is two years after Coopers and Lybrand merges with Deloitte Haskins and Sells [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] to become PricewaterhouseCoopers.  Now, in--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Price Waterhouse and Coopers merged later, in 1998.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Yeah, so at this point, Price Waterhouse is an independent entity.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the merger doesn't happen--
Speaker 1: And Coopers--and you merged with Coopers--
Speaker 2: Right, in 1998.
Speaker 1: Got it, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1998?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No, but I have--okay, I have a point--okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: A little--no, it's on your website.  Okay--never mind.  Coopers and Lybrand merges with Deloitte Haskins and Sells (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, that's different.  Coopers and Deloitte merged first.
Speaker 1: But Coopers and--that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Price Waterhouse merged later with Coopers, right.
Speaker 1: Later, okay, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: So your data's right; we're together.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you get there, what is the--because the--accounting--you hadn't been an accountant.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So I'll give you the deal on that.  So Price Waterhouse, at the time, had--you know, they were big on accounting and auditing; that's what they're known for--signing off on financial statements for big public companies, for the most part.  They're in a very robust tax consulting division, but they also had a con- a very large consulting and advisory business.  At that time it was heavily into I--information technology space, but they also had some smaller consulting areas, and they decided they wanted to get into this merger and acquisition consulting basis, so I wasn't being hired to do accounting or anything like that.  Pretty much everybody in my group were people with finance backgrounds; some of 'em had started on the auditing side, so it had really good forensic au- accounting and skills related to mergers and acquisitions, but we weren't doing that kind of work; we were basically--my group was basically like a little Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] inside of Price Waterhouse.  We got hired to represent companies when they wanted to sell things off, and when they want to buy other companies.
Story_ID: 636469
Speaker 1: I'll tell you, you know, I told you before, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] is one of my best friends ever, and here's the other--another point of evidence on this.  So I moved from lending into the deal to actually advising the deal--don't really know what I'm doing, though; I hadn't, I hadn't been that before.  But I knew I didn't know what I was doing so I'm studying, I'm getting all kinds of books.  I call up Ray, at this point--who I think is at First Boston [First Boston Corporation] at this point and--
Speaker 2: Ray McGuire.
Speaker 1: Ray McGuire.  And Ray is working for one of the best M and A [mergers and acquisitions] firms in the, in the world at the time, and he's got all these experiences.  Ray, basically, would coach me over the phone at night.  He would send me training materials that he had run across.  And the thing I remember about that period a time that, you know, just makes you never forget a friend, no matter where Ray was in the world--he might be in South America, he might be in Asia, he might be in Europe--if I called him, within twenty-four hours or less, I'd get a phone call; it might be in the middle of the night someplace.  He always called me J.C., my first--Joseph Christopher.  "Hey, J.C. [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons].  Okay, man, I heard your question.  Here's how I would handle that."  So here's what happens.  I'm very early in my tenure doing this advising work at Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers].  The guy who's like the co-head of our national group--a guy name Martin Wade [Martin R. Wade III], who had been working at Salomon Brothers--so he's a real bona fide investment banker type.  He goes to a meeting with me, and the partner in Atlanta [Georgia], a guy name Larry Stevens [J. Larry Stevens], who became my--like my father in, at Price Waterhouse--the issue I had posed to Ray had several possible answers to it.  I heard the answer that Martin Wade gave and it was a good answer, but I thought about the answer that Ray McGuire had given me and I thought, "This answer's better."  I knew enough to know which answer was maybe better, so I said, "Well, I have a theory, Martin; let me, let me try this theory."  And I float this thing out there, and Marty's like, "Wow, that's really creative; that's a good idea."  First impressions--Marty thinks I'm brilliant at M and A work; I'm a star because of the idea (laughter) Ray McGuire gave me over the phone in the middle of the night.  It immediately puts me in a special place with Larry, who was the partner in charge of the Atlanta M and A practice for Price Waterhouse (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's Larry's last name?
Speaker 1: Stevens.
Speaker 2: Stevens, okay.
Speaker 1: So basically, what happened was Rick [Richard Hew (ph.)], who brought me over there from Bankers Trust--he didn't stay long, he lasted maybe a year or so, and then he left.  But by that time, Larry and I had already formed a relationship that is by far the closest personal relationship in the business context I will ever have with any human being, and it started with the moment of looking smart (laughter) that I got from Ray.
Speaker 2: That's nice.
Speaker 1: Relationships--
Speaker 2: No, it's (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Other people helping you along.
Story_ID: 636470
Speaker 1: So what was Larry Stevens' [J. Larry Stevens] background?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Larry's a interesting man.  Larry was from Macon, Georgia, born about 1948, I think.  I think he's nine years older than me--very religious, very soft spoken, a fun guy--relaxed but, you know, very involved in his church.  I'm sure he's been president of a bunch of stuff in his church--gives a lotta money to the church.  Strong family man; wife, two kids; may- maybe three kids, I may not be right about that.  Very strong work ethic--old school about that, and very committed to the concept of being good and decent to all human beings.  And I figured that out about him pretty early on, that it was all about the work ethic and being good to other people, you know, honesty, integrity and, so we really bonded around that stuff.  And he's very humble.  And, so, you know, first of all, I think Larry--I've never really said this to him (laughter), but I think Larry saw some stuff growing up as a boy in Macon, Georgia--some racial stuff that he didn't like, that he was uncomfortable with.  So if you think about it, you know, 1968 he's twenty-one; I'm eleven or twelve, right?  And I think when Larry and I hooked up, Larry said, "Hm, I got a black guy with talent, with interpersonal skill, and with work ethic, and I'm gonna help make him successful, and this is gonna be my way of saying I'm not like the people I saw do bad things when I was a boy in Macon, Georgia.  This is gonna be how I'm gonna participate in the movement my way."  And I remember, very early on, Larry would take me to this club, the--this eating club, The Commerce Club, in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: So you're still in Atlanta.  You haven't moved (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still in Atlanta--haven't moved; still in Atlanta, working for Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers], covering the Southeast, doing these deals.  And Larry would take me to The Commerce Club, which I don't think had any black members in it--I don't think they had any.  And Larry, he used to like to take me around while we were having lunch, and introduce me to people.  And he would say things like, you know, "You need to know [HistoryMaker] Chris Simmons; he's gonna be one of my partners one day," and becoming a partner at Price Waterhouse is a big deal; very few people get chance to do that.  So he's signaling me--I'm with you, I got your back. Just meant a lot to me; he's telling these people that, and he's telling 'em at The Commerce Club at lunch.  He's telling it to old white guys, too (laughter), I know, like, really?  You know.  And then I remember the time we had a client who told somebody that he didn't want me running his deal--running his project because he, you know, didn't want a black guy running his project.  And Larry basically said, "We're--we gone fire that client; we're not, we're not doing work for that client."  And I said, "No, we're not.  We're gonna pretend that you're running this project and we're gonna get paid.  And then what we're gonna do is we're gonna take that fee and you're gonna give me a good bonus, and then I'm gonna buy my son something that a racist client doesn't want two black boys," I only had two sons [Christopher Simmons and Joseph Simmons] at the time, "doesn't want two black boys to have."  So, but I was happy that Larry was willing to do that, but I was wanting to signal him, no, I'm here to get the job done; I'm not thin skinned, I can handle that comment.  Because there's a phrase that drives me--another phrase that drives me--and I actually stole it from an ex-partner of ours name Reed Keller; he used to say this.  Reed used to say, "Keep the main thing the main thing."  And so I'm like, yeah, the main thing is for me to do another deal.  I got another notch on my professional resume for us to make our budget and for Larry to pay me my bonus so I can hook my sons up.  He can call me whatever he wants to call me, long as he paying that check at the end of the month.  And, so--but it still felt great to have a boss who I knew was there for me.  And also, I remember the time that I wanted to buy a piece a property behind my house and I didn't have the money, and bonuses weren't due to come out for several months and I told Larry about it, and I got a advance on my bonus in less than twenty-four hours 'cause Larry wanted me to have that land behind my house.  Just story after story I could tell you.  We had a black secretary for a little bit--we had several of 'em.  We had this one particular one for a little bit, and she heard Larry say something one day that she thought had a racial overtone to it and she got all worked up, and she came down to my office and was saying, "I'm gonna go complain."  I said, "Well, you're gonna look silly," I said, "because after you go complain, then I'm gonna have to go down there and tell 'em all the stuff that Larry does for me, and the fact that he lets me use his summer house up at Lake Burden and lets me bring my parents [Dorothy Anderson Simmons and Joseph Simmons] there and all this stuff."  I said, "You're gone look silly."  And I've often thought how sad it would've been had she been there by herself with him and could have inflicted that on a guy who (laughter) is as much a civil rights leader in my life as anybody has been.
Story_ID: 636471
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about the environment you were in in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time you (unclear) because this is after Maynard Jackson was mayor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you know, he had been very instrumental in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, but you were there during that time and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I was there when Maynard was mayor, when Maynard was running against [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax for mayor--yeah, all that.
Speaker 1: Right.  But you also--he was--he had gotten blacks involved, you know, on bond deals and things--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on the muni- municipal side.
Speaker 2: Municipal side, right.
Speaker 1: Right, right, but that's not your side.
Speaker 2: Not my side.
Speaker 1: You run the business side.
Speaker 2: Totally different world.
Speaker 1: Right, totally different world.
Speaker 2: And totally not nearly as racially integrated.
Speaker 1: That's right; your side is not racially integrated.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Not as much.
Speaker 1: Not nearly.  All the other things on the municipal side; it still is that way.
Story_ID: 636472
Speaker 1: Who are the main players, you know, within the company [Price Waterhouse; PricewaterhouseCoopers]?  What are the--who are you looking up to?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean I know Larry [J. Larry Stevens] is very important.  Is he moving up in the organization, or is the--or is that part the image (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, Larry's, at that point, pretty much at the peak of his career.  At the time I joined--I was thirty-four when I got there, so Larry would have been forty-three?  I can't believe he was actually (laughter) that young then.  But Larry was running the Southeast corporate finance practice for the firm which was a, you know, pretty, pretty significant job.  Over time, he grew that practice and had, I don't know, thirty or thirty-five people working for him down in the office.  My--it's interesting; my understanding of the firm was very limited when I first got there, you know.  We--audit's the big thing, tax is the next big thing, IT [information technology] consulting is the next big thing, and then there's this little sliver--
Speaker 1: Called corporate finance.
Speaker 2: Corporate finance consulting.  We were like a drop in the bucket.  In fact, when I first got there, the way it worked was you couldn't even make partner in my group.  The firm wasn't sure that it was going to keep doing this work, so what they did was they took three or four partners like Larry, who were audit and tax partners but who had some knowledge and capability in the deal space, and put them in charge of the group in each region, then they hired finance deal types underneath.  So our highest level was managing director; we couldn't be partners.  I got a letter that--when I made managing director 'cause I came in as a senior manager in '92 [1992], I got promoted to managing director in '94 [1994], and I got a letter in '94 [1994] that said, "You're a partner equivalent," and I remember telling one of the partners that, and he laughed in my face and said, "There's no such thing--you're either a partner around here, or you're not," and I was like, hm, that's interesting (laughter).  So I don't know much about the firm really; I don't interface with them much, other than when one of their clients has a merger and acquisition need, and then they bring me into it.  And Larry started talking to me about, "You know, Simmons [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], you could--you're a leader; you could have bigger roles in the firm.  You need to understand the firm more."  So I started trying to understand the firm more and understand what everybody else did and then--but my knowledge of the firm was really Atlanta [Georgia]; that's what I knew.  I didn't really know who ran the firm in New York [New York], or that--it wasn't part of my thinking.  I was trying to get my deals done.
Story_ID: 636473
Speaker 1: And then Larry [J. Larry Stevens] did something for me.  He called up a guy named Woody Brittain [Willard W. "Woody" Brittain, Jr.], and Woody Brittain's African American who, at the time, was the number two guy in the country (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I've heard of that.
Speaker 1: --for P- for Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers].  Woody's a Yale undergrad [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Harvard M.B.A. [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], who came up on the consulting side of the business, and Larry knew Woody; I think they made partner the same year.  And Larry--I remember I was sitting in his office when he told him--Larry told Woody, "I've got a guy sitting here in my office, he should be helping y'all run the firm one day; you need to meet him."  You're starting to understand why I get choked up when I talk about Larry; like who does that for you?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So at some conference a couple of months later, I got introduced to Woody--very brief.  Two months later, Woody called me up and he said he had a question about valuing some software; I knew that this is a test--Woody's checking me out.  So that question should've normally taken me ten minutes to answer or research; I took like two hours (laughter) I wanted to make sure I had it right, and I gave him an answer.  And a couple months after that, I got another phone call that said that the firm was going to start up an in house merger and acquisition group to handle the firm's transactions when the firm went out and bought things or sold something off or made equity investments in other companies, and they were gonna populate it with a few people.  It was going to be run by a guy name Bob Glatz [Robert R. Glatz], who was a white tax partner in St. Louis [Missouri], and Bob was going to be reporting to Woody.  So I'm thinking, okay, all right; I see, I see the deal here.  So I go interview with Bob and interview went well and I kind of had the feeling that Woody was, you know, sort of behind this, but I never treated Bob like I was working for Woody; I treated Bob like I was working for Bob because what I determined was that I wasn't ever gonna go talk to Woody unless he asked me to come talk to him, I wasn't gonna be sucking up to Woody, I wasn't gonna be hanging around Woody's coat tails like the two black Harvard guys hanging out.  I decided I was gonna do great work for Bob, and that Bob was gonna tell Woody how good I was.  And after about three months, Woody called me; he said, "You need to come see me."  I went to see him, and Woody said, "I'm hearing good things from Bob."  I was like, the strategy's working.  And so, during that period of time, I'm working with the top leaders of Price Waterhouse now when we're doing transactions on behalf of the firm, and Bob was skillful at managing my career at this point.  He is making sure I'm working on transactions with all the players in the company.  He made sure I met a guy name Bob Moritz [Robert E. Moritz], who was running a piece of our financial services practice back in 1998, '99 [1999]; this is the time when I switched into this job.  Bob Moritz's now our U.S. CEO; he made sure I worked on a deal with a guy name Dennis Nally [Dennis M. Nally], who was running audit in the U.S. at the time; Dennis is our global CEO.  I could keep going.  And then Woody kept calling me and saying, "You know, every time I talk to one of these guys, they say good things.  You just keep that up."  So, you know, Woody was helping me behind the scenes, and I was helping myself by (laughter) doing good work and developing a good reputation.
Story_ID: 636474
Speaker 1: So I went into that group in nine- 1998, and then in 2000, I made partner while I was part of that group, and I stayed in that group under Bob [Robert R. Glatz] until 2001, and then in 2001 Dennis Nally [Dennis M. Nally] had become the U.S. CEO, and he made me the head of that group, so now I'm now running the in house corporate finance merger and acquisition group that does the firm's activities.  And I have--I had a couple of watershed moments when I was in that deal practice, and probably the most notable one that I think set me apart in Dennis Nally's head was--and this was before Dennis was CEO.  Dennis was number two at the time, and we had a particularly difficult transaction, and I wasn't a partner yet when this story I'm about to tell you had occurred.  But there was a difference of opinion between me and a very senior partner who wanted us to sell a certain division to a certain company.  It was gonna be better for certain partners in the firm if we went to that--if it got sold because they were gonna have big jobs there.  If it went to the other place it could go, they weren't going to have jobs--the other bidder had made that clear.  So you have to imagine this scenario.  I'm sitting in a small room with the number one and number two guys for Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers] at the time.  This very senior guy who's one of the top ten people in the firm, and me--I'm not a partner yet.  And this other very senior person goes first, and he says, "Well, I think we should sell the business to here," and finishes his reasons why, and then they turn to me and they say, "Well, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], what do you think?"  And I said, "I disagree with every word he just said.  We should do this," (cough), "and here's why."  And it went--after while they, they came to understand why, and they said, "Yeah, we're, we're doing what Chris says."  And again, I've never had this discussion with the number one or two person, but I actually would like to at some point.  I'm pretty convinced that when they were, walked outta that room that day, they said to themselves, "Oh, my god, that guy is different; he's not even a partner yet?"  I had done my homework, and I had the courage to say what needed to be said in the moment, and it wasn't long after that that Nally basically told me, he said, "Look," you know, "you're not a deal guy, you're not a IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] salesman; you're not any of these things you've done."  He said, "You're just a leader, and I can have leaders do lots a things."  So that sort of propelled me down a path with him.  So I ran that group for a while, then he put me in charge of diversity for three years, and then after that he gave me my current opportunity (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 636475
Speaker 1: A couple things before we leave Woody [Willard W. "Woody" Brittain, Jr.] because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I had just heard his name recently and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, he's ill, he's very ill.
Speaker 1: It was--but I hear that he can't speak.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: He can't speak, but that--can you talk about this--him as a person--the significance of his role--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --at Price Waterhouse.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was [HistoryMaker] Larry Bailey who told me about Woody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Larry Bailey's a good alum of the firms, and friend a mine in Washington, D.C. area now.  Woody was--Woody attained the highest level in the big accounting firm space than any African American ever has.  He--when he, when he left the firm, he was the number two person in the world for PricewaterhouseCoopers after the merger.  And, so when I did become aware of Woody, once I started working in the chairman's office--yeah, seeing Woody up on that certain floor sitting where he was sitting, that was a--yeah, as confident as I've always been, it probably even helped me say, "You know what?  I can--I can be up in those circles, too--he's there."  And I also learned a lot from Woody by example.  Wood- Woody was very contained, he picked his spots, he--I always watched him in meetings.  I actually did get to attend some meetings that he was in; he was very good about maintaining his rapport with people while still being firm, so he was a good role model from that perspective.  But, yeah, I mean it was tremendously empowering to know that he had been able to do what he had done.  And I'll tell you, I'm very involved in the Executive Leadership Council, which is the organization for the highest ranking blacks in Corporate America, and on two occasions when we've gotten awards and I've been on the dais, I've recognized Woody because he deserves to be recognized.  He helped a lot of blacks in our firm very quietly behind the scenes, and I think some blacks never knew what he was doing.  In fact, some of 'em maybe didn't even think he was doing enough 'cause they didn't know what he was doing, 'cause he didn't do it in a way that brought attention on himself, in part, 'cause I think he knew his ability to do it the next time might be impacted if it was too obvious what he was doing.  But I know several people who's, you know--he was moving things around behind the scenes for.  But, you know, Woody--you have to perform for Woody and, I got the sense early on that, you know, Woody was gaging me.  He was, he was listening to those reports, and if the reports had come back bad, he would've said, "Uhh," 'cause he's gotta preserve his credibility and to be able to help the next person, and I'll never forget a conversation I had with him.  When he left the firm I called him up and I said, "Woody, I just wanna thank you for all the stuff you've done for me."  And he said, "Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], you don't have to thank me, you just have to help the next one; that's what I want you to do."  So he was always focused on the next.
Story_ID: 636476
Speaker 1: Now at this point, who's in the accounting space?  There's PricewaterhouseCoopers--
Speaker 2: At which point?
Speaker 1: At the, at the point I'm in, 1998 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight [1998]--2000 range?
Speaker 1: Right, nineteen ninety--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It's the Big Six at this point.
Speaker 1: So it's--
Speaker 2: Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP] is still around.  Yeah, it's the Big Six.
Speaker 1: Price- PricewaterhouseCoopers, you got Ernst [Ernst and Young LLP].
Speaker 2: Ernst.
Speaker 1: Ernst (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you got Deloitte [Deloitte and Touche; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited].
Speaker 1: Deloitte.
Speaker 2: I always have trouble remembering my competitors, as you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (laughter).  They're--none of them are relevant (laughter) so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --so when you got offered--tell me how the position for head of diversity came, and you're still in Atlanta [Georgia] at that point.
Speaker 2: Still living in Atlanta, but doing this national job running the corporate finance M and A [mergers and acquisitions] in house function.  So, yeah, Dennis, Dennis, Dennis [Dennis M. Nally] calls me and he basically says, "Look, I need to get you more exposure, you know.  A handful of us in New York [New York] noted how good you are, but the, the average partner out there doesn't know you, 'cause these deals are very quiet behind the scenes."  And he says--and actually he--he had told me that, but he said, "I don't know what position I wanna put you in yet."  And he actually tried to put me (laughter), it's kind of a funny story.  He tried to have one a his direct reports put me in one leadership role, and I went and interviewed with the people in that part of the firm--and I don't wanna be too specific here--and I could tell they weren't really with the idea.  And I just sort of said, "Okay," and let it go.  I'm still, you know, got my current position around the M and A function for the firm and (laughter)--in another moment that he and I have never discussed, but we should at some point--I was on a bus ride with Dennis and he asked me, "How do you like your new job" thinking that I am working in the leadership team with this other group.  And I said, "Well, Dennis," (laughter), "when I get one I'll let you know, 'cause I don't have a new job."  See, a lotta people would of had a lotta anger about it.  I was very like, "Hey, you know," I was just, "Hey, I thought you knew."  I knew he was gonna be upset by that, and I got a phone call from--like the next day from the person who was supposed to be handling it.  He was like, "Just hold your horses, it's gon' be okay."  And, and I wasn't worried because I knew I had a track record and they were gonna find me something good to do.  So Dennis calls me actually, one day, on the phone, and I don't get a unsolicited call from him that often, so I'm like, "Okay, what's up?  What did I do?"  He says, "Well, I got a strange idea for you.  I think I want you to be the chief diversity officer."  And I could tell he thought he was gonna have to convince me (laughter) and I jokingly said to him--I've always made sure I had sort of a joking level of rapport with my bosses--and I said, I said, "Dennis, you got a whole speech written out, don't you--to convince me to take this diversity job, don't you?"  He said, "Yeah, as a matter of fact, I do."  I said, "Well, I'm gone give you some time back today; you're not gonna have to waste your time on me."  I said, "I want that job."  I said, "Number one, it reports to you; only an idiot doesn't take a job that reports to the CEO, I don't care what the job does.  Secondly," I told him, I said, "I've got some ideas about diversity that are very different than what's been done in Corporate America up to date--to this time, and I'm looking forward to implementing those."  I said, "Obviously, I have a focus on the issue; I am a black man born in Memphis, Tennessee in 1957 so--." It was pretty much the conversation we had.  So he knew pretty quickly that I was interested in having the job.  What I saw in the job immediately was--well, several things.  One I was gonna get a chance to take the firm in a totally different direction and sort of be a little controversial, and if you wanna be a leader, that's always a good thing.  Two, I did have some views about diversity that I wanted to implement.  Three, I knew that the way I was going to do the job it was gonna be a very visible, and I was gonna know everybody in the firm by the time I was done.  So I immediately saw the political implications of it, shall we say.
Speaker 1: Which doesn't always happen with diversity jobs.
Speaker 2: Especially doesn't happen if you don't have a leader who has your back.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I did.
Story_ID: 636477
Speaker 1: So tell me what your ideas were.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Number one, I had viewed a lot of the diversity dialogue as one at which white men were blamed and cut out of the discussion as opposed to brought into the discussion as solution points.  So I developed a theme where I basically--and I went around the country, two or three cities a week, talking to all my partners about the problem is that your minorities and your women don't know you; they don't know your heart.  If they really knew you, they'd like you more, they'd trust you more, and you wouldn't have these conflicts.  That was part of my angle.  My other angle, though, was that the white males who were in charge were never given an accurate depiction of how the minorities and the women really view their challenges.  So they hear diversity but they don't know what we think our challenge is, so I would tell 'em.  I'd say, "No, we don't want a guaranteed slot, but what we do want is for you to think twice that when the client says we did bad work, that maybe the client said that 'cause I was black.  I at least want you to dig deeper to know that I might have some unique things affecting me because I'm black, and that doesn't, that doesn't make me a whiner that just makes me black."  So we had real dialogue about what was really in our heads, but I viewed them as being part of the solution.  The third thing was that I thought that a lot of our young minority employees were being turned into victims and not empower, and my message to them essentially, was--I've pretty much been the only black person in every group I've worked in since I got outta graduate school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]; within a year I've been the boss' pet, so don't tell me it's because you're black that certain things can't happen.  Your game needs to be improved and your game needs to be improved in a number of ways, you know; when they go golfing, you gotta go with 'em.  I'm not a golfer, but I always went.  I drove the cart.  You know, you gotta socialize with people; you can't wear your anger on your sleeve, you know, all these interpersonal things.  And you gotta be good at what you're doing.  So I gave them a different type of coaching about how to be successful and get people to want to make them successful.  And the last thing, I decided that--I did a lotta research right before I officially took over, and one of the things I discovered was that the Big Four--'cause by this time it was the Big Four.  Big Four accounting firms were very quiet on the topic of GLBT advancement--gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender commentary.  And what Dennis [Dennis M. Nally] and I discussed was that great firms don't join causes when it becomes easy; they join them when it's still courageous to do so.  And I was worried that we were missing an opportunity to demonstrate that we were a great firm [PricewaterhouseCoopers].  And after I had that conversation with Dennis, about two weeks later he came back to me; he said, "I'm with you.  We're gone do whatever it takes."  So we called a meeting--never been done before.  I asked any gay or lesbian partner in the firm to come to New York [New York] for a meeting; twelve of 'em showed up at the first meeting, and the number one issue on all their minds was: nobody knows I'm here, do they?  Nobody's gonna know I came?  And the beauty of what we did was that a year later, by virtue of law, the messages that Dennis and others of our leaders sent out--because Bob Moritz [Robert E. Moritz], our current U.S. CEO was running New York at the time.  And I remember as busy as Bob was, he never missed our GLBT events; he always came.  I knew he was making a point to show his support, so there was a lotta leadership support shown.  Well (laughter), a year later, all those people, plus a few others, agreed to have their full identities revealed on the firm internal website because we had shown them that we were committed to being an organization that supported them, and the message we essentially sent was, "And if you're not with that, you can get out."
Story_ID: 636478
Speaker 1: And that was a lot of fun, you know, taking the firm [PricewaterhouseCoopers] in some new directions, both in terms of the dialogue and then sort of our stance on certain issues, and now we're--you know, we've won all kinds of awards--in GLBT [gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender] front. This year we were DiversityInc's number one rated company in America.  We've been in the top ten several times over the last decade, but this year we finally got what we deserve and we won (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So another critical part, it sounds to me, and I'm not--is that the diversity position allowed you to build your own team.  Is that--am I wrong or right?
Speaker 1: I inherited a team--
Speaker 2: You inherited--okay.
Speaker 1: But I built a different way of going at the issues--very open dialogue.  We actually started a program called Distinctive Dialogue [ph.], where every partner had to sit down with their minorities and their women and basically say, "Hey, you're a woman," in your case you're a black woman, "what are your unique challenges? I wanna know what they are so I can be alert to helping you."  And like some women would say, "Well, in meetings, people always expect for me to take the notes."  So then our partners now are more aware, and if somebody does that, they'd say, "Well, why does Cathy have to take the notes?  Bob, you take the notes."  So, you know, we sort of got to the real issues that frustrate people by having these distinctive dialogues.  So it wasn't so much that I built my own team but I built a different way for us to have the dialogue and a different level of aggression that I think my successors have maintained, and they each have their own emphasis points--they have their own programs, but it's still been a, you know, very intense kind of approach to the, to the topic.  And the other thing was, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], I built my connectivity to two thousand partners because I basically have sat down with virtually all of them in some venue, which became very useful to me later when I ran for the board.
Speaker 2: So can we talk about that?  Now I wanna ask--the names of Patty Tilton [Patricia Tilton], Jean Hobby and--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Dena Pern [ph.].  Are they from that period, or are they from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they're from the period when I first took over diversity.  So the other thing that happened--
Speaker 2: Can we talk about--okay (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --was that our leadership felt that we needed to not only have a chief diversity officer, but we needed to have somebody embedded in the business unit also responsible for diversity.  So each of the three big business units named diversity champion who was on the leadership team of the business unit, and they worked inside the business unit to track our progress on diversity initiatives to make it a topic that stayed top of mind at leadership meetings.  So, yeah, in, in that sense, I had an expanded team of people who were working to kind of keep the agenda front and center.
Story_ID: 636479
Speaker 1: The person who you, who you succeeded in the diversity role, what was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To- her--Toni Riccardi.
Speaker 1: Toni, Toni Riccardi.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how long had she been in the position?
Speaker 2: I think she had had the role for three or so years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long had the--how long had that position existed?
Speaker 2: Price Waterhouse [PricewaterhouseCoopers] had had somebody in some role similar to that, I think, since the mid-'90s [1990s], and I think Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers] may--probably even before that.  I think the difference--what happened once I took it over, a lotta those people that preceded me were career HR [human resources] diversity types.  What we started with me, and we have maintained since, is our diversity leaders now have to satisfy two conditions.  They have to be from the business, and the view of them has to be that they could have a bigger managerial job once they leave the diversity role, so it has become a training ground for minority leaders.  So I had it; I run the D.C. region [Washington, D.C.] now.  Roy Weathers, African American male who's considerably younger than I am--so kind of where your next stop is depends on where you are in your career--I was a little older.  Roy now runs the New York [New York] tax practice, so he'd certainly be a candidate to run the entire New York region at some point or, or maybe run tax for the whole firm at some point.  He's on his way.  The person after Roy, Niloufar Molavi, who's Persian--of Persian descent, she now runs the Houston [Texas] region, and a current diversity officer,  Maria Moats [Maria Castanon Moats], I'm sure will be running something when she's done.
Speaker 1: That's--so that's--so you sort of set the path for the people to not be serving a perfunctory role but to be serving a business role within the organization.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't--I wouldn't say that any of them served a--
Speaker 1: Well, let me just say (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --served a perfunctory role but it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No but what I'm saying--I'm talking about the HR role.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: (Cough) And I don't mean that in a perfunc- but it--
Speaker 2: Right; I know what you mean.
Speaker 1: But it's not related to the line item of this.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Now it's more integrated, and it's also more of a statement about where this person's career is heading than it was before.
Speaker 1: That's what I--that's my point--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --still.
Speaker 2: I'm--'cause we--I mean Coopers had some fairly innovative diversity programs before the merger. Price Waterhouse wasn't quite where Coopers was in terms of the level of the dialogue before the merger, I would say.  But certainly, since the merger, you know, since '98 [1998], the combined firm has been very focused on it and, now we've been recognized for it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for over a decade now.
Story_ID: 636480
Speaker 1: Now where does the global CEO and the CEO [of PricewaterhouseCoopers]--they're out of New York [New York], is that right, but (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the glo- the global and the U.S. CEOs are in the same building in New York.
Speaker 1: New York?  Okay.  So, now, you said that another thing was made possible, and that was serving on the board.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can we talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the way the firm governance process works is that the partners--the two thousand plus partners--vote, and they vote on the senior partner, the CEO, and then he chooses a leadership team, and they also vote for eighteen board members who govern the firm and who oversee leadership.  And so a few years ago, some people came to me and said, "Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], we think you ought a run for the board."  So I guess this would've been 2009-ish, and by this time, I've left the diversity role; I'm now in Washington [D.C.] as the managing partner down in Washington.  And my first thought, honestly (laughter), was, I don't like public embarrassments, I'm not sure I'll win, I'm not sure I wanna do this 'cause this would be a really public defeat, you know; your name gets on the ballot.  And so they get in about 250 nominations, then there's a committee that comes up with a ballot of, I don't know, thirty or so people, something like that, and then--or may- maybe fifty people, and eight- eighteen are voted in.  We vote in nine at a time; we have those staggered (unclear), so there're actually nine candidates at a time--nine people elected at a time.  So I was, I was nominated, and I was voted in in 2009, and I, and I think the reason that I made it is that, you know, across two thousand people, it's in part a familiarity contest.  Well, they all know me; I got--had a lotta visibility when I ran diversity, and second, I think I established a image and a track record of somebody who engaged in straight talk.  In the diversity role, it happened to be straight talk about diversity, but I think people said, "He'll be that same person when they're discussing whatever at the board; he's not gonna sit there and not speak his mind, and he's not gonna sugarcoat truth--he's gonna tell it like it is."  And, so, you know, I think I was able to establish some leadership attributes in people's minds through the diversity visibility that was very useful to me when I, when I ran for the board.
Story_ID: 636481
Speaker 1: So what is your role there on the board?  What does the board do, and what are the issues?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm on several committees; I chair the partner admissions committee, so I make sure that the process by which we admit partners is fair and--both internally and externally.  When we admit partners directly and from other firms it's actually even smaller group of us--five--who vote on those, so I chair that committee.  I'm also on the Management Evaluation and Compensation Committee, which is composed of the chairs of each of the other committees, and we're the ones who determine the CEO's pay, and we evaluate the CEO and his top leadership's performance, and then we handle, you know, very sensitive issues.  And then finally, as a general board member we, you know, vote on major transactions the company [PricewaterhouseCoopers] might entertain doing--changes in direction, regulatory strategy--things like that, depending on, you know, the severity and importance of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do regular sessions with the partners, so I'll fly down to Miami [Florida], go to Charlotte [North Carolina], and explain to groups of partners sort of what's going on in the firm, and hear their input, and then bake their input into what we discuss at the board level with leadership.
Story_ID: 636482
Speaker 1: You also are now head of the--
Speaker 2: PwC Charitable Foundation [PricewaterhouseCoopers Charitable Foundation, Inc.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Foundation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I feel--you know, I feel really good about my journey.  I feel as if I have done right by the people who supported me--who encouraged me; I feel like their efforts have borne fruit and that some--I feel, you know, like I've done what I was supposed to do.  On the other hand, we all have, you know, thoughts about what we could have done a little differently.  Some days I wish I had joined the firm [PricewaterhouseCoopers] a little earlier and had a CPA [certified public accountant] because I think I could've been senior partner or CEO had I been an accountant and gotten there at twenty-four and not thirty-four but, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], what do you wanna--
Speaker 2: I also wish I could dunk like Michael Jordan, too.
Story_ID: 636483
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What haven't you done that you would like to still do 'cause you're still young.
Speaker 2: I'm--I've got some plans.  I'll be fifty-five this year.  We have mandatory retirement for partners at age sixty, so there's a couple of jobs in the firm [PricewaterhouseCoopers].  I wouldn't mind being chair of the board; I ran this past go round and didn't win, but was told I'd fared well in the process, so I'll probably run again.  There's some vice chair titles floating around the firm; I wouldn't mind having one of those, but those are minor wants at this point.  What I'm really focused on, I'm really focused on preparing for the afterlife, and in the afterlife, I plan to write books--lots of them.  I'm going to write a series of books about how to climb the corporate ladder, how to make your boss love you, how to negotiate political terrain, I'm gonna write some very provocative books about diversity and the unspoken little things that still go on in people's heads.  I'm probably going to write some interesting ones about the arrogance of the American public about how we live as opposed to how other cultures live and our not total willingness yet to accept that what they do in some other countries might be as right as what we think about things.  So it's kind of got a cultural diversity angle to that.  And I plan to live in a different country every year for ten years.
Speaker 1: Where did that come from (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's been a plan.  If--anybody who knows me well will tell you, "Yeah, he's been talking about that for ten years."  Because (laughter) when I used to sit back in my little room in the back, in my 2381 [2381 Bridgeport Drive, Memphis, Tennessee], my brother [Bryan Simmons] and I shared a little room in the back, and there's a bunk bed in there, but my mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons] bought some nice Ethan Allen [Ethan Allen Interiors, Inc.] furniture, and we had a drop down bookcase, and I used to sit on that little drop down ledge and read these encyclopedias, and I was always looking at maps.  If you come to my house, (cough) I've got maps and globes.  I've always loved maps; I've always been curious about the world around me, and I've done a lot of traveling internationally and I've decided that I want to live in ten different countries one year at a time.  I'm already studying Spanish; I'm on level three of Rosetta Stone, and my Spanish is decent.  I can be understood--I can't hear as well, but I can be understood, that's what I'm going to do.
Story_ID: 636484
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your family. You've been married for how many years now?
Speaker 2: At this point I've been married for twenty-seven--almost twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your wife's name and--
Speaker 2: Is Allison Arnold, Allison Arnold Simmons.
Speaker 1: And your--and I also--your sons.  You have three.
Speaker 2: I have three great sons.
Speaker 1: Can you give their--
Speaker 2: Christopher Arnold Simmons [Christopher Simmons], who's almost twenty-three--
Speaker 1: So he's--is he a junior?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sort of--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm Joseph Christopher [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons].
Speaker 1: Joseph (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's Christopher Arnold.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  Okay, Christopher Arnold.
Speaker 2: He graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] a year ago in computer science, and he worked a lot harder than I did, but I partied better.  He's working in Seattle [Washington] for Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] in computer software development.  And my middle son, Joseph Walter [Joseph Simmons], but we call him Walter, is a phenomenal athlete--got recruited by several Ivy League schools to pay football.  He's not playing now, but he could play if he wanted to, but he's focusing on his school work.  He's at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]; he's a sophomore at Cornell.  And then my youngest son, Anderson [Anderson Simmons]--and Walter's almost twenty now.  And Anderson will be turning sixteen soon--Anderson Allen Simmons--and Anderson is a sophomore; he plays lacrosse and golf, and is a great public speaker and wants to go to the Military Academy, he says, at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  And then they're great kids.
Story_ID: 636485
Speaker 1: So you have a view of yourself after age sixty; it sounds like after retirement, which is still young.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, you know, just--this part of our interview is really more sort of philosophical but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, I--you know, you've been very gracious about sharing your journey.  My question is you have--you always had a sense of yourself.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--your father [Joseph Simmons]--you could say that your father ordained it, in some respects, with his proud--and that it was cultivated, but when you look back--like if you, you did say that you might have gotten a CPA [certified public accountant], but what things, if you were starting over again, Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], would you do differently?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'd keep better track of all the people I met along the way because your--the power of your network and all the people you know, who you can call on, is one of the most important things you can harness, and I'm really good at connecting with people; I'm not that good at keeping track of them afterwards, so I would do that better and more.  I would have expanded my network even more when I was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because there were tons of people there who could help me and do things for me and, you know, some of 'em I didn't bother to get to know 'cause you're so easy to be inside your little cocoon and think you're fine.  Interestingly enough, the number two guy in the U.S. for us at PricewaterhouseCoopers, at PwC now, is Greg Garrison [P. Gregory Garrison].  Greg Garrison was a first year at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] at the same time I was--I didn't know Greg.  Now, can you know all 750 people?  Not necessarily, but I should've tried harder to know all the Greg's, right?  So, yeah, that really--especially when you're in high quality environments, and you have to know that a lot of these people are gonna be doing important stuff one day.  You really can't afford to not be connecting and then keeping track and staying connected to the people.  That's probably the number one thing I would do differently.  I probably have st- I probably would study--have studied more in--probably study more in college, too (laughter), so I'd have a higher GPA [grade point average].  There's a couple of labels I wish I could wear today, you know.  It would've been nice to have been a Rhodes scholar, or win a, win a Rotary [Rotary Fellowship], or something like that.  I think Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] had a Rotary.  And so even though he had really good credentials, you know, Harvard-Harvard, but there's some others that would have been nice to go along with it that I probably could have done if I had spent a few more hours in class when I was in college, rather than coasting for that period a time.  And maybe, maybe take more risk.  But it's a hard--it's a very difficult thing I'm 'bout to talk about next.  It's very hard knowing when you're just taking a more risk, and when you're being stupid.  So for example, I had a chance when I was working at Bankers Trust, to go up to New York [New York] for a while and work for the chief credit officer of the bank.  Jim [James D. Zielinski] had sort of set this possibility up for me and I turned it down because my view was, "Well, I'm the star in Atlanta [Georgia]; they think I walk on water."  And I had been in some meetings with this chief credit officer guy and I thought he was pretty darn smart and I was afraid that he would conclude I wasn't as good as people thought, and then I would be exposed and my, you know, I'd be damaged.  So I decide to take it safer and stay where I was.  There was another guy working up in that area at the time, in the bank--a guy name Edward C. Forst, also a Harvard grad.  I had run across Ed a couple a times and I thought Ed was pretty darn smart.  If you Google Ed Forst, Ed--after he left Bankers Trust after becoming one of our more senior credit officers, I think, went to Goldman [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] where he ended up having some huge job in Asia for Goldman.  And when Harvard wanted some advice on how to manage its endowment after the crash a couple a years ago (laughter), they hired Ed Forst to advise them.  See, I don't think I'm quite as smart as Ed, so it may be (laughter) that I did do the right thing and not go do that job, but I--still not sure.  May- maybe I should have tried it; maybe I would've found out I was that good, maybe I would've found out I--that I could figure it out.  But I think there are these moments in life where you can look back and say, "Well, I should have tried that."  Well, the thing is people do fail, and it's hard to know whether I would--that would have been one of my failures or whether that would have been something that propelled me.  So it's easy to look back and say you should've taken more risks, but I think when you're younger you should probably take more risks.
Story_ID: 636486
Speaker 1: What do you feel that the future of blacks in Corporate America on a global sense will be?
Speaker 2: I think it's good.  I think through organizations like the ELC [Executive Leadership Council], I'm in contact with a lot of people ten to fifteen years younger than I am; their outlook is very global, you know.  They're trying to get the experiences of working in Asia, working in South America; they're learning languages.  They don't, they don't feel some of the restrictions, I think, that some in my generation felt.  Now the flip side of that is some of 'em don't feel the linkage and the commitment to our people that they need to feel either, so we need to work on some of them with respect to that.  But they really do have a sky is the limit; I can do whatever everybody else does and they're planning for that eventuality.  They're, you know, they're not just looking for the assignment.  To them, stretching yourself isn't moving from, you know, Memphis [Tennessee] to New York [New York]; it's moving from Cleveland [Ohio] to Dubai [United Arab Emirates] and a bunch of 'em are doing it.  And I see the successes coming up, up through the ranks, so I feel really good about that.  I just hope that they feel the same commitment to bring people along, you know.  I'm involved in the National Association of Black Accountants and I love their motto, which is, "Lifting as we climb."  I see a lot of climbing that's gonna occur; I just wanna make sure that the lifting (laughter) of others continues.
Speaker 1: So let's--then, let's talk about your hopes and concerns for the black community then.  What are your hopes, and then what are your concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, I have some specific hopes.  I mean one of my hopes is that we can close the educational performance gap and I, and I still do not understand it.  I don't understand fully why, even among middle to upper middle class blacks--let's strip the excuse of, you know, higher poverty rates.  But among middle and upper--middle and upper class blacks the performance on tests, et cetera, is not up to snuff and I don't buy the, you know, the racially biased argument, you know.  My wife [Allison Arnold Simmons] had a 800 on her math SAT growing up in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  I haven't seen a math problem that has a racial aspect to it, so it must be that we're just not focused enough as a, as a community on that.  We need to get more focused on closing the, closing the educational attainment gap, because there is one.  And secondly, I would like to see us, as a community, get more traction away from some of the traditional, you know, doctor, lawyer, engineer, you know.  We need more businesspeople, we need more forensic scientists.  We need to participate in a broader range of activities in the society than I think we do.  I think we're still kind of limited by these old thoughts about what careers, you know, people should focus on.  We need more--we need more accountants and, you know, we need more IT [information technology] consultants; there's a lot of opportunities that--because people don't have family members who do it, they don't get exposure to it, so we need to figure out how to do more of that, and that's one of the beauties of what HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] does; it plants these thoughts in people's heads.  The more stories you hear, you might decide that story works for you.
Story_ID: 636487
Speaker 1: Chris [HistoryMaker Chris Simmons], what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've thought about that.  I want my legacy to be maybe four or fivefold.  One, a person who achieved and took advantage of the opportunities that people died to give him, so I'm very shaped by being--growing up in the '60s [1960s] when all that civil rights stuff was happening.  Two, as a person who helped other people and did it selflessly--not focused on what was in it for me.  I often tell people, "If you--," and I tell people this at the firm [PricewaterhouseCoopers], "If you coming to me for advice, I'm gonna give you advice human to human; it's not gonna be any advice that's best for my company."  My view is if I do that for enough people that is best for my company.  I definitely wanna be viewed as somebody who was a great dad, and I can stack my fatherhood stats up against anybody.  I wanna be viewed as somebody who lived life in a vibrant, aggressive, courageous way and who didn't do what other people thought--did what he thought.
Speaker 1: And then I want to also ask you about your legacy in terms of the legacy of your family heritage because (cough) I think about the story you told, you know.  Your father [Joseph Simmons] was still alive.  God, what is-ninety-two and your mother [Dorothy Anderson Simmons]--two different people--
Speaker 2: Very different.
Speaker 1: --but came together in a union.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so I want you to think about where they came from and where you are now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your sons, and what you would say in that journey.
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting.  I used to think about the legacy in terms of, you know, my parents were here, then I accomplished this, and I want my sons to do more.  I've since concluded that that burden of feeling like the next group has to do more may be a unique burden of having been oppressed, and I think about wealthy whites whose children oftentimes do less, and I think one of the things that happens after a point is that you no longer care about whether you impress other people, or whether your children do, and you really just care whether they're happy.  And this is why I have told--for example, I told my oldest son who is, you know, very gifted mathematically, quantitatively working at Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] in a very elite part of Microsoft.  And he's also a great pianist and loves to pay the piano, and I told him when he was getting out of school.  I said, "Look, Chris [Christopher Simmons], if you decide that you wanna be the piano player in the Ritz--in the bar at The Ritz-Carlton and that will make you happy, I will defend your right to do that.  There will be all kinds of people who will say, 'He threw away all this education.'"  And I said, "I will tell them to shut up and mind their own business."  Because what I decided is, real success is letting your next generation find happiness however they want to and I think they will.  And more than likely, they're going to find it in ways that society views as being important and contributing.   But frankly, as long as they're good people and they're happy, I--probably the legacy I want to be left is that they're good people who care about people around them, and would come to somebody's aid if they needed it.  And I think they all three do have that, you know.  My oldest son, when he was in high school--he's not very outgoing, but he won some awards and got some recognition from his peers.  There was clearly evidence that they think he cares about them, and both of my two younger sons [Joseph Simmons and Anderson Simmons], you know, have sort of the reputation in their friend circles that if you kind of have a problem and you wanna confide, or you wanna be helped, you know, go talk to them.  So I think that legacy will protect them no matter what they wanna do because they'll always have a community, they'll always have friends.  They'll take care of family, and they'll be there for people when they need 'em.  But in terms of particular professional things, I stopped worrying about that--I just want 'em to be happy.  I don't want 'em to be stressed out.
