Story_ID: 75528
Speaker 1: -- [Larry] Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Kalamu ya Salaam, K-A-L-A-M-U, middle name, ya, Y-A, with a small "y", last name Salaam, S-A-L-DOUBLE A-M, [S-A-L-A-A-M].
Speaker 1: I think it's important give the meaning of your name.  I, I know it myself--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kalamu ya Salaam is Kiswahili name.  It means "pen of peace".  I took that name in December of 1970, a Kwanzaa program we had down here in New Orleans [Louisiana].  There were some brothers at the program from Kenya, and some of us changed our name at the time, so in 1970.  I was born here in New Orleans [Louisiana] March 24th, 1947, and you know, glad to be here with this program that you're doing.  Larry, I think you've made a mistake.  I may be your first mistake.  I don't know how I fit into The HistoryMakers category.  I see all them illustrious Negroes there, you know, and so.
Speaker 1: All right, did you care to give us your, your birth name?
Speaker 2: My, oh yeah, I born Vallery [Val] Ferdinand III.  It was combination of Spanish and French, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father's name is Val Ferdinand too?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you were born here in New Orleans [Louisiana]? In New Orleans [Louisiana], yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you gave us a birth date already.
Speaker 1: March 24th, 1947.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm a writer, editor, and filmmaker.
Story_ID: 75529
Speaker 1: Okay.  And before we get into depth, there are like five "People" magazine-ish kind of questions, and I'm compelled to ask you them.
Speaker 2: Sure, ask away.
Speaker 1: Now the first one--
Speaker 2: I'm not compelled to answer, however (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  Depends on what you're talking about.  I, for instance, in the vegetable category, I, I really like beets, fresh beets.  I'm from New Orleans [Louisiana], so red beans and rice is gonna be high, you know, up there, and seafood that's prepared well, all kinds of seafood, you know, it's New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue and green.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  Well, you know New Orleans [Louisiana] is, is, is happening all the time, and most of the time I spend traveling, it's in the Southern part so near the, the equator.  So no, I don't have a favorite time of the year per se.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: What is that (laughter).  I know what destination is, but what is vacation?  I mean (laughter)-
Speaker 1: I'm compelled to ask these questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I travel so much, and, and have had the opportunity to travel so broadly and constantly traveling that much of my life some would say has been a vacation, in the sense of going different places and seeing different things.  I can tell you that of the places in the world I've been, which is, as I say, virtually around the world, there are some places I would, I would feel comfortable living possibly would be, the two highest on the list would be Barbados--not because it's beautiful, because the, some of the other islands are much more beautiful.  I mean Tobago, just a short hop away, is gorgeous, you know, Jamaica, etc., and--but, Barbados is just a place I feel comfortable.  And its, it's nothing I can explain.  It's not physical.  It has nothing to do with the layout of the place.  You know, I don't have a woman there or nothing like that.  It's just I, I felt comfortable at, and Ghana; those are the two places where I, I felt most comfortable outside of New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Nah, not really.  I mean, depends on what's happening (laughter), you know.  I don't, I don't--I'm not--I have habits, but I, I, I really am somebody that's into diversity and change.  I mean I'm always looking to expand, develop, grow, learn something new, you know.  You know, I, I wrote a haiku.  I'm paraphrasing 'cause I don't remember exactly, but it says: "What we know limits us.  Wisdom loves everything not yet understood."  So that's, I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's, let's talk about-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: You were asking me about a favorite phrase.  I do radio work, a lot of radio, five, five hours a week live radio, and I also produce programs.  And sign off on a radio program is that, you know, "Whatever else you do, please be sure and take a liberal dose of the music each and every day that you live, breath, and walk the face of the planet earth.  Why?  Well, simply because the music is medicinal, good for you, help you keep your spirits together.  In these days and times, we sure enough needs that.  See you next week."  That's my signoff.  So if you say a favorite phrase, that's about as close as you're gonna get to a favorite phrase from me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 75530
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me ask you about your family background.  What do you know about the origin of your family.
Speaker 2: Not much at all.  I know that my-
Speaker 1: -on both sides, my mother side and my father's side, our people came from the country, from the countryside here.  My father's side out around Donaldsonville, Louisiana, which is near Houma [Louisiana], not too far from Houma down at, further down river from here.  And on my mother's side, Violet, Louisiana, which is a couple of, ooh, maybe about twenty, thirty miles outside of New Orleans [Louisiana].  Now I don't know whether they were originally from Violet [Louisiana] or not, but I can remember my grandfather on my mother's side.  He was a minister and had a church in the country and in the city.
Speaker 2: What denomination was he?
Speaker 1: Baptist.
Speaker 2: And what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: Noah Copelin.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and of course, on my father's side, [paternal grandfather] Vallery Ferdinand, Sr.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--Can you give us the names of both your parents and their birth dates and-
Speaker 1: I can give you names.  I can't give birth dates.  I'm not, you know, that's not, that's not me, to be--I'm really--people are sometimes surprised.  They say well, we thought you were--yeah, well, okay, you thought, but I don't.  My mother's name was Inola Copelin Ferdinand, and my father was Vallery Ferdinand, Jr.
Speaker 2: Can, can, can you spell your mother's name?
Speaker 1: Sure, I-N-O-L-A, C-O-P-E-L-I-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And they--you told us where they were from here in Louisiana, but did, did you, did your grandparents have any stories about anything that happened--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: If they did, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: --or the nineteenth century.
Speaker 1: If they did, I don't, I don't really remember 'em.
Speaker 2: They teach you any songs or anything or-
Speaker 1: Nope, nope.  My grandfather on my father's side, we never really knew him, although he, for the last maybe six, seven years of his life, he lived next door to us, where it was our house, an empty lot, and then on the corner my father brought the--bought the property on the corner, and so then that's where my grandfather lived.  But we never really talked or anything.  He was almost a hermit like, you know.  You just didn't see him or talk to him.  And on my mother's side, he was a minister, so he was always involved in the church and doing that work and pastor and this, that, and the other.  And although we lived with our grandparents, I don't really remember stories per se, you know, like people talk about, I don't, I don't have those memories.  There are other memories I have, my, you know, my grandmother raising chickens in the backyard and all that kind of stuff, and doing certain things with my father.  He was a, a Republican.  I remember that very much--very active, and that was because the Republicans were the party of Reconstruction, not--it's not current Republicans now, you know.  So I remember all of that, but personal stories, no.
Story_ID: 75531
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what, what kind of people were your parents?  What, what kind of man was your father, and what, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a laboratory technician at veterans' hospital, was a trade--for him it was a trade more than a profession.  I say a trade because, came out of the country and literally walked from the country to the city [New Orleans, Louisiana], close to about sixty-something miles, and went to high school here, attempted to do some college.  There was a place called Leland College [New Orleans, Louisiana], ended up in the service, served in World War II in the Pacific Theater and then was also in the Korean War.  And while he was in the [U.S.] Army, got in, into the Medical Corps, and while in the Medical Corps, trained to be a laboratory technician.  When he got out of the [U.S.] Army, coming back after Korea, went to apply to the veterans' hospital here, to work there as a laboratory technician, and they wouldn't hire him because he was black.  And so he, he fought it all the way to Washington, D.C., and then finally, Department of the Army Regulations came back and said while, he was a veteran, he--they checked his records.  He was qualified for the position. They had to hire him, so they hired him for the position.  He was never able to earn a college degree.  He would try to--I remember him going to classes at night at Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana] and a couple of other things, but he never earned a college degree.  And as a result, he was never able to be promoted above a certain grade at the veterans' hospital.  And in the latter years, he was training interns who would come in.  And four or five years later, one of those interns would be promoted above him even though he taught them, you know, everything they knew on a practice side in terms of being a laboratory technician.  That's, that, that was his story.  My mother was a schoolteacher.  She went to [New Orleans] Normal School here, which was a, the school that there set up specifically to, to teach people to be teachers, schoolteachers, and Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And she taught third grade just about all of her career.  I don't remember her teaching any other grade.  As far back as I can remember, it was third grade.  And we followed her around.  She worked for (unclear)--then Fisk [Fisk-Howard Elementary School, Louisiana], which is uptown, then Phillis Wheatley [Elementary School, Louisiana], which is downtown just outside of the Treme area, which was a historic area, and then down--we lived in the Lower Ninth Ward, and finally a elementary school was built on the site of a farm that was in the next block from the house, a literal farm, you know-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --two square blocks of pigs, cows, all that stuff, you know.  I mean that's what the Lower Ninth Ward was like that.  It was like being in the country.  We, we can go hunting.  We had picked blackberries or go and-
Speaker 1: Right here in town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean that's, that was, that was the way it was, you know, hunt rabbits, go right across the, the, the tracks to the swamps, you know, looking for alligators, and gulf fish, and cottonmouth snakes, all that kind of stuff.  That's what I, you know, I grew up with that.  But, so then the next block was (unclear), and then eventually that land was acquired.  And a school, an elementary school was built there.  By that time, I was past elementary school, so I never went to that school.  But her classroom was on the corner.  And from her classroom, she could see our house, which was at just a half a block away.  And so, you know, she taught, so she taught third grade all that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 75532
Speaker 1: Now, can you, you know, think back.  It shouldn't be hard for you to do this.  Give us an idea of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in--and, and what neighborhood was, was-
Speaker 2: Lower Ninth Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, Lower Ninth Ward-
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a working-class area of the city, separated from the city proper by the Industrial Canal.  It was country; I mean we were living in the country.  I--on the weekends, I remember people, distinctively remember people actually physically building their houses, you know, I mean uncles and cousins would come in and, you know, we'd all be running around there helping you nail up a little, you know, siding for--on the, on the house or whatever, the steps, you know, you did--as young people, you did whatever--it's almost like nontechnical hammering.  All you gotta do is--or just hit the nail right there, put it in there, and you know, do the next one.  So you didn't have to measure nothing or anything.  You just (laughter)--but all of that so.  So people were actually building their own houses.  My father acquired a lot, and he got a contractor to build us a brick house, but most of the houses in that area at that time were wooden houses.  As I said, we grew up fairly much in the country.  The, there, where we were, the bus--there was no bus service, no public bus service.  So there was a guy on the corner who bought an old school bus, and he ran a route.  I lived in 2500 block of St. Maurice.  The nearest public transportation was fifteen blocks away.  And the, the little bus would make that, that little circuit.  And it was a nickel bus, and you paid a nickel to get on the bus, and the, the public service was seven cents.  So, you know, and if you didn't have the nickel, you had to walk (laughter).  You know, I mean it's, that's, that's the way we grew up.  And I was--I went to school.  All of my school years were--except for about five or five days, I went to a school in the Lower Ninth Ward.  But I live in that--I went to school in the city proper because my mother was a schoolteacher.
Story_ID: 75533
Speaker 1: How big was your family?  You had--the family-
Speaker 2: I have two brothers.  There was just the three of us.  And-
Speaker 1: Are you the oldest or?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, yeah, I'm the oldest.  My, the brother under me, Kenneth Ferdinand, he's, he owns a chain of coffee shops now.  And he's, he's been in urban development a long time, so it's just one of the things he was interested in.  My younger brother is Keith C. Ferdinand.  He's a cardiologist and has a center called Heartbeats Life Center.  And he's, he's very, very, very high in the, in the whole medical profession.  He's served as the, the state director of the Red Cross something [President of Louisiana State AHA Affiliate].  I don't know.  I mean all of those kinds of things, he, he's done that.  Yeah, he's super intelligent.  You can all check the records.  Go back to 19--I would say '68' [1968], '69' [1969], Time magazine [sic, Newsweek Magazine, "Universities Under the Gun" 1969], there he is on the cover for the Takeover of Cornell [University at Willard Straight Hall by Afro-American Society, 1969].  He was one of the ones with the shotgun; that was (laughter), that was my brother.  You know, I mean we had a whole history of activism because we came up, when we came up, the Civil Rights Movement was starting.  And so in high school, that's what we did.  I, I tell people all the time, I don't remember high school prom.  I don't even know if I went to my high school prom.  I can remember sitting-in on Canal Street [New Orleans, Louisiana]; I can remember picketing; I can remember doing voter registration on the weekends, knocking on doors, going door-to-door.  But as far as those high school memories that most people have, I don't have those 'cause we didn't do that.  I was, we were into the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 75534
Speaker 1: Okay, just to backtrack a minute to when you were youth, what kind of a little boy were you, and what, what did you like to do, and you know, what were your interests, what, what, what was fun for you, and did you see some remarkable things when you were coming up that made an impression on you or any people?  Did you meet some remarkable people that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  I, I mean, you know, we, we were in the, we were in the country, so you know, we camped out.  We fished in the canals, mostly catching crawfish and stuff like that.  And it was, I mean it was just, it was just country life.  And it wasn't until I got to, and in-involvement in the church--I, I left the church at fifteen.  But it wasn't until high school--well, junior high school was for me the period of when I found myself, or I was, as it turns out, I didn't really find myself; somebody, you know, shone the light and showed me which way to go - said, boy, look, see (laughter), and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: So this is junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school it happened for me.  And-
Speaker 1: At eleven, twelve?
Speaker 2: Twelve.  Seventh grade I did--I got involved in photography.  The industrial arts schoolteacher, Mr. Conrad, had the photography club after school, and I'd, and I'd gotten deeply involved in photography.  We learned everything.  We were working--my first camera was a Yashica Twin Lens Reflex.  He taught us how to do all the darkroom work, so processed our own film, did our own printing and everything.  I've always loved the darkroom work.  Eighth grade, the English teacher said one day, "Put your books away.  I want you to hear something."  I was glad to put the books away.  I didn't like it no way, so.  She put on a recording, Langston Hughes reciting poetry with a piano player behind him, and I said, "Boom, that's it."  And that evening right after school I went up to the public library to get a book of poetry by Langston Hughes, turned the corner where the librarian said, you know, the Langston Hughes book was, and Langston Hughes was like that.  I said damn, all that?  So I started reading all that; I just started reading Langston [Highes].  In his autobiographies, in his autobiographies, every writer he mentioned I'd go back to the library and check that book out.  So by the time--that was eighth grade--by the time I got out of twelfth, I had read all of the writers of the Harlem Renaissance, had read a lot of the African writers because Langston Hughes did anthologies, '[An] African Treasury' and "Black Poetry from Africa" [sic 'Poems from Black Africa'].  So I'd, you know, and, and I'd see the writers' names and then I'd read.  And the ones I liked, I'd go to library and find their books, and I read all of that.  Langston [Hughes] spent some time in--he passed through China and spent some time in Japan, so he mentioned those writes.  He did a lot of stuff with Caribbean writers, you know, Haitians and, and Cuban, in particular, but others.  And so he mentioned those, and I'd go look those up, and, and that was my education.  And then later in eighth grade I got interested in music.  My brother was in--my younger brother, Kenneth [Ferdinand], he was into The Band very heavy.  My, my, one who's a physician, [Dr.] Keith [C. Ferdinand], he also played clarinet.  Kenneth played trumpet, and in the band he played eu-euphonium and stuff like that.  So they were formally into music.  I was just informally into it.  I liked it, so I would listen to it.  But photography was the first love, then writing, then music.  And all of that happened in junior high school, so for me, that was the period of, of my real blossoming.  And I understand now, of course, that my parents prepared us for this and encouraged us.  They encouraged us both in terms of our, whatever it was we were personally interested in, but they also encouraged us in terms of participating in the Civil Rights Movement.  They would take us there.  You know, other people, you know, they'd say well, you know they, they too young to do this or blah, blah, blah, but they encouraged us to do it.
Story_ID: 75535
Speaker 1: And what was, what were some of the major issues here in New Orleans [Louisiana] that the civil rights issues--I mean I, I'm, I'm sure you're aware of the national issues go, going on in the South in those days, but were there any particular issues here in New Orleans [Louisiana] that you, you know, that you got personally involved?
Speaker 2: The par--I mean it's, it's just a local variation of the, of, of the basic--the, the basics were public accommodations, which tended to focus on jobs in the retail stores, and then of course in, in this area, in the hotels also, voter regist--you know, voter registration participation and that, and then political participation in the whole, the whole political, the polic--arena politics in public office and what have you.  Those, so those were the three main areas of, of activity around the Civil Rights Movement.  And I left, consciously left, the Civil Rights Movement March of '64' [1964].
Speaker 1: There's a march down here in '64' [1964] or?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: There's a march here in '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm saying that March of 19--the year--month of March, 1964.
Speaker 1: Oh, in March '64' [1964].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I left the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I mean it was a conscious decision we had-
Speaker 1: So you remember--you were part, part of the NAACP--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: The NAACP Youth Council and the--we had spearheaded the boycott of Canal Street to, you know, "Don't shop where you can't work," that kind of thing.  And at one point, the merchants decided they wanted to negotiate.  And the adult chapter came in and said, "We're gonna negotiate?"  And we said but yeah, "But y'all wasn't the ones out there on the picket line; y'all didn't do all the work."  So we, we, we are willing to negotiate, but we're not gon' stop the pickets until they actually hire somebody.  So we're willing to talk anytime, you know, blah, blah.  So they, they adult chapter said, "No, you gotta stop picketing so we can"--we said, "No, we're not gon' stop," you know.  And they sent for Warren Moon [sic, Henry Moon], who was one of the national secretaries of the NAACP, and he came down.  They had a meeting and essentially told us if we didn't stop picketing so that they could negotiate, they were gonna kick us out the NAACP.  And at that point I said, okay.  And I--we used to meet at Mt. Zion Church, AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, on Dumaine and Galvez [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I forget--I think it was Tuesdays, and I'd got there early one Tuesday.  I said I sat on the steps and I thought about it, and I walked away, never been a member of the NAACP since, got--have no desire to be part of that.  And I just walked away from that.
Story_ID: 75536
Speaker 1: I became a supporter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna ask you about that, as-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --SNCC was reaching an impasse I guess around the same time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a supporter of SNCC, and-
Speaker 2: That summer in-
Speaker 1: Right, and some-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --and some of the sit-in activity I participated in was CORE-led [Congress of Racial Equality] down here, Aretha Haley, Jerome Smith and some of the other people, Ike Reynolds.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did--were you--did you pis--participate or know anybody that participated in the big voter registration campaigns in Mississippi in '64' [1964], summer of '64' [1964]?
Speaker 1: I only knew 'em at a distance.  I, I mean I never knew anyone personally.  I, I, later I came to know Jerome Smith very well, one of the original Freedom Riders, yeah.  He was in CORE.  He wasn't in SNCC.  And I later, you know, became friendly with some SNCC people, but not at that time, not in '64' [1964].  It was '68' [1968] when I came out of the [U.S.] Army that I got to know a lot of people.
Speaker 2: What, you came out of high school in '65' [1965]?
Speaker 1: Came out of high school in '64' [1964].
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Right, and went to Carlton College, Northfield, Minnesota, for--it was on a trimester system.  I lasted two trimesters.  I was singing like Bobby Bland, soon as the weather break, "I'mma make my get away, boy" (laughter), and I got out of there--had, had not signed up for the draft.  You know, by now it's spring of '65' [1965], so you know it was popping right along through there.  And my mother just, she just stayed on me - "You got to go do this."  I said nah.  You know, my birthday came and went.  I wasn't even thinking about signing up for no draft.  So finally I went down to the draft board, and some elderly white woman said, you know, "When is your birthday?"  And so I told her, and she said, "You breakin' the law.  You were supposed to have been down here to register," and everything like that.  "You come down here tomorrow.  You could go to jail.  You be here tomorrow at twelve noon."  Needless to say, I never went back.  I went (laughter) down to the recruiter's office.  I told 'em send me anywhere but Vietnam.  And the guy said, "Well, we can't do that."  I said well, yeah, I mean, you know, I'm-"Don't y'all use people other place?"  And he said, "Yeah, but there're only a few categories that they're not using in Vietnam, and you have to take a special test to get in that."  I said, "Give me the test."  So I ended up in Korea in nuclear missiles.  I was an electronic repairperson in nuclear missiles.  So I did all of the electrical systems for nuclear missiles and on the warhead and everything, was trained in chemical, biological, radiological warfare.  And so when I came out, I'd been trained and all of that stuff.  And well, it was one of the reasons I took an active interest in the anti-nuclear movement, 'cause I, I mean I knew it.  I had worked with it.  It wasn't--for me it wasn't an abstract sort of thing, you know.
Story_ID: 75537
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are there are any experiences in the [U.S.] Army you wanna tell us about that are remarkable or anything, or, or how did you like Korea?
Speaker 2: Well, actually Korea was, Korea was a, another one of the areas, places in the world that where I've received another level of education.  In the armed services, everywhere you find [U.S.] Army bases, you find major centers of prostitution.  In fact, the, the term "hooker," you know where that comes from, the word hooker?  When they refer to a prostitute as a hooker, that, that was General [Joespeh] Hooker during the Civil War.
Speaker 1: General Hooker--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were (laughter)--the women that serviced the [U.S.] Army under--and, and troops under [General Joseph] Hooker became known as Hookers.  That's, that's how that term, but the U.S. Army is probably the single largest foci or focus-
Speaker 1: Or customer--(laughter)-
Speaker 2: --for--no, for prostitution.  And it's not just in terms of being--the, the soldiers being customers, I mean that's part and parcel of the whole culture that grows--military culture.  Now it's not official.  There's no--nothing on--you'll never find it officially sanctioned, but everywhere there are [U.S.] Army bases, both domestically and abroad, it's, there's a major center of prostitution.
Story_ID: 75538
Speaker 1: In Korea, I was on a missile site in the mountains.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You had to drive it on--in Deuce and a Quarter--two and a half ton trucks, two and a quarter-ton trucks, or a quarter-ton with the four-wheel drive up through the mountains to get there.  I mean it was like, we were way, way--there were no regular roads or anything to get there.  So there was just a small village right outside of the, the base.  The missiles themselves were located one mountaintop.  On the peak, there was a small valley.  And on the other peak was the radar section, and in the valley was the garrison.  And it was--it couldn't have been more than a maybe a little bit larger than a square block, maybe two square block.  Right outside the gate was a small Korean village, and that was the village set up to serve the troops.  Well, one of the things some of the blacks over there--there weren't that many of us, maybe--if I remember, maybe there were twenty, may have been about two or three hundred people in that garrison.  We rented a hooch, a little hut, in the village, and we called that hut Soulville.  And the only rule in Soulville, there's no fucking in Soulville.  You could not--that you could not do that in Soulville, because it was collectively rented, and it was there for our rest and relaxation.  We had a little record player and that, and we would have parties over there.  But if you wanted to get with a woman or something, you had to go someplace else, not in Soulville.  So, what happened was, of course the word quickly spread among the women that that was a "safe place."  Soulville was a safe place, and there was always somebody there because we worked like--I think we worked 24/24/20--no, 24/8/24; that meant you worked, you were on-- for 24 hours you were on the mountaintop, then you came down, then you worked eight hours on the mountaintop--no, it was eight hours you worked on a regular shift, came down, then you'd go back up for a full shift, which is 24 hours, then you were off for 24 hours.  So on the days you were off for 24 hours, we didn't stay in the, in the, in the barracks.  We'd go over to Soulville, lay up there, you know, and you could get--the food was cheap, you know, from the village and everything.  And the women there knew that in Soulville there wasn't nobody gonna, you know, bother 'em there, so we'd hang out.  And people were hanging out and talking, and we began to develop human relationships, rather than simply the, the power and a, and a, and the consumer relationship of the, of the dollar.
Story_ID: 75539
Speaker 1: And I remember there was an older prostitute, her name was Em (ph.).  And we were in Soulville.  I was, you know, we we're just (unclear)--and turns out Em read and wrote and spoke Korean and Chinese, and could speak Japanese.  She had three languages, could read and write in two of them, and I'm strug--and she spoke English, okay, so that was four languages.  I'm struggling with one, you know.  And she was reading the paper and telling me, you know, what was in the paper and so forth and so on.  You know, they--we would talk about where they came from, where we came from, that kind of thing.  And at one point, she reached over and she told me "same old, same old".  I said what?  She said--she rubbed, rubbed my arm, then she armed her arm.  She said "same old, same old".  And we began to talk about that relationship.  I began to understand the power of relationship, and so my Third World consciousness actually took a leap there.  It wasn't completely, but I began to understand some things that I hadn't understood before.  And if, if we hadn't had Soulville, I, I probably would have come to some degree of consciousness.  But this was actually sped up because I, I had a tutor like Em who, who understood and talked about how for many of them they were the major support for their families.  And in a sense, they sacrifice themselves to support their families.  And they would tell me, you know, like "My little sister's in school.  I pay her tuition and so forth and so on, and blah, blah, blah."  Now they didn't say tuition.  They say I, you know, "I pay for her go to school, and she's gon' be such and such and so forth."  And they would tell us different things.  And I knew from occasionally going out in to the countryside in Korea, 'cause once we got to know them on a personal level, they would tell us about other nearby villages, when they were gonna have a festival, when this was gonna happen and so forth.  And we would go and you know just stand around and look.  But the young girls would always, whenever they saw a soldier--and at that time, we had to be in uniform, but I mean even if, I mean even if you weren't in uniform, we were black and you know.  Anyway, whenever they saw a soldier, they would shy away, I mean literally move across the road and everything else like that.  And through talking with Em, I got to understand the whole thing.  I mean they, they viewed soldiers as, you know, one step from the devil (laughter), and that's the way we acted.  We didn't know it, but I mean that's the way we, we acted, 'cause we were, you know, U.S. soldiers and so forth and so on.  But she helped me understand those things, so I, I think that that, that accounted for my developing concept of the third world solidarity, and how the in, in very real and down to earth terms how imperialism works.  See, most people think about it in terms of the bigger picture and so forth and so on, but in terms of human relations, there's, there's some major things.  And people that talk about making the world safe for democracy would be aghast to talk about, you know, you try to also make it serve prostitution, and they don't, they don't wanna talk about that.  But that's a major part of what goes on with the U.S. Army, so much so till today the major audio/visual industry is pornography, not the Hollywood movies.
Story_ID: 75540
Speaker 1: --So much so that today the major audio/visual industry is pornography, and yet you could read newspapers all day and look at television all day long and not know that, you understand.  So there's a, there's a, a, a sense of denial about reality that exists within the United States, and it is so, it is such a profound sense of denial that there are many--that I think the majority of "the American people" don't actually know the reality of America.  There's, there's just so much that they don't know, but it's a willful ignorance in the sense that they don't wanna know.  They don't wanna know the truth.  We'd rather, you know, believe certain things.  And so when you ask me about Korea, I think that, that.  And I also--Em also got me to understand that the Koreans are looked upon--to put it in very negative terms, as the "niggers of Asia," of, of, of the '40's [1940s], you know.  They, the Japanese, of course, always dump on 'em, and the Japanese--the way we used rank it, we used to call 'em crackerjacks, 'cause the, many of the Japanese thought of themselves as superior to all of the other, the Asian things.  And then you had the Chinese, and the Chinese didn't like the Vietnamese, you know, and none of 'em like the Koreans.  And it's, it's still very much that way.  So when I can remember in later years, in the '70's [1970s], when we went, we went to China--you know, I've been to Japan a couple of times--I've got--I was--I had an invitation to go to, to Cambodia, to Phnom Tbeng [Meanchey] and so forth and so on.  And I decided against going, based on my understanding of the dynamics that were going, you know, going on.  And I didn't have to refer to Newsweek or the New York Times.  I had other channels and conduits.  But I'd also had an on-the-ground education from a, a, a prostitute [Em] who was multilingual and who was very conscious that her position in society was, on her part, a sacrifice to aid her family, her extended family.  And she understood the dynamics of what was going on much better than I, I did before she started talking to me and explaining to--and once I started looking, you could see it.  But until you know what to look for, you don't see it.  You really don't see that the U.S. Army is a major focal point of prostitution, that pornography is the major audio/visual industry in the United States, you know.  And oddly enough, one of the main areas for sale of pornography is Utah, you know, but that's a whole 'nother story I won't go into.
Story_ID: 75541
Speaker 1: Have you been able to--were, were you ever a--able to reconnect with Em in-
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Korea?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just-
Speaker 2: No.  And I, you know, it--I don't know why we set up Soulville in that way.  It hadn't been done; it wasn't like that before.  I mean you could all--these are just one-room places that the heating was, it's coal that they had in the stoves right under the floor, paper floors you had to take your shoes off and all that.  I still take my shoes off at, at home, you know.  We leave our shoes at the door and all like that, so we're very used--I was used to that, coming, you know, through the cra--the Korean experience.  I just learned a lot from that, but it wasn't like, we didn't write nothing else like that.  It was, it was the--to me, the parallel is what Cabral taught, the PAIGC [African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde], when they were fighting the Portuguese, and how he-
Speaker 1: This is, this is benefit of those who-
Speaker 2: Yeah, Amilcar Cabral, leader of the, the Party for Independence [African Part for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde], and Guinea-Bissau in, in West Africa on the coast there and Cape Verde islands.  [Amilcar] Cabral, as the liberation leader, taught them to actually recruit when they, when they would capture Portuguese soldiers.  They would talk with them and then turn them loose.  And eventually what happened was, there was a revolution in Portugal and many of these soldiers were involved.  And basically what they did was talk to them about why are you here, what are you doing, do you know this, this, that, and the other.  And when you begin breaking it down to people, and people see things with their own lives--eyes--and then compare the, the realities of their lives and so forth and so on, they, you know, it really impacts them.  So that's the kind of impact that, that Em had on me in the later years, as we developed our political theory.  I could understand--I had a practical basis for it.  I'm, I'm not a--I would say I'm a thinker, but I'm not very abstract.  I don't--it's--I mean my, my head hurts when people start putting an abstraction on top of an abstraction on top of an abstraction.  I'm looking at for okay, what's happening on the ground?  What are people dealing with on a day to day basis?  And so that, that was, that was the influence for me.
Story_ID: 75542
Speaker 1: So with that, that experience, you come back to the United States after three years.  You come back about what, what time?
Speaker 2: I got back--well, I was only there [Korea] a year, and then I, I served another year--well, I was a year in training in Fort Bliss, Texas, El Paso, went to Korea for a year, then went back to Fort Bliss-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in El Paso, Texas.  Of course, right across the border was Tijuana [sic, Ciudad Juarez Mexico], and there the oppression and degradation was worse than Korea.  Because in Korea, that was Korea.  That was their own country, their own land.  The border towns don't really belong to the Mexicans.  I mean the, the, the pull of the U.S. is, is so great, you know.  I mean it's just, I, I hated Ti-Tijuana [Mexico].  I mean--not Tijuana.  What was it--El Paso?  It's not Tijuana.  It's [Ciudad] Juarez [Mexico].  I had to get my--knew Tijuana's on the California side-[Ciudad] Juarez [Mexico].  And I would try and go off the beaten path and go deeper into [Ciudad] Juarez [Mexico], but it just, it didn't--I never was able to connect there the way we connected in, in Korea.  And in fact, there's a, there's a funny thing among the [U.S.] Army, the servicemen.  The [MIM-14] Nike Hercules missile, which was the missile we were working on.  I don't know if they still have 'em, but there was only three places that had the Nike Hercules missile: United States, Korea, and Germany.  And all of the white soldiers loved duty station in Germany, and the black soldiers loved duty station in Korea, you know.  So when you would go back to the [United] States, if you stayed in, you'd have a choice, you going to Germany or you're going to Korea.  And for the most part, the black soldiers wanted to go to Korea, and the white soldiers wanted to go to Germany with the missiles and so forth.  And I just think that the, these are the experiences that make a difference in terms of how people look at the world.
Story_ID: 75543
Speaker 1: Now, now why--you raised a question yourself about why you all created Soulville.  And I've, I've heard other stories, where black sailors created similar situations, you know, and with rules like, you know, like that and everything.  I mean why do you suppose you did?  I mean-
Speaker 2: Search for community and understanding the need to have community.  We couldn't survive by ourselves as an individual.  I mean you either had to become part of that, "you can go with this, or you can go with that" (laugher), you know I'm saying.  And so, we had to--if we wanted to be with this, we had to set it up; we had to establish something.
Speaker 1: 'Cause something had started I guess as a result of I think the civil rights activities in the '60's [1960s]--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, but all the people, the people who were involved in it were not necessarily--I was a veteran in the Civil Right Movement, but some of the other soldiers weren't who participated in, in Soulville, you know.  I mean the whole time I was there, we had it going; you know, we kept it.  It didn't cost much to, I think the--if the rent was twenty dollars a month, it--I doubt it was that much, you know.  You know, so you had--I mean it was like we had our own little condo.  (Laughter) We, we didn't call it that now, but I mean, you know, in the-
Speaker 1: What about--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --village.
Speaker 1: --in the (unclear) your father's generation and World War II, they didn't have the opportunity to do that kind of thing I guess-
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  Yeah-
Speaker 1: Yeah, (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --and he was in Korea also, you see.  He had served in Korea, and that was a connection.
Speaker 1: I guess a change of status on the part of black soldiers or-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --had something to do with the ability to be able to create that kind of--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 75544
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when, so when you came back to civilian life, what, what, were your plans, or what did you think you would do?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.  I was playing music at that time, was in a band in El Paso [Texas], came back home; in fact, I was only supposed to be here for--come back for, to see my family for a week or so and then go back out to El Paso [Texas].  We had some gigs lined up.  We were playing in a hotel, this, that, and the other.  I was playing drums-
Speaker 1: What did you play? (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I was playing drums.  And I got here, man, and heard some of the drummers, I through the sticks away.  I said, I said I, "I will never be able to play as good as some of these cats, James Black, Smokey Johnson, Zigaboo [Modeliste] and some others."  I said, "But I can write better," 'cause I was also checking out the theater companies and what was going on, on that scene.  And so I just, that's when I decided to focus on writing.  I was still doing photography, but I decided to focus on writing rather than focus on music.  At that point when I came back, joined the Free Southern Theater [New Orleans, Louisiana] in summer of '68' [1968], when I got, you know, when I got back.
Speaker 1: Now who was the director there?  That was-
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, Tom Dent was running the writing workshop, and Robert Big Daddy Cosley (ph.) was running the drama workshop.  John O'Neal was still in New York doing--he was a conscientious objector to the war, and so he was--his community service was up there, so he was up in New York.  And before the, the--I joined the theater, I also hooked up with the community center down in the Lower Ninth Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] and I was teaching, I was actually teaching photography to, to the neighborhood kids, you know.  'Cause when I came out, you know, I knew photography.  I was doing that.  So that's what I did first, and then I, I joined the theater.
Story_ID: 75545
Speaker 1: By '60 [1960]--in the fall of '68 [1968], I went, got back in school.  We had a major struggle to, you know, take over and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Where were you at school?
Speaker 1: Southern University in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And I was, I left school April of '69' [1969].  They put about 2,500 students out.  That was the only way they could break the strike over that summer.  And I was one of the student leaders.  In fact, I had a restraining order, a court restraining order.  I couldn't set foot on a campus for a whole year, year and a half, something like that.  And many of us had been veterans, so I our movement we were armed, and we were older than the average incoming freshman.  And some of us had been in Vietnam.  I had not been in Vietnam, but I'd been trained, you know, and so forth and so on.  So we had a different, slightly different, mindset that they were dealing with.  And I think that that's a--that's always been a major spur in the development of the black struggle.  The struggle peaks after every major war, when the veterans come back.  And these are men who have been trained, and, and in many cases, battled tested.  And they come back and become, if you will, a spearhead of whatever struggles go on.  So when you look at the civil rights struggle, that's what you're talking about.  And the aspects of that--of the struggle that are seldom talked about are the ones that had the, the strongest resonance in the community and in fact were pushing the others.  So you had the people who came from the, the religious/political side, and then you had those who had the military training, and the military training was, was the, that was the, that was the fist within a cer-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --and, and you--all across the South-
Speaker 2: Did, did you know Robert Williams and-
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Rob.  In fact, I, I first, where I first met Robert Williams was in pek--Peking, Beijing, China.  That's where I first even met him.
Speaker 2: Did you know he had to, he, he, he was already a patriot--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a--yeah, yeah, yeah, he was an ex-patriot, and he was in a, a hospital in Beijing [China].  And our guide said that Robert Williams was there.  Did we wanna go see him?  I said "Yeah, definitely," you know.  And that's where we hooked up, where we first hooked up.  And of course we, we got to know each other, and, and subsequently, yeah, he came back to the United States.  But what I'm saying is that Robert Williams, military man.  The whole Deacons for Defense [and Justice], that--those were, were military people.  And you had within the, the Civil Rights Movement you had two layers, and, and I didn't understand it at the time.  I understand now.  You had two layers of participation.  You had the participation of those who were, for lack of a better term, were simply educated, petty bourgeoisie, who were seeking their fame and fortune in the "big house".  And most of them were religious or lawyers, preachers and lawyers.  I mean if you go back and look at it, you'll see it.  You'll see it, college trained preachers and lawyers.  Then you had that other that, and much more militant strain, and a, and, and based in the community, in the sense that these were men who had come back from, from the war, from conflicts.  And after every major war, you see an upsurge because of the--and that's, that's the fuel that, that's that militant fuel that pushes that struggle much further than it would ever go if it was left to the preachers and the lawyers, 'cause that's the period we're in now.  We ain't got nothing but preachers and lawyers, you know, leading our struggle.  So there's no, there's no real struggle there, 'cause all they're doing is fighting for their fifteen minutes of fame, you know.  They're not really trying to change nothing.
Speaker 2: It's beyond the personal, you know, achievement-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --level.
Speaker 1: The first Negro to do this-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --first Negro to do that, you know.
Story_ID: 75546
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're, we're at about 1960--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Sixty--we're actually about '69 [1969] now.  I'm joining the Free Southern Theater [New Orleans, Louisiana], become active in the Free Southern Theater.  We're going throughout the South performing.
Speaker 1: Free Southern Theater, just, just kind of-
Speaker 2: Free Southern Theater-
Speaker 1: This was a big deal, I mean-
Speaker 2: Yeah, 19-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--people write about over and over again.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's 1964 [sic, 1963] I think it was founded by Gilbert Moses, John O'Neal and Doris Derby in Jackson, Mississippi [Tougaloo College].  They were all work-SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] workers at the time.  And it was, by design, meant to be a cultural arm of the Civil Rights Movement specifically coming out of the SNCC point of view.  And it moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] I think in '65 [1965] or '66 [1966], somewhere around there.  I joined in '68 [1968].  We traveled throughout the deep South.  In some places we weren't--it wasn't even on the map, you know.  You had to know where you (laughter) were going.  Somebody had to tell you, you turn by the big tree off the road and go back up in there for about five miles, and then you come to a clearing and that'll be Harmony, Mississippi, say okay, you know, all over the place and learning.  That, that was a great learning experience for me.  in 1970, I was one of the founding members of the Black Collegian magazine.  I was still active in my communities with the community center, so much so that in 19--also, yeah and also--no, this would have been early '70 [1970].  Early '70 [1970] I became the executive director of the Lower Ninth Ward Neighborhood Health Center.  'Cause see, I was a, known as a community activist and so forth and so on, and I'm, I'm smart.  I've been trained to take tests and stuff like that, so I can do that kind of stuff.  But I'm not college educated, so I got a lot of rough edges to me.  And so the community folk like that.  You know, I mean they're looking for somebody smart, but they ain't looking,  necessarily looking for no, you know, button-down, proper speaking, lawyer type, 'cause they don't trust 'em, quiet as it's kept.  People wonder why black folk don't vote.  What have we got to vote for?  Preachers and lawyers--come on, give me a break, you know.  But anyway, (laughter) that's--and, and I was--and [HM] Reverend [Al] Sharpton, I'm talking about you, yes.  Not you personally, but as a class, as a social class.  I mean we, we have to be frank about these things if we're gonna make some substantial change.  And the social class of the lawyers and the preachers, that combination is not, does not wanna make fundamental change in the social order of the United States.  They wanna, they wanna secure a place within that social order.
Speaker 1: We have to pause here and change tape.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's a good place to pause.  I agree (laughter).
Story_ID: 75547
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, so I'm saying that, the--this is, this is an analysis that I make, and I don't claim it as my analysis.  It's simply an analysis that I make, and a lot of other people have pointed it out before me.  I remember the Chinese, we had a meeting with the Chinese, and they were talking about it.  When I said, had a meeting with the Chinese, we, we were in China in 1977, all black tour of-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --educators from independent black schools across the country which we had organized.  And while we were there, we, you know, we were--they were taking us around.  We went all over China, from--came in at Shanghai, went up to Wuxi, the old capital, Nanking [Nanjing], went over to Xi'an, which is like in the middle of the country, and then from there a couple of other places, and then we flew in to Beijing.  But while we were there, after we'd, you know, we'd see all the sights, you know, the tourist things, and then, then of course show you the, the communes and the educational centers and this, that, and the other.  We said okay, we wanna have some ideological discussion, and we kept (unclear).  So finally, in Xi'an, this was towards the last third of the trip.  We were there for I think either nineteen or twenty-one days, something like that, the last third of the trip, and said, "we're gonna have a meeting, and we'll have some discussions in the cotton factory tomorrow night."  So fine.  We get to the cotton factory.  And we're in the room, and these cats walk in and immediately I know this is a different breed than we've seen before.  And we have some ideological discussions and struggle, and that's when I heard the Chinese run it down, Jack.  I mean the cat said, you know, "after every major war we have advanced, and the United States has lost ground."  And they went, they went through and showing it point by point.  They said, "We're not afraid of war.  We don't want war, but we're not afraid of war; and in fact, we're prepared for war."  And they have, in China--I don't know what it is now.  This is '77 [1977].  At that time, all of the major cities, there were cities below ground.  They had already literally put an infrastructure below ground, because they would--they were certain that there was gonna be a nuclear war, and they were preparing--as, as the guy said, "We are prepared to lose, you know, two hundred million people if this war comes.  We are prepared.  We know that this is gon'--" you know, you know.  And they was--I mean I've seen some of the--I have--what I--what, I'm sure what they showed us was just minimal compared to what exists at, existed at that time, but they were prepared for it.
Story_ID: 75548
Speaker 1: So this kind of ideological struggle, this was my first example outside of the United States, where we were on the Third World scene.  In '74 [1974] I was a delegate to the Sixth Pan-African Congress [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania]. Of course we were active with, you know, the African liberation struggles and, and the forces there.  But, in fact, when I got to Tanzania, the first thing we did was went and stood on a Tanzan railroad [TAZARA Railway], you know, the, the railroad that's built between Tanzania and Zambians, outlet to the sea for the copper to try and break that stranglehold.  So I mean we, we understood all of those kinds of things, but '77 [1977] in China was when we saw some stuff and were--had some high level ideological discussions like I'd not had before.  Then later on, by '80 [1980] I'm in Cuba, all throughout the Caribbean; '85 [1985] I'm in Nicaragua; '87 [1987], somewhere around there; I'm in Suriname, you know, all these places, learning and, and, and understanding, you know, what struggle was really about, you know.  I mean I remember in Nicaragua, seeing people literally, literally living in mud when it rained.  You know, stand out there in the rain with them, you know what I mean.  I, I don't--a lot of people romanticize revolution and all that.  I can't because I've seen too much, been in too many places, been too close to death, and seeing, you know, comrades who, who didn't make it, and so forth and so on.
Speaker 2: Nothing to talk about lightly.
Speaker 1: No, no, and, and that's why when I make an analysis to what's happening in the United States, and people saying, you know, about, you know, why black people don't vote, why we don't do this and so forth and so on, what they're basically saying is, why they don't vote for me (laughter)?  You know, that's what them cats are saying.  I mean are you advocating some major fundamental change?  No, you're not, you know, no, you're not, so, I mean why should somebody get up and go vote for you and what--you know?  And at the same time, I've, I've had to take a, a more sophisticated view of this whole voting issue coming cir--it's a long way back, but I'm circling back.  I remember being in Jamaica during [Michael] Manley's reign, and getting to some arguments about whether voting was worth it.  And they argued that regardless of what difference it made domestically for us, who was in office made a big difference on the international scale, because the officeholders in the United States affect international relations at a much higher degree almost than they do domestic.  So like, it doesn't make that big a difference domestically or seemingly parts.  You could argue, say between a [President William J.] Clinton and a [President George W.] Bush, you know, 'cause, you know, [President George H.] Bush is gon' argue, well, "I've got black--the highest ranking blacks that's ever been in government, blah, blah," you know, all that kind of stuff.  But on the international level, it makes a major difference, a huge difference.  The only U.S President in post-World War II era that is universally admired is Jimmy [President James] Carter, is Jimmy Carter.  And believe it or not, most of us in the United States, if you, you think of who was deemed as the most ineffectual president, you know, he would be right up there, ranked right up there.  You might not have liked [President Richard] Nixon, but he did what he did, you know.  [President Ronald] Reagan obviously did what he did, you know, all the others (unclear)--but--and, and, and people always characterize Jimmy [President James] Carter as ineffectual.  But on an international basis, he is respected.  I mean, you know, I mean he was one of the few presidents that remained active, politically active in international affairs after he got out of office.  One of the things he did was set up that whole commission to monitor elections in other countries [The Carter Center-International Elections Report], I mean major--so, my comrades in Jamaica, arguing me don't, don't be so pigheaded.  You know, it may not make a difference to you in New Orleans [Louisiana], but it makes a big difference to us in Jamaica whether it's [President Ronald] Reagan or [President James] Carter.
Story_ID: 75549
Speaker 1: Let me backtrack some and go back to Black Collegian [magazine].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get involved with Black Collegian?  Who started it, and how, how did you become the editor?
Speaker 2: Black Collegian [magazine], that, that involvement was because of the Free Southern Theater.  Here's how it goes: We're in the Free Southern Theater.  We start a literary journal.  And the second, on the third issue--I believe it was--the first issues was a mimeograph.  I think it was the second issue, but it may have been the third issue.  We got it printed by a printer who was actually a shoemaker.  His--and he had bought a printing press and he it in the back of his shop, (unclear); that's another (unclear).  And so, I forgot how we found his--his name was [Lawrence] Lucien Edwards.  So we went there.  We got our magazine, journal, printed by him, got a real good deal on it.  His younger brother is--had graduated recently from college and is now teaching at Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Preston Edwards.  Preston [Edwards] gets an idea that black college students need a magazine.  It's the late '60's [1960s].  So he decides he's gonna start a magazine in 1970.  And he talks to his brother about who he can get to work with.  The first editor-in-chief was Norbert Davidson, who had written the play, 'El-Hajj Malik' El-Shabazz.  And I was the managing editor, and there were about eight or nine of us that started with Preston [Edwards].  He called a meeting and said okay, we'll do that.  And then in--I think Norbert [Davidson]may have probably left after the second year, something like that, and I became technically editor-in-chief, although I didn't want the title editor-in-chief.  I just said editor; you know, just call me editor, you know, so forth and so on.  And I stayed with it until '83 [1983].  I--you know, I left it in '80--1983, but I remember when I signed up to work there full time, 'cause I was still working with Free Southern Theater, you know, pulling this and odd jobs and you know, making it.  I got married in '69 [1969]; my daughter was, Assante was born in 1970; and in '70--in '71 [1971] I was director of the health center [Lower Ninth Ward Health Center, New Orleans, Louisiana].  They wanted to--there were three health centers in the neighborhoods in the unite--in New Orleans [Louisiana], and I was gonna--they wanted to promote me to become vice president of the complex.  And I was set to become the executive director of the whole complex when the guy--Harvey Dershin was his name--had been hired to set up the, the health care program.  And he was--he always said he was gonna put himself out of business, and he, he only wanted to be there three years and was gonna train people, and so forth and so on.  They were trying to get me to do that.  And it was "a good job" and all like that, but I decided I wanted to do this Black Collegian thing.  So the day in '71 [1971], the day that I signed the formal contract, because before that, we were just working for stock, but I signed the contract to come on staff.  There were only about three of us on staff.  After I signed the contract, I went down to the welfare office and applied for food stamps, and I was eligible, even with that new contract, so that tell you how much I was paid (laughter).
Story_ID: 75550
Speaker 1: And so I worked, you know, worked that for a while, yeah.
Speaker 2: So were you part of the, a golden age of black magazines.  I mean magazines are really coming out in black communities-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --with, you know, Black World [1970, originally HM John H. Johnson's Negro Digest] was still coming out with Hoyt Fuller.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Hoyt Fuller and I were close, yeah.
Speaker 2: Black Collegian coming.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you're, you're Black Collegian, and Black Books Bulletin coming out on Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right-
Speaker 2: And-
Speaker 1: Black Books Bulletin [HM Haki Madhubuti, Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois] came about in, about '76 [1976]  [sic. 1971], somewhere around there I guess.
Speaker 2: It was out before that.
Speaker 1: It was '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: It was before that, about, about '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: No, I don't think it was-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--'73 [1973].
Speaker 1: It couldn't have-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --it wasn't--it may have been '73 [1973], 'cause-
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause there's a--I've got some older issues.  I had a com--almost complete set of all (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --but-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but--and then Black News out of, out on the East.
Speaker 1: Right, Black News out of the East, a couple of others, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a, it was an age of struggle, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Then later, NOMMO  [sic. 1968] comes out.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was a powerful time.  If you, if you really wanted intellectual stimulation, you could, you could get it easy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, it was out there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think in a higher level than it is now.  I mean--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And all the, all the editors seemed to know each other and to-
Speaker 1: Well, every, every, everybody-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--each other-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --before it got that way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had to work together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that was emphasis.  So that was me.  That's how, that's how I got involved in the Black Collegian.  And I left in '83 [1983] to become executive director of New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Foundation [Louisiana].  I was on my way out anyway.  It, it's was a funny story.  A guy had been hired to become vice president of the Black Collegian.  And I'm trying to remember his name.  I got a black on his name.  But anyway, he was a retired [U.S.] Army officer, and he had tremendous skills.  But he, I mean he was military-minded, you know, the whole--and I remember they had to--a couple of people had to hold me back, 'cause I was gonna, you know--we were just gonna have to go to "fist city", that was it.  I'm, I'm--you know, I said I ain't worked all for this and-
Speaker 2: Was, what was, were some of the issues, conflict?
Speaker 1: The issues was, we all saw a change, momentous change was on the horizon.  And the question was which way was the community gonna go?  And they opted for the inclusion route.  And I just, I didn't, that's not what I wanted, you know, and I saw it-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --so that's why I-
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: I had, I had to, you know, I had to withdraw.  I mean it was--it wasn't I didn't understand what they were saying, and it wasn't that I didn't see that a majority of, of our people decided that that's what we're gonna give a try.  I was just that, that's not what I wanted to do, so I left it.
Story_ID: 75551
Speaker 1: Now at the same time you, while you're at the Black Collegian, you--I'm gonna back even further, 19--1970 to Congress of African People.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were there founding of Congress of African People, Atlanta [Georgia], 1970.  Yeah, we were there.
Speaker 1: And what--how did you get involved with Congress of African People?  I mean--well, I, I guess it's a natural involvement from everything else you're involved in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When that meeting was called--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: We were active in the ALSC, which--and-
Speaker 1: African Liberation-
Speaker 2: --Support Committee, yeah, and community organizing around issues of police brutality and what have you.  So when that meeting was called-
Speaker 1: Now this-
Speaker 2: --anybody that was-
Speaker 1: --Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Right, in Atlanta [Georgia], AU [Atlanta University] Complex, 1970, summer.  Anybody that was active in a movement at that time was there.  I mean I don't know if you remember the, one of the sessions when they had on a dais, among others, [HM Louis] Farrakhan, Whitney Young, [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.], and Amiri Baraka all holding hands up there together, I mean if you can imagine that.  I mean it's, it's, it's hard to, to--for people to imagine, but Whitney Young of the [National] Urban League, [HM Louis] Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam, [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.], the country preacher, and Amiri Baraka all on the same (laughter) platform at the same time.  It was that kind of--so I mean, if you were doing anything in the black community at that time, you were aware of that meeting.  And if you didn't attend, you had, you knew somebody who had a--your organization or somebody you knew was there and relayed it to him.  Shortly after that, Whitney died in I think it was either Nigeria or Ghana.
Speaker 1: It was out--I think it was off the coast of Liberia he drowned.
Speaker 2: Liberia, yeah, drowned, yeah, somewhere in West Africa.  And the, and the Nation [of Islam] went through their changes.  You know, 'of course [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] went on to be Jesse, you know, that whole thing.  But I mean there was, that was a period, and there was an attempt--we've gotta remember, at the same time, you had [HM] Mayor [Richard] Hatcher [Gary, Indiana], he was there, and some of the other politicians who were trying to forge political alliances.  And out of that came two, two entities: the Congress of African People and the National Black Political Assembly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You know, and, and CAP [Congress of African People] represented the activist focus.  And the [National Black] Political Assembly represented the electoral politics.
Speaker 1: Now, Congress of African People was, had a cultural thrust.
Speaker 2: No, it started off as, first it started off as a united front organization of all those various forces.  The ideological struggle went on, and eventually it became a Kawaida organization led by Amiri Baraka.
Speaker 1: Now in the early days of this development, I mean, was there any hands-on involvement by Dr. [HM] Maulana Karenga?  I mean he wasn't a doctor then, but-
Speaker 2: In, in CAPS [Congress of African People]?
Speaker 1: --'cause I know--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but at the same time, on unbeknownst to us, two things were happening: one, the [Black] Panther a split, just escalated to open warfare.  And then there as a split between [Amiri] Baraka and [HM Maulana] Karenga, which was not as well known, at least I didn't know it at the time.  I'd found out about it shortly afterwards, but at that time, I didn't know that, that had gone on.  So, [HM Maulana] Karenga's influence was peripheral and through his teachings of the doctrine of Kawaida, but not personal nor organizational.
Speaker 1: And he was incarcerated around the same time-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which made it impossible for him to have physical con--I mean even be in the same room with people-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--involved in-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the Congress of African People.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But Amiri Baraka becomes the, the leader of-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of some African pe--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --people (unclear).  And Congress of African People I suppose is, is active with, under his leadership till 1974-
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] it became a Marxist [Maoist] organization.  They announced it in August or September of '74 [1974], right after we came back from Six Pack.  There was a national conference, black women's conference, and that's when they publicly announced it.  But, but you know, they'd already been making those moves.
Story_ID: 75552
Speaker 1: Now the organization here in New Orleans [Louisiana] that, that's--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Ahidiana, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Ahidiana works--(unclear)-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and formed the independent school-
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a school; we had a printing press; we had a bookstore; you know, we did community organizing, mainly around police brutality and communications issues, public access to communications, and on education issues.
Speaker 1: And similar to--some of the activities going on in the East in Brooklyn [New York]-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --and Newark [New Jersey] and-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Newark and--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --same thing.
Speaker 1: --and IPE [Third World Press] in Chicago [Illinois] and--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I think they're some other organizations around.  I know they, they--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Oh, there's St. Louis [Missouri]. Okay. There was a major group in St. Louis.  I'm trying to remember, 'cause we would drive up.  And in Houston [Texas] there was a major CAPS [Congress of African People] organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were close to them, 'cause we'd go over to Houston [Texas] and, and St. Louis [Missouri].  I don't know--I don't remember there being anything strong in Atlanta [Georgia], not that I recall.  I mean I'm not saying I'm not-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--I don't think you're right.  Now I can't think--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Maybe [Washington] D.C. (unclear)--and-
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was D.C.-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], like that.  But, yeah.
Story_ID: 75553
Speaker 1: That is a part of African American history that people know very little about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But can you, can you talk about that peri--period of time and what you were really trying to do you think with Congress of African People?
Speaker 2: Self-determination, self determines the nation.  We were trying to build a, an infrastructure, schools, political organizations, and cultural organizations to advance our views on what should be done.  It's happening at the same time.  Though, at the same, you've gotta remember at the same time you got the Republic of New Africa going on.  And that's a, that's a major, major thrust.  The National Black Political Assembly is another major thrust.  So we had a independent school movement that became, eventually formed into Council of Independent of Black Institutions, CIBI.  And culturally, I would say there was no one movement, but it was a lot of us aligned around that Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois] axis, Broadside Press, Black World, Third World Press/IPE, you know.  That was, I think that was the major axis, particularly after '74 [1974], when [Amiri] Baraka went Marxist and began liquidating a lot of the, what we would call, what he would call, cultural nationalist elements of what they were doing on the East Coast.  And the West Coast was already, I mean that was just open warfare, and it was just, just got--it, it became insane.  And see, again, my international struggles and study had prepared me to understand this.  I was prepared to understand that, for instance, the struggles between ZANU [Zimbabwe African National Union] and ZAPU [Zimbabwe African People's Union] in Zimbabwe, between PAC [Pan African Congress] and ANC [African National Congress] in South African, where they were actually killing each other.  So I understood how these struggles got played out.  The classic struggle in, in Angola, with UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] falimo--UNITA, MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola], and Holden Roberto, what was--FLN--F--FL--
Speaker 1: NA?
Speaker 2: [FNLA National Liberation Front of Angola] Yeah, something like that, you know.  It was--I mean that was, that was a doctorate education, and what happens?  And these aspects of this struggle, this, this, this (unclear) warfare that has happened everywhere in the world that you've had major arms struggle.  You've found different camps actually fighting and killing each other, prepared--it didn't make it any less painful, but it prepared me to understand it and put it in a global context, so that I didn't think it was just, you know, black on black crime, as some people like to simpli--oversimplify these things without understanding the dynamics of what's going on and without understand that, you know, the, the role of agent provocateurs. and all of this, as well as just what happens when you have ideological struggle within a military com--context.  And, and it's winner take all, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did you, did you have any personal experience with, with people that you now know were agent provocateurs?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, of course I did (laughter).
Speaker 1: The FBI had a COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program] --
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --going--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois] we had something call the Red Squad out of the Chicago Police Department--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Hey man, you know, this, this is a whole--that's a whole area for discussion at another time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but, yes, of course we did.  There were some major struggles that went on here, particularly around demonstrations against the [Ku Klux] Klan and what have you.  I'll just leave it at that there, 'cause it's really, it doesn't--it's too soon to, to tell all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 75554
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you, knowing something about [Kalamu] ya Salaam I just wanted get your take on what were the--what did you--'cause I know you and your entire family was involved in, in probably one of the biggest I guess attempts at cultural change ever in the, in African American his--history.  And I mean how did you--can you describe that, I mean the, the changing of your name.  People change their diet, they change their dress, they change, they try to change how they fundamentally related on--and what was-
Speaker 2: It was what everybody else does.  We just different differently (laughter).  So everybody, everybody wants the same thing, don't they?  Everybody--remember Black Uhuru sang that song.  "Everybody wants to raise their family; everybody, you know, wants to enjoy the game on Sunday."  How did--I'm trying to think of the lyrics.  But anyway, I don't, you know--man, it, it's not--I don't romanticize it, and I don't--and I'm not nostalgic; I'm not trying to go back to it.  It was--every generation young people dream of making the world the way they'd like it to be, you know, and that was our dream--(unclear)--the, the hip-hopper's dream now, you know.  I mean it's just, it's the same thing.  It's the difference was we lived during a time period of very real international struggle, and that's, well, that, that's, that makes a major difference, because now you see comparisons and contrasts across borders, across racial borders, across national borders and what have you.  And so you find yourself, here I am, you know.  I'm in China, you know, talking to the Chinese people about these, some of these same issues.  And so I can't talk to them like, you know, this is about black power, 'cause (laughter) that's not what it's about for them (laughter).  But su--I see what they're doing, and I--and it resonates with me, because what they're doing, the same I'm trying to do, you know, back home, to control lives, to, to create a progressive (unclear), to try and do education that takes into consideration, how do we educate the masses of the people?  And that means everybody, rather than just the ones who "are natively smart," you know.
Story_ID: 75555
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the culture of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I mean you, you--
Speaker 1: --just--
Speaker 2: --you were asking me a question.  I could emphasize the details, but I don't think the details are as important as the fact that this reflects something that everybody goes through.  In their youth, they'd like to see the world be different and, and better, and they try and work for it.  I came up during a period.  My young adulthood was during a period of intense international turmoil, when people were struggling around the world for independence and the right to self-determination.  So of course, that res--that was in the air.  You understand what I'm saying?  That was, everywhere we looked, that's, that's what was happening.  And so it made our efforts seem part and, and be support and that our efforts were, were, were in, in concert with the atmosphere internationally.  Whether we understood what was going on internationally or not, that was happening all over.  You understand what I'm saying?  And on the continent people were trying to figure out how to make these new nations work, and culture played a big part in that and so forth and so on.  I remember, you know, in, in '74' [1974] when I was in Tanzania, about, must been about twelve, thirteen of us had an audience with [President Julius] Nyerere and that was, that interview was published in (unclear), 'cause I got to ask a couple of questions.  You know I got a big mouth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--is Julius Nyerere, who--
Speaker 2: President of Tanzania.  I got to ask a, a number of questions, so that was published in the, in the Black Collegian.  But one of the things he said that always stuck with me--somebody asked him--it wasn't me--asked him a question about praising Tanzania for doing this, that, and the other, and so forth and on.  Then he thanked such and such.  And he interrupted him when he said, you know, he said all governments are conservative.  And a person said well, surely not the Tanzanian government, 'cause you done blah, blah, blah.  He said "all governments are conservative."  Everybody who's in power is gonna do what they, they can to stay in power, in terms of groups of people.  He said individuals might, you know, do different things.  But in terms of groups of people, all governments are conservative.
Speaker 1: Well, I hope I'm not over, overdoing it, you know, over--raking over this, but I think, I do think there were some things that have been done during that period of time, regardless of (unclear)--the reason why that happened.  They, they have happened a little bit different from the attempts to change the world of other generations are on a level.  And I think--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was because we were, we were in a period of momentous change.  And what you were having a change from direct imperialism to what we have now, the global capitalism.  So you had the eu--European colonists were actually living in and administrating Angola, you know, Ghana and all of the African countries.  And that was a period beginning in the, in the mid '50s [1950s] and culminating really in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s], when that was overthrown, because some of the Europeans would not leave without a physical struggle.  You understand what I'm saying?  So this, this, this is a period of momentous change that is, yeah, it's, inevitable.  Every, every year somebody's trying to do something to make the situation better.  But there are certain conditions that are pivotal.  They come along at, at seams in history, if you will.  When I say a seam in history, I mean when, when the dominant social order changes from one thing to another.  And that point of change is a seam because it, it, it connects both the old and the new.  And sometimes the new social order will stay in for 100 years, sometimes it'll stay in for two or three hundred years, but we, but we pass through one of the major transitions in the, in, in, in history as we know it during that period.  And that doesn't happen all the time.  As they Chinese say, may you be--
Speaker 1: Right, right, I--
Speaker 2: --born in interesting times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--I, I got your point.  I wouldn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --necessarily romanticize--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the individuals involved.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I would say that once the opportunity presented itself, as, as history pushes to the, to the edge--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of this change.  I mean people did make some changes and were able to because of circumstances.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This played a change that hadn't been thought about--
Speaker 2: Before, right (Simultnaeous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I'll give you, I'll give you--
Speaker 1: --men and women--
Speaker 2: Right, I'll give you anoth--I'll give you--
Speaker 1: --children --
Speaker 2: I'll give you another example today--
Speaker 1: --ideas--
Speaker 2: --that people don't realize.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 75556
Speaker 1: Right now, today, one of the major cultural movements going on in the world is the attempt of Christians, Christian missionaries to Christianize the world.  It's going on all over the place.  And they're out in a, in a, in, in ways--it happens in ways that we see every day, but we don't know what it is we're looking at.  So right now, as we speak, the Mormons [Church of Jesus Christ and Latter Day Saints] are actively recruiting black folk, in, in the cities--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--you know, so forth and so on.  In that moment--
Speaker 2: And they (simultaneous)--bicycles into the south side of Chicago [Illinois]-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You understand what I'm saying?  And I'm--
Speaker 2: You know, old ladies and stuff--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --today.
Speaker 1: But I'm saying that's not the only thing.  Now we--that's on a domestic level.  But if you look across the world right now, in the Third World, the missionary movement, you can hardly find a third, "a Third World country" where there's not a strong missionary movement going on.  That was one of the excuses in Afghanistan.  You understand what I'm saying?  And these, these, this is a cultural--this is a moment of cultural activity.  And the people who are participating in that movement, will have the same sort of feeling of there was no time like this, that we have about that period of struggle we went through, because that is a period.  And, and I'm saying people, it seems to me not enough people are able to step back and take a broader view of what is going on and in sense of--and by taking a broader view, be able to put it in a context of human history and how human societies work in the movements and so forth, and where are the seams in history?  You know, where are all those points when there's a transition from one to another?  And who decides to par--who decides to, to be, if you will, the thread that connects one historical era to another?  Who decides that they're gonna jump into almost an abyss.  They don't know tomorrow will bring, they're gonna go and do this thing, whatever it is, you know.  And so, if somebody wanted to do a real hip study now, study all of these, these missionaries who're working all over the United States.  Remember in Peru?  We hear about it all the time, but we don't really connect in our minds what's going on.  Remember in Peru, when that, that plane was shot down with those missionaries in it?  What were those missionaries doing down there flying in the zone that's full of the drug trade?  Peru, where they have "American citizens in jail" for participating in guerrilla movements, what were they doing down there?  Have we ever thought about that, that these were churches that, that church groups set--and we think of the church groups as, as very conservative things.  And these churches are actually in the forefront of international struggle right now, but most people don't even see it.
Story_ID: 75557
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I'm just saying--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--do you think there's any, any lasting value to anything that was done in those days?  I mean or what would you consider the things that were, that, that, that have lasted that, that came out of those, those days of the '70s [1970s] primarily I guess?
Speaker 2: Of lasting value, it's too soon to evaluate what's of lasting value.  Some of us are still alive, so we, we're struggling in our struggling, you know, looking forward of being nostalgic, or a combination there.  But I don't know.  You know, I mean I, I don't try and make that kind of analysis 'cause I'm too close and it's too soon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean it really is too soon.  I mean you never know--to, to use a cliche, in 1493, nobody could have said Columbus (laughter) trip was gon' change the, the history of the world.  This is just some crackpot who went out there and he came back with some Indians and not much gold.  You understand what I'm saying?  Fourteen ninety-three, yeah, you know, Queen Isabella and them say they back and so forth and so on.  But nobody at that time period would have this is a fundamental change in the world as we know it.  You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You couldn't--how could you know?
Story_ID: 75558
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about this.  Now you've actually written about the, written about the Black Arts Movement--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the impact to Black Arts Movement had.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, would--do you think that the--well, I suppose you think the Black Arts Movement had an impact, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what, what do you--what's your na--
Speaker 2: But I'm saying--
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: I think the best thing I, I wrote about it, all of it.  In the larger sense is in my book 'What is Life? [Reclaiming the Black Blues Self']  And I said we struggled for revolution, and what we got was reform.  I mean that's the reality.  That's what we got.
Speaker 1: Is that what most people get when they start a revolu--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, but I'm saying what we got (laughter).  I'm talking about here in the United States, what we got.  I'm not making assessments--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of what happened in, in Ghana, what happened in Angola.  That's for those folk to, to assess their history, and they're still in the process of sorting that out.  But we have sorted our stuff out in a, in a certain sense, you know.  And what we got is reform; that's what we got.  You know, most of our kids go to--where they, where do they go to school?
Speaker 1: Black schools.  They end up in the black schools.  I mean the--those of us that are involved in this--
Speaker 2: Where do most of our kids--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's general--yeah, in public school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then when they college, the majority of them do not go to the traditionally small black--
Speaker 1: That's right, you go to public col--college.  It's basically state schools.
Speaker 2: And private schools, and they're doing well within the context of the system, how, you know, our children are this, they are that, they're officers in this, they're officials of that and so forth, and engineers, they're lawyers, the doctors and so forth and so on.  We still ain't got no nation.  We still, you know, we're still not self-determined.  And he pe--our people have made a decision that, you know--that's why when [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] made the push to change from calling ourselves black to African-American, that is a key development, because it reflected the decision to have an identity to hook up and be part of the, "the American dream," rather than to pursue something different.  That's what that was all about.  And that's why right now, the push, however subtle or blatant it may be, depending on who you are, is to identify ourselves simply as American.  That's what the hip-hoppers do.  That's why they talk about it's not a racial thing.  They dropping the African part of it.  That's all it is.  I mean it's clear, I mean to me it is; it's clear, you know.  That's what I see.  You know, I'm not, and as you can tell, I'm not, I'm nostalgia.  I don't get all teary-eyed talking about how wonderful the '70s [1970s] were and all like that, so from--yeah, I mean that was my youth.  Yeah, I was involved in struggle; yeah, it was a unique time period; and yeah, I could talk about all that, but the reality is I'm living now.  I'm not living then, you know.  If I could sit in a room and look at old pictures, fine, if that's what I wanna do.  But that's not what I wanna do.  And we've got thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions of young people in this society today who are facing things we never even thought about, even when we became adults, we never had to face on a daily basis.  And where is the leadership to help these young people prepare, you know, for tomorrow?  Are we gonna leave it up to preachers and lawyers?  And if we do, we know what we're gon' get.
Story_ID: 75559
Speaker 1: So do you see any leadership on the horizon that does address a sort of fundamental need--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in their pockets--
Speaker 1: We have this prison population growing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, their pockets--
Speaker 1: --the black youth are actually in jail in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --college.
Speaker 2: Well, black men, not--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: --not--and you're only talking about an of college age.  You're only talking--basically, you're talking about 18 to 25, in that particular time, that particular zone.  There are people, just don't--we don't any, any, any national and inter--international movements yet.  I don't know what's, what's coming around the bend.  Something'll happen, I mean, that'll galvanize us and, and get us to see our struggle in a larger context than just me and mine, you know.  But what it's gonna be, I don't know.  So meanwhile, we, we do what we can, you know.
Story_ID: 75560
Speaker 1: Do you--just reflect back a minute on this.  What do you see as--did you see--do you have an analysis or is it too soon to analyze like why some of the ideas of that, that period of time, in the early '70s [1970s] I guess, in the mid '70s [1970s], like didn't, didn't seem to stick, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, they did stick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did stick, but they were erased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were, they were consciously erased.  People were killed.  Aspects of history remain unwritten about, you know, like they will never find the body of [President] Patrice Lumumba, 'cause the body was destroyed.  And that's what happened to a large degree to a certain aspect of that struggle, that it was so dangerous, that efforts were made to destroy it, to wipe it out so that you would not even find the bones; you would not even find the remains.  If you went back now, went to the [Republic of the] Congo, and tried to find the remains of, of Patrice Lumumba to do DNA testing or forensic stuff like that, you couldn't, you can't even find that.  People, many people have no idea how deep and thorough was the effort to wipe out this movement.  So, I mean that, that is, that is, that's part of what, what, what happened.  And the, and the, the, the--it's not even amnesia for most people.  They never even knew what went on.  You understand what I'm saying?  They never--most Americans never knew what went on and what is going on and being perpetrated by the U.S. government.  They have--they don't have a clue; they don't know.  You think most Americans have never been outside the United States to the third world.  They may have gone to Europe, but not to the third world.  They've never seen, seen it.  They've never been in Haiti to see that poverty, you know.  And once you see it, it's a whole, I mean you have a whole different relationship, you know.  And all of these things are kept away from us.  And again, that's why, you know, I, I'm, I'm not ashamed to say I have a lot of respect for Jimmy [President James] Carter, former president, Jimmy Carter, because he could have just retired and did, didn't do jack squat, sit, sit there, drink corn liquor, and, and roasted, neat roasted peanuts the rest of his life.  But he has been on the front line whether, wheth--regardless of what you may think about his personal politics, he has put himself, inserted himself, into the struggle, to make change around the world.  And people around the world respect him for the work that he has done.  I mean they--in some place there never would have been any kind of, even any semblance of, of, of Democratic election if he had not, and, and people like him, had not been involved in the, in these campaigns to monitor elections and so forth and so on.  And Haiti was one of the places he was, you know, [President] Jimmy Carter was acting.  Now I don't--are you asking me if I agree with Carter's politics?  Probably not.  You know if you--if we just sat down and talked about him in detail, mine would be different from his.  But do I appreciate the fact that this man has made a commitment to, to bringing a world about and being aware of him, his participation in the international area, yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I think you'd probably be surprise at a lot of--I think that more people than you think probably have a similar analysis (unclear) black people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one, once it, once you lay out the information, yeah, I mean 'cause it's, it's commonsense.  I'm just saying most people don't have the information.  Most people don't know what [President James] Carter's--and the reason they don't know is because of the global conglomeration; it's called global capitalism.  So we have, we have two forces happening at the same time with communications technology.  One is the democratization of the technology, making it possible for anybody to make movies, anybody to print newspaper, anybody to do a, a list serve, anybody to do a website.  And on the other side we have this, this, this, this concentration of wealth, technology, and infrastructure so that now, you know, a company like Viacom is, is just, there is just so much stuff it owns and controls in terms of communications.
Story_ID: 75561
Speaker 1: And so you have the democratization of technology, and the individuals on the ground that can do certain things.  But on the other hand, you've got these large global corporations that control almost everything.  And the way I, I bring it to people so they can understand, I say man, do you realize the Japanese own Louis Armstrong recorded legacies, Miles Davis recorded legacy?  Do you realize the Japanese own it?  Do you realize that of all the record companies, the, the, the five--six major record companies, only one is a U.S. owned companied, and it ain't got much stroke.  You understand what I'm saying?  So you realize that telecommunications industry and what's happening with this, with this struggle around what's going on with, with cable and, and, and, and this next wave of [clearing throat], of Broadband Cable that's gonna come through.  I mean people think that they got a lot of channels to watch now, we ain't seen nothing yet.  You know, what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Now, now what, what's the up-shadow on it?
Speaker 1: I don't know, 'cause it's--there, there's still contending forces out there.  I mean we--I, I don't know.  I probably won't be around to see it.  I mean, hey, I saw firsthand and experienced Jim Crow segregation.  I was, as an adolescent, active in the Civil Rights Movement.  As a young adult, I'm in, involved in the black liberation struggle and international struggles for revolution, independence, self-determination.  I've seen more than my son will prob--more changes than my son will have probably see, you know, certainly more changes than my father saw.  You know, I just came along at a--at, at, at--I just happened to be born at that time.  That's why one of the reasons why I believe chaos theory, you know, black people in general.  And they say shit happens, I mean that's, that's basically what it is, you know (laughter).  So I don't know what the future's gon' be, and I probably won't see it.  So in, in that sense, I can't guess, but what I can try and do is prepare people to open their mind and be receptive to whatever possibilities are out there, and to take advantage of the time you live and the life that you're given, to, to do what you think is the best way to make this world better and more beautiful so that after you've been through here, people can say yeah, it was a better world because so and so was here.  It's more beautiful.  That, that, that stuff we've been, you know--
Story_ID: 75562
Speaker 1: Speaking of beautifying the world, let's talk about your art some.  You are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We always--we've, we've been doing--that's all we been doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I mean that's just the basis from our--
Speaker 1: You can't separate art from life, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, and then (unclear)--you, you, you did have a career as poet, as a critic, and, and people read what you write.  And you--tell me about your writing career.
Speaker 2: Langston Hughes is the first major influence.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Langston Hughes?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Never got a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: Second major influence was James Baldwin, whom I met a couple of times; and in fact, Baldwin did a film.  One of the film documentaries he did, we shot some sequences of he and I walking through [Louis] Armstrong Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] talking.  They didn't use those sequences in the, in the final edit, but he credits me in the, you know, in the credits and so forth and so on.  And the third influence was Amiri Baraka, whom of course I'm--I know and worked with and, and continue to work with on, on a number of issues.  After that, there are no other literary, direct literary influences except those three.  And I would say that was like the first ten or fifteen years.  After that, James Baldwin fell off, then Baraka fell off as a literary influence.  Langston Hughes has remained a major influence, that's why I work in all genres.  There's no genre that I don't work in.  I've done a little bit of everything, actually have been more successful than most in terms of playwriting and theater working and so forth and so on.  But as far as I'm concerned, all of my writing is filtered through my activity as a, as a human being who's, who decided to be an activist in the transition between segregation and raw imperialism to global capitalism, what we're--the period we're in now.  But see, this is gonna change also, not necessarily because of political or military struggles, but because it's--the environment is gonna play a big role in what, what comes next.  It's gon' play a major role in what comes next, a major role.  And people who, I think, who become active and understand that--and I don't mean environmentalism like we've traditionally known it here.  I mean there're some, there're some, there're some doozies coming, some real questions about--we could get into talking about urban societies, what they mean and so forth and so on.  I go back to Ibn Khaldun from North Africa who said that societies are like people.  They are born, they grow, develop, mature, and die.  And if there is no way--if you don't have it in your, your life cycle a rebirth, and a rebirth can only happen after a death, that is, there's no way to fundamentally change your, your society.  Move away or you know, make some, some changes.  If that's not, if that doesn't happen, you just gon' die and that's gon' be it.  There will be no rebirth, and I think the same thing with America.  See, people thing that America's gonna be around forever, but you know, it's only a couple of hundred years, 1776, the foremost started its thing, you understand?  And we're not even three hundred years later.  You understand what I'm saying?  So now in terms of the--and to think that humankind has--had societies for over 10,000 years.  I ain't nothing but a drop in the bucket, you know.  And, and, and this whole question of urbanization, there have been urban societies before.  But all urban societies have problems, major--when you, when you get these conglomerations, millions and millions of people in on spot, like, like I always say the way I describe it is, one of the things that rev--all revolutions have to do--have to determine, is how do you deal with shit, both literally and figuratively, when you've got all of these people--
Speaker 1: Waste management.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Waste management, waste management becomes a major, a major issue.  And I, I tend to think that--I live in a metropolitan area, and I'm not in no hurry to move outside of it.  But I tend to think that that's gonna be one of the major struggles that United States is gonna have to deal with.  And how they did with it, I don't know.  For instance, we're seeing across the country a breakdown of public education.  That cannot continue.  The public schools cannot continue for another ten years the way they are now.
Story_ID: 75563
Speaker 1: Quickly, could you just maybe in a, a minute summarize maybe some of your hopes and concerns for the black community.  I know you already have done a lot of--(unclear)--but I just--you probably can't, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: First of all, my first concern is for the (unclear) and for the well-being of all of those of us who live on the earth.  I have not for a long time been overly concerned about race.  It doesn't, it doesn't--it's a waste of time.  It's really a waste of time.  I am concerned about people, such as "my people," who have been defined and developed in a crucible that was racist.  But race per se, I, I much rather hook up with progressive people of whatever racial background and see what we can do to make some change, than to get caught up in trying to maintain that which cannot be maintained anyway.  The history of what we call black people in America as such, our very existence is of what would be called we are a multiracial people by our very existence.  Our cultural, we have a, a certain culture that we live out, and I'm proud of that culture, you know.  And I'm, I'mma be an advocate of black culture, but I'm not gonna be an advocate of, of, of racialism.  That's not gonna happen--
