Story_ID: 304123
Speaker 1: So we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Tuesday, December 7, 2004, and this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C.  Now if you would please for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Alfred Bennett Spellman [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman].  A-L-F-R-E-D, B-E-N-N-E-T-T, S-P-E-L-L-M-A-N.  And there's actually a junior at the end of it.  The two Ls are important because people confuse me with the Spelmans of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] who were the Rockefeller-Spelmans and no relation to me as far as I know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Well now, that's an interesting story in itself.  Are we ready for stories?
Speaker 1: Not quite, but I--but I'm gonna get that story.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, but we're gonna get that story.
Speaker 2: It's August 7th or 12th, 1935.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I--now I definitely have to get that story.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: Elizabeth City, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All righty.  Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am--let's see, I'm the deputy chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA].
Story_ID: 304124
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine type questions, so if you could give me short answers to these, that would be great.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Cake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: I'm boggled on that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, if one comes to you that you say a lot--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --just let me know.
Story_ID: 304125
Speaker 1: So why don't we begin with the story of the date of your birth.  This, this is a first for me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is it now? Well, it's not all that rare, actually.  The thing is that I was born actually outside of Elizabeth City [North Carolina] in a little place called Nixonton, North Carolina, which was barely a town at all, and I was delivered by a midwife who happened to go nuts the next day, you know, the cattle lowing, the wise men coming from the east, the stars rising from the east, so it was more than she could handle.  And so it took a couple days for my papers to get filed at the courthouse so that even though I had already celebrated August 7th as my birthday, when I had to apply for my passport and sent for my birth certificate, it came back saying August 12th.  So it winds up that wind up using August 12th on all my official documents, but August 7th is actually the date I was born.
Speaker 1: And you celebrate on August 7th.
Speaker 2: I celebrate on August 7th.
Story_ID: 304126
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother starting with your mother's name and where she was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Rosa Bailey, Rosa Belle Bailey, actually.  In those days, you had such middle names as Belle and Mae and so forth.  And she was born in Elizabeth City, North Carolina, as was my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.].  She grew up in Elizabeth City.  For a brief moment, she lived in New York--pardon me, in--yes, it was in, in Long Island [New York].  This was because her father who was--her, her biological father was a prominent white man in the county [Pasquotank County, North Carolina] and there was a lot of stress, of course, when her--when her mother's husband saw her being born.  And so there was some problem in the family and she wound up being sent to live with relatives of her mother in New York State, in Long Island.  Ultimately, she was called back to North Carolina, but that--she, she was in, in North--in, in New York State for a while.  She would have preferred to have stayed up there.  She was, you know, being sent to better schools and better working conditions.  It was a much more interesting environment than Elizabeth City, which, though a nice, sweet little town--not so little, it was about plus or minus fifteen thousand at any given time, but it still was rather stultifying for a bright kid.
Speaker 1: And did she ever tell you stories about what it was like growing up in New York and just what life was like at that particular time?
Speaker 2: She was barely in school when she left and she was only there for a couple of years, but she found it to be a much freer and supportive environment than she got here.  There was much--as I say, much more stimulation for her.  But--I don't think that her recollection of it was that specific for, for that long a time.
Story_ID: 304127
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman]?
Speaker 2: My mother was--you mean physically or, or as personally?
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: Physically, she was a very attractive woman.  She was very fair complexion, had straight hair, which in our time, at that time was thought to be a, a sure mark of beauty.  There was a lot of often heard boastful sayings that no straightening comb had ever seen her hair, and so there that was.  But she was regarded as being quite an attractive woman by older men in Elizabeth City [North Carolina] to my embarrassment sometimes.  And she, as a person, was certainly the brains of the family.  She was extremely smart, read a great deal, and inculcated a love for reading in me, and exposed me always to books, loved a good argument, and, and tried very hard to work my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] to advance the family so that I grew up in a household where it was taken for granted that women would work or at least the, the woman I knew worked all the time, and also where she was the brains of the family, the, the intellectual force of the family, the person who was most called upon by her peers in town--in, in town for some solution regarding say a document that had to be written or a case that had to be made.  It was--it was she that people came to very often.  So that--so I, I didn't grow up with--grow up with an attitude.  Also, as, as I never had sisters, it was never a factor to me that housework was not something that I--that I as a male would do.  My parents both are working, me and my brother [Roland Spellman] at home, the chores, all of them had to be done by us.  So I never did come up with that attitude that no, I am the man who stands above.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 2: She became in, in, in her sort of elder younger years, as I guess about her thirty, about thirty she became a school teacher.  She had gone to Elizabeth City State College [Elizabeth City State Teachers College], which in her youth was called Elizabeth City State Normal [Elizabeth City State Normal School; Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], which is to say a two-year school, and, and then it became a four-year college.  But around that time, she had to quit because she had me.  And my father persisted and went on through and got his bachelor's degree in education.  My mother later went back to school some time during my high school years [at P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and finished her degree and became a school teacher.
Story_ID: 304128
Speaker 1: Just in terms of some of the controversy surrounding her [Spellman's mother, Rosa Bailey Spellman] birth, was that something that, you know, she talked about openly and shared with you?
Speaker 2: Not so much about the birth, but there was a problem with her growing up with other kids because of the color issues within the community.  So she was said--she was a good fighter, she was--said as a kid because she was always being called a white girl or, you know, being picked on by darker kids who resented the sort of--I, I guess it's understandable, the resentment, because light-skinned people in the South, especially during that time, definitely took an attitude about superiority.  I don't know that my mother really did because my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] was very dark, so I don't think she had that in her, but at least, the status of the community, of course, put those who were lighter above those who were darker.  And so she had to put up with that a great deal.  It passed, of course, but by, by the time that I knew about the world, there was no resonance, no residual influence of that kind of concern in our lives.
Speaker 1: And was she ever accepted by your stepfather--by her stepfather?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I didn't know him.  He died before I would've, would've gotten to know and understand him.  I have only the vaguest recollection of him.  I suppose so.  She, she didn't complain about it after her initial stay in, in upstate New York.  I, I think they worked--the family worked it out.  But she, like my father, had to see to getting her own education.  They both grew up in largely illiterate households.  My, my father's father [Charlie Spellman] actually thought that it was inappropriate to get much of an education, so he had to fight his father to, to, to teach--to get himself taught.
Speaker 1: Because he felt like you should be working and taking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go to work and bring some money home at the lumber mill, which is what he did, and you should not put yourself above him by getting, you know, the social benefits that he didn't have.
Story_ID: 304129
Speaker 1: My mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] just basically was not in a family that could afford much support.  Most of her sisters went off to do farming, very, very small farms, and they were very poor farms, and in those days if you had--if you had gotten something resembling the, you know, the so-called--the mythical forty acres and a mule, you were doing pretty well, but most of the farms were really quite small, around twenty acres or so.  But they--but they, they--all of her siblings did manage to put together enough acreage to be able to, you know, make a reasonable living eventually farming, but where she was coming up, this was all a very, very dear struggle.  Certainly, the [Great] Depression made all that harder.  So she and my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] went through very, very hard times getting through high school, having to negotiate with the school for time off, being able to come part days, part weeks, and so forth until they were able to sort of struggle their way through.  It was--it's, it's--I think this is not well enough known among younger African Americans today, I mean, how much of a struggle it was for their ancestors to actually get access to books and learning and how, how desperately they wanted it, and how much they had to put up to get it.  So, yeah, it's a--it's a matter of great pride for me and for them--was, you know, being able to get educated.
Speaker 2: And did your mother--was she the oldest of the siblings in her family?
Speaker 1: No, she was the baby.
Speaker 2: She was the youngest.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And did she--did, did she ever talk about just, like some of the things that she and her siblings did once she came back to North Carolina, how they spent their time, that kind of thing?  Did she grow up on a farm?
Speaker 1: She--the summertime was, was spent on the farm, but basically she lived in town [Elizabeth City, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I, I think that her--her mother was in town and, and her sisters were on farms.  So what did they do with themselves?  I hear--I heard stories about things she and my father did together, you know, when they were going to school and courting and all that, but I don't recall much, much talk about how they--how she and her sisters had, had their social life as young people.
Story_ID: 304130
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your father starting with his name and where he grew up and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Alfred Bennett Spellman, Sr.  My father was--you should know that I'm called A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman] because I'm a junior, and because when my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] called, she wanted to make sure that the right person came, so when she called Alfred, my father was supposed to come.  When she called A. B., I was to come, and only, "Coming mother" was allowed as a response.  No, "What" (laughter) or "What do you want" or "Wait a minute," none of that.  "Coming mother" was what I was supposed to say and say it.  Okay, so my father, Alfred Spellman, Sr., Alfred Bennett Spellman, he--his father [Charlie Spellman] was--his father worked in a lumber mill and, in fact, lost his leg in a lumber mill accident.  And he had--my father worked in a lumber mill as well for--I mean, but he was still healthy at this time, for most of my father's early years.
Speaker 1: Like how old was he, do you know, when he started working in the lumber mill?
Speaker 2: I know that by--at--that probably he must've started at hauling things around probably around age of eight or nine, something like that?
Speaker 1: And was lumber like, like the big industry in Elizabeth City [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, it was a truck farming area, but lumber was reasonably strong as an industry.  There was--there was a lot of pine around the city.  And most towns in the South at that time would've had lumber mills because they would've produced their own lumber.  So that was a job my grandfather wanted my father to take, and he did a great deal of work in the lumber mills.  But as it got to the point that my grandfather thought that my father should stop going to school, then my father was constantly in conflict with him about, about persisting in school.  He, rightly as my mother, saw education as the way up and they were strivers.  Now, striving in Elizabeth City meant you could teach school or you could--perhaps you were extremely fortunate, go away and get a medical or dental degree, but there was only room for a couple of those or you could operate some small business like a dry cleaners.  There was an African American who owned a taxi service.  But there were not a lot of opportunities and my father saw teaching school as being his sort of way up in the class structure of the area.  And so school teachers were sort of an elite in those days, and, and the profession carried with it a lot of sort of social inhibition.  I mean, there were things that school teachers could not be seen to do and behaviors that were expected of 'em.
Story_ID: 304131
Speaker 1: But back to his [Spellman's father, Alfred Spellman, Sr.] youth, I've heard my father tell me many times that he wore a skirt until he was five, which is what--which is what little boys did then.  It made it--made changing easier.  You ask people in my, my generation and--or people who are older, of, of the generation before who are still around and, and a lot of them will tell you that, that the boys wore skirts until they were five or six, and that they were not girl skirts, they were boy skirts, more like kilts, I suppose.  And I've heard him tell--talk about how, how social affairs were carefully circumscribed.  You could not dance in front of a girl and all the dances were things sort of--I, I imagine all the line dances that you see in the old westerns, you know, where you sort of, real sort of skipping around the room side by side because you--it, it was just too risque to actually dance in front of, of, of a girl or hold her by the waist or anything like that.  He talks about the sexual titillation of seeing an ankle and what a big deal that was, and if you ever saw a knee, my God, you know, that was really hot stuff.
Speaker 2: She was scandalous (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely (laughter). Absolutely.  So he had--he, he, he--but--and he and my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] as they grew up, they, they started going together very early age.  It must've been at least by high school they were tight.  I, I, I think that they, they got married just shortly after high school.  But he, he, he would talk about how they would put on musical performances for people to throw pennies at, the dancing and songs and skits and all that, and people toss money and they would collect that, and it would be some, some change.  As I say, this is during the [Great] Depression and it didn't take much money to make your day at that time.  Jobs--when they started teaching school, when my father started teaching school, I recall he, he made very, very little money.  It might've been something--I remember fifty dollars a month as being a, a major milestone for him.  That was considered big money on his part.  And at that time, he was a principal of a three-teacher school.  They taught eight grades with three teachers in one--in one school room.  I remember summers--they, they would always work during the summers as, as, as waiters or bellhops or short order--my father was, was an excellent short order cook.  They would go to the Outer Banks, Nags Head [North Carolina] or to Virginia Beach [Virginia].
Speaker 2: To work for the summer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For the work, for the summer, yes.  And they probably would make nearly as much as they made during the school year during that.  They, they would sometimes work as servants for prominent white people in the area, the superintendent of the schools, for example.  Even as my father was a--was better established in a larger school, he would still sometimes moonlight serving parties for the superintendent.  When--even his days when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], they would spend their summer raising the children of this wealthy white family in Charlottesville, Virginia, by then.
Story_ID: 304132
Speaker 1: --There's a good story in there about how the--how the Spellmans got, got to Virginia.  That's--that--that's a good story, too.
Speaker 2: Tell us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me--okay, so my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] has, has, has--my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] has now--by now gone--I'm what?  I'm in high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina].  My father's--my mother has gone back to--my mother has gone back to college and she is getting her degree from Elizabeth City State Teachers College [Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], at that time, it's now Elizabeth City State University.  So they are very prominent among the school teachers and I'm hearing a lot of conversation in the kitchen from the other teachers coming by talking about their membership in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which had been quite a respectable thing to do up until the early 1950s, and we're talking about--now, we're talking about the late '40s [1940s] now.  Up until that time, it had been quite a respectable thing to do.  But there was this case going around and working its way through the school--through the, rather, the court system, Brown versus Topeka Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And now all of a sudden the NAACP got to be a little dangerous and it was something you did on the quiet, you didn't--you certainly didn't want the super--superintendent of schools to know that you were a member of this, so you send your membership in, but you don't talk about it to white people.  And so as the South had made this case for separate but equal, you know, coming out of Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896], and that was a huge lie to tell with a straight face.  There's no possible way you could talk about the schools I went to as, as a kid and compare them with the schools the white kids had.  Well, you know, that, that, that story is well known and, and my stories on that would not be unusual for anyone, again, who grew up during the segregated South.  But in order to tell the lie better, the southerners started building new schools.  Now all the kids in the area, at least the ones around in, in the countryside in the county, went to these little shacks that my father--like the ones my father was principal of, and they were all raised up on cinder blocks and, you know, with hard dirt ground around them and few books, few materials, all of that, really, really poor, poor situations.  But the county decided at this time since they were claiming to have--to be offering an equal--a separate but equal school system, to consolidate all of these little schools into one big county school, and that county school would then be a showpiece for how they were treating African Americans equally.  Well even so, it was by no means such, but nonetheless, that's what they were doing.  So, okay, they build this thing, it was called Pasquotank County New Consolidated Elementary School for Negroes [ph.], and that's what you got when you called up the school, "Pasquotank County New Consolidated Elementary School for Negroes, can I help you please?" (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And what county is this again?
Speaker 1: Pasquotank County [North Carolina], and it--it's the county around Elizabeth City [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: P-A-S-Q-U-O-T-A-N-K.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's--there's a river, the Pasquotank River that passes through.
Story_ID: 304133
Speaker 1: They build this school [Pasquotank County New Consolidated Elementary School for Negroes (ph.), Pasquotank County, North Carolina] and it was a big deal, and all its teachers are very excited about the school is coming.  They've never seen anything like this around our, our way.  It was going to have--I forget what number--there, there were gonna be like forty-five teachers in the school; they had never seen a school that big.  It was going to have school buses; they had never seen school buses.  It was going to have all of these wonderful facilities and bring all the kids from the counties in.  And, the thing is, they needed a principal for the thing.  Well, everybody assumed that the principal would be my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.].  He is--was an experienced principal and he also was tight with the superintendent since he often served his dinner parties, and so that was the deal and all the teachers were fine with that.  But it turned out that the school board decided they wanted someone with a master's degree, which was a hard currency around Elizabeth City [North Carolina] at that time for African American people.  And the--so the superintendent asked my father who would be an acceptable principal to the other teachers who would have a master's degree, and my father recommended this gentleman whose name I probably shouldn't call, who--
Speaker 2: But why not--
Speaker 1: Well, okay I guess he's dead now, but I don't know.  I--anyways, we called him Fats Jones [ph.].  I don't know what his real name was, but it was--it was called Fats Jones.  Fats was the football coach at the local high school and he had a master's degree in physical education, good enough, and all the teachers liked him.  Fine, Fats it is.  So Fats is made the principal of the school.  Now, right away, Fats and the superintendent got to be very tight, and they started doing all these very corrupt things.  The property had to be sold from all the other little schools around altogether and they had a nice little piece of change.  Fats sold 'em, split the money with the superintendent.  Then, you had to--well, there was the nature of the running of the school itself.  They wanted a showpiece.  This meant not great teaching going on, but a clean school, floors polished at all times, brand new linoleum.  You always had--so teachers were required to scrub and wax their floors twice a week.  All right.
Speaker 2: The floors of their classroom.
Speaker 1: That's right.  There--this, this new thing called the intercom was put in.  No one had ever seen an intercom before, but all of the sudden, Fats could listen in to everybody all around the building, and they got--there's a lot of paranoia about that.  Fats wanted a choir, a glee club that he could show off, so he put--so he hired a, a terrific choral teacher, and they put together a youth choir, which was outstanding.  I mean, it was a brilliant choir.  I mean, I--my, my memory of it, of course, is probably greater than the reality, but I, I remember it as being a set of voices trained exquisitely, the like of which I have not heard better in all my years.  He wanted a band.  Each teacher was required to buy a gown for the choir and a musical instrument and, and, and a uniform for the band out of their paychecks.  They did so.  They also bought Fats and the superintendent--everything Fats got, superintendent got as well.  Television came to Norfolk, Virginia, then; that was a big deal, and they bought TV sets for Fats and for the superintendent, the kitchen appliances, all this good stuff.
Story_ID: 304134
Speaker 1: All this stuff was taken out of their salaries.  Now, you might wonder why they put up with this, but the fact of the matter was in, in the school system at that time in North Carolina, you had a black list, so if you could not get a reference from your principal, you could not teach in the state.  That was clean.  There was no ambiguity about it whatsoever.  And Fats [Fats Jones (ph.)] told everybody, buck me, you get no reference.  And so they went along with it.  And finally, Fats fired this teacher who had been giving him some trouble and blacklisted him, and the teacher went to the papers with documentation and the story, and the scandal ran every week in Elizabeth City [North Carolina], something else happening about--at the school [Pasquotank County New Consolidated Elementary School for Negros (ph.), Pasquotank County, North Carolina], which was big, big deal.  Small town, doesn't take much to make a huge news story; this was it.  So they call all the teachers in and said, "Okay, we're gonna have this hearing.  You'll be testifying one by one, not in a group, and I, Fats, will be sitting next to the superintendent and I am taking names, so if I hear anything I don't wanna hear, you will not work in the state again."  Now, meanwhile, my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] has finished school [Elizabeth City State Teachers College; Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and she's taken a job up in the town of Gretna, Virginia, which is on Highway 27--Highway 29 between Lynchburg [Virginia] and Danville [Virginia], pretty town up in the mountains there.  And so she has taken a job there and Fats has been bragging to the principal of the school there about this great assistant principal he's got, my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.], who does all the work for him, keeps everything running smoothly, and how easy it makes his life.  Meanwhile, my mother's there and she's feeding the superintendent all these stories--not the superintendent, rather the principal, all these stories, and they're having a big laugh about all this stuff that Fats into--is into and all the trouble he's into.  So the day before the hearing, my father borrowed Dr. Jones' [ph.] Cadillac.
Speaker 2: Is Dr. Jones the superintendent?
Speaker 1: Dr. Jones is the--is the local doctor.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Borrowed his Cad--local, local black doctor.  Borrowed his Cadillac, drove up to Gretna, interviewed with the principal, and came back.  And so only two teachers testified about what was actually happening in the school--only--well, only one teacher, my father, and the other person who testified was the dietician who would, would not have trouble getting re-employment.  And so that's basically how the Spellman family moved from Elizabeth City to Gretna, Virginia.  I would say that probably if you look at the small stories behind things like Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], almost any historical event of that magnitude, you will find hundreds of stories like that.  There--things like that were probably happening all over the South.
Speaker 2: So what became of the school and Fats?
Speaker 1: Well, the school ran its course.  Fats flourished in Elizabeth City.  He did very well there.  He--he always maintained some big job.  He was sort of the official guy for white people to talk to black people through and he, he did well.  He wasn't hurt by this at all.  And the school went on its--its way; it ran, ran its course.  I mean, eventually, it wore out like schools do.  But, no, there was--there was no like cataclysm, no upheaval, no revolution that occurred in Elizabeth City as a result of these events.
Story_ID: 304135
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: As I said, I knew my, my grandmother--my, my grandparents on my mother's [Rosa Bailey Spellman] side, I knew very slightly.  They died as I--when I was very young.  I knew my father's [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] father pretty well and, in fact--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Charlie [Charlie Spellman].  I used to call him Pa Charlie.  He, he got to be a cranky old, dirty old man, and he would sit on the porch making rude remarks at young girls passing by as he drank corn liquor.  And, in fact, he gave me a drink of corn liquor and Pepsi-Cola when I was a little boy--I remember that.  And I got along with Pa Charlie all, all right.  I didn't have a lot to say to him, but he, he certainly was--I mean, I wasn't aware of the problems he and my father had had at this particular time.  I didn't learn about that until, until much later.  I didn't--I didn't learn the story of my mother's father being white until I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  You know, the family scandals are not given to young people and, and you think everything is mellow and then you find out all about (laughter) some weirdness that's going on--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, with husbands and wives and kids and all that, so.
Story_ID: 304136
Speaker 1: Now what about your maternal grandmother, did you know--oh, you said you knew them slightly.
Speaker 2: I did--
Speaker 1: And what about your paternal grandmother [Maggie Spellman]?
Speaker 2: I, I did not know her very well, either.  She, she didn't last too much longer than--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --than the others.  You know, they--people died--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --if people lived to be sixty, then they were living to be old.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what your earliest memory of childhood is?
Speaker 2: I have a very vague, but I'm sure true feeling of coming from the--from the country to Elizabeth City [North Carolina] in the back seat of a car, and I think I must've been very, very--I, I must've been, I don't know, two or less at the time.  I have--I have that.  It--it's--I've kept it all these years, but I can't tell you much more about it.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: There's only one, my brother, Roland [Roland Spellman].  He is eight years--he was eight years younger than I and he died about six, seven years ago.
Speaker 1: And what were, like, special occasions, holidays, birthdays, that kind of thing, what were they like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: We didn't make a great big deal of birthdays.  I mean, I got presents but it wasn't a big deal.  I don't--I don't recall getting one or two parties and I don't--I don't recall that a lot of our friends had birthday parties, either.  Some must have but I, I don't think it was a big deal.  I remember Christmas as a--as, as a very big deal for me.  I think that, you know, I had--I believed in Santa Claus probably much longer than anybody believes in Santa Claus today.  But it was--it was a big--it was big to me to decorate a tree and to wonder what was going to be under it.
Story_ID: 304137
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the community that you grew up in Elizabeth City [North Carolina].  Can--do you remember the name of the street you lived on?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I lived on Edge Street was one.  Southern Avenue was the first street I can remember, then, then Edge Street, and then a street that faces the--faces the old black movie house.  The name of it escapes me just now.
Speaker 1: Can you just kind of describe your community for us a little bit?
Speaker 2: Okay, the African American community was bifurcated.  There was one group on, on the south side of downtown and another on the north side of downtown.  And, of course, there were divisions as there always will be between communities, nothing serious.  I mean, we didn't have gang warfare or anything, but still.  You know, people choose any excuse to talk about each other.  It was a quiet and peaceful community.  There was no fear of anything on the street.  There was no fear of the streets at all.  There were very few incidents of any kind of crime.  One or two people were known to be thieves and they were thought to be psychotic practically.  No one stole anything.  It was just not done and it, it didn't occur to me to ever steal anything.  The--
Speaker 1: Now, you said you had a black movie house?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had a black movie theater and we got--I don't know how much--how long movies would've been, been out before they came to us.  I know they--I know the white theater would've had 'em weeks before we ever did and they usually came--they, they--I think movies changed twice a week on--no, wait, they changed once a week.  They changed once a week.  And it was a big deal to go to the movies.  As I said, we did not have television.  We had radio.  There was a local radio station that was on limited number of hours for the day, but basically we reached Norfolk [Virginia].  By the time I went to high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], I got interested in jazz and the airways were not so crowded as they are now, so when I was in high school, I would be listening to people like Jazzbo Collins [Al "Jazzbo" Collins] and Symphony Sid from New York [New York].  It was rather faint, but, but I could get them and, and I paid very close attention to that.  What else would--could I say about my community?  It was--
Speaker 1: Did you have like one African American doctor?
Speaker 2: Let me see, we had Dr. Hoffer [ph.] and Dr. Jones [ph.].  Dr. Jones did more gynecology and pediatrics and Dr. Hoffer, but they were both general practitioners.  We had one dentist who--he who also was a Dr. Jones.  Not--they were not related.
Story_ID: 304138
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood and remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, sights, sounds and smells.  I think perhaps the color green is my favorite because it was such a green place and because outdoors was so much in my life.  My--so much of my life was in the outdoors.  It was a town you could walk all the way across and I remember being--walking through greenery the whole way.  Elizabeth City [North Carolina] is basically sort of drain swamp, the Great Dismal Swamp it was called, which I think is a terrific name for a swamp.  It's a very historic swamp.  It's where Nat Turner ran away to, you know, and a lot of slaves did run away there because you had to really want somebody to go back up in the Dismal Swamp looking for them.  But a lot of the swamp is gone now.  So yeah, there was that.  I, I spent a lot of time in the woods.  So, again, we--meant a lot to me.
Speaker 1: What smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Probably frying fish.  Fish fries on, on, on Friday night were a big deal and I, I think that there was times when a lot of people in the community got together, basically benefits for a church or some other social need in the community; there was that.  I didn't mention something else I should mention about my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.].  I thought I got a love of reading from my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman], but my father also would've been an artist, had he come up in my generation.  He--the thing he did most and, and cared about most was drawing, and he had no training in it.  He was what we, we would call an outsider artist now, but of course this was not an avenue that was at all available to an African American man growing up in North Carolina during the Great Depression.  There were no models for him to follow as to how he could pursue that.  But I did sort of get sort of an eye I think from him.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of drawings did he do?  Did he draw like inanimate objects or--I mean, were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He would do landscapes.  He would do scenes.  He would draw people.  Not--cameras weren't so prevalent in those days, so that people would often bring their kids by for him to do portraits of, and he would do a portrait then, and sometimes in crayon, you know, but in whatever material he had at hand.
Story_ID: 304139
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about elementary school.  Do you remember the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Not the first one.  The first one was a public elementary school and it was right across the street from Elizabeth City State College [Elizabeth City State Teachers College; Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina]; I think the building is still there.  And one thing I, I remember about that was the following.  I went a year early because I was an early reader, and I was enjoying being this new star kid, little kid in school.  I was really loving that.  Hand always up, any of the questions, any of the problems, I have the answer, I have the answer.  I, I was loving that I'm the star.  Then the college started, started about a month after the--after the elementary school did.  And J. Saunders Redding had a job in Elizabeth City State that year, and in walks J. Saunders Redding with his son, Conrad [sic. Conway Redding].  This probably isn't true, but somehow in my mind I see Conrad with a newspaper, but he probably didn't in the first grade have a newspaper, but that's, that's, that's how I see him.  And then all of the sudden Conrad jumps--not only does Conrad jump from the first grade to the second grade, which my parents [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.] wouldn't let me do 'cause they thought it would be--I wasn't socially ready for it.  Then, he jumps from the second grade to the third grade, and he's my age.  And I remember busting Conrad in his mouth on the playground one day (laughter) when he came over to play with me.  And if, if Conrad Redding ever sees this tape, I, I, I do apologize.  He probably has no memory of it.
Speaker 1: So you were hating on Conrad (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Conrad--damn him (laughter). He stole all my glory.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from elementary school?
Speaker 2: I could not recall their names today.  You know, but the problem with elementary school was that there were not a lot of trained teachers in, in, in those days among African American people, so there were--I, I was being taught by people who might've had a tenth grade education, some of them.  And it was a, a great concern for my parents that they thought I was a bright kid who would have a future and with his mind and they wanted to see me better taught.  So that when I got to the sixth grade, elementary school went from first to the eighth grade then, and then you went to high school, you know, for ninth grade, ninth through twelfth.  So when I--when I got to, to the sixth grade, my parents took me out of that school and put me into a little Catholic school.  Again, this was like four teachers teaching eight grades, and these were nuns, and this was a big scandal in the community 'cause here are my parents, my father a school teacher, my mother an aspiring school teacher, and they're saying, no, you're not good enough to teach our boy.  And so they took a lot of heat for that, but they thought that I would do better at this school.  And, in fact, these were--this was a very good teaching order and it was a shock to me because when I go there in the sixth grade, the nuns wanna set me--wanna put me back a year.  You know, because my parents are looking, I'm coming home from school, I mean, I'm not bringing my books.  You know, I--I'm, I'm doing homework when I get back to school in the morning--the next morning.  I'm making all A's, but they're seeing--I'm, you know, I'm not--this is--you know, this is not anything.  Because as I said, most of the kids I grew up with came from illiterate families, so for my, my possessing literacy at an early age was rather unusual for school.  But, yeah, so they put me in this school and these--and then, you know, my mother came in, copped a plea, and I caught up.  And actually I ran into--to another guy who was in school with me, and he came by and asked me, he said, do you remember when, when we graduated from elementary school and I was valedictorian and he was salutatorian, and we were the only two who graduated in that class (laughter).  It was kind of funny, yeah.
Story_ID: 304140
Speaker 1: So when you were in elementary school, what, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was--I probably was a little bit of a cut-up in the public school because I was very bored and, and the teachers kept having to go back over and over and over material.  And in the--in the other school, though, the, the--they worked me very hard and I was a very diligent student.  I wished that I'd had a school equally rigorous for high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] because in high school, I lost all my study habits.  High school, again, was extremely easy for me.
Speaker 1: But let's, let's not move ahead to high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And also in elementary school, what type of child were you?  Were you mischievous, obedient?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was pretty obedient.  I think my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.] would tell you that I--that I didn't get--that, that he didn't have any, any real trouble with me.  I got the occasional spanking, usually for being late, but--or for, forgetting to do something.  I was extremely absent-minded as a kid.  I lived in my head a lot.  I lived in fantasy a lot and--
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you fantasize about?  Like going to different places and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, possible worlds or riffs on books that I had read, you know, riffs on movies that I had seen.  I, I--there are stories about, about me in, in elementary school being sent to the store to get something and, okay, it seemed like a long walk at the time but now I see that distance, it was nothing at all.  And, and, and the--my mother's [Rosa Bailey Spellman] sister, Aunt Minnie [ph.], was living in town [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] at that particular time.  And she--I remember this--coming back home and, and, and Aunt Minnie had been to the house and told my mother, "Rosa Belle, A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman] has been standing in front of my house for an hour looking up in the sky," and said, "now everybody in the neighborhood came out to see what he was looking at, and there's nothing up there.  There's no birds, there's no airplanes, and he got the whole neighborhood standing there looking up in the sky," you know.  So, yeah, that was me.  I, I--all kind--my mother's favorite stories were all these embarrassing things about me being sent to the store to get some kerosene, only taking the shoebox, which was--which was next to the kerosene jug to the store and then trying to sneak back to the house (laughter), pick up the kerosene jug before they caught me.  They'd be, of course, standing there, about me maybe leaving the butter out on, on, on the table as I cleaned up, and putting the sugar in the refrigerator or--you know, I was extremely absent-minded.
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?  Like, what did you wanna be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, doctor was the highest aspiration that was possible for us in those days.  I, I did not know of anything greater and I--and I did hold that all the way through high school.
Story_ID: 304141
Speaker 1: And when were you starting to develop a, a love for music, was that later in life?
Speaker 2: Well, I always loved music and--
Speaker 1: What kinds of music did you like during elementary school?
Speaker 2: During elementary school, well--you had to understand that, that jazz and popular music were not contradictory at that time, so that jazz was America's popular music, and so there was that.  And I, I liked the popular songs of the day, the songs that you would've heard in, in the movies, songs you would've heard--Judy Garland or Vic Damone or any of those people sing, and Bing Crosby or Frank Sinatra, so I, I liked--I liked all of that.  By the time I got to high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], I got much more in--into instrumental music, and so the jazz orchestras were a, a big deal for me.  And then I heard bebop on the radio.
Speaker 1: And, so what was is about music that you really loved?  Or did you--at that time in your life, did you just like listening to music, or had you really developed a love for it?
Speaker 2: I developed a, a deep love for it and I and a few of my friends, maybe four or five of us, would buy--save up, buy seven or eight RPM records and, and we go by each other's house and play these records and listen to them over and over and over again.  The bands that got through, biggest, of course things like Ellington [Duke Ellington] and Basie [Count Basie] and, and Hampton [Lionel Hampton]--these were things that you heard a lot and they were in all the juke boxes around town because they--that was also the dance music.  People liked a little Jimmy Scott.  'The Masquerade is Over' ['(I'm Afraid) The Masquerade is Over'], I knew largely as a slow drag.  Now, of course, I appreciate it as a great bit of jazz singing, but at those--at that time, it was something to dance slow (laughter) with, with the girls with--but--so we started listening to jazz, and jazz at the philharmonic [Virginia Symphony Orchestra] was a very exciting thing for us because it would come to Norfolk [Virginia] and once had a chance to go hear jazz at the philharmonic in Norfolk, and these would be all the big names in jazz at the time.
Story_ID: 304142
Speaker 1: But when bebop caught my ear and I started, you know, buying these Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie records, then you started getting the difference between me and my parents [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.] and music.  Because, you know, they danced to Ellington [Duke Ellington] and Basie [Count Basie].  They could hum solos of, of Lester Young, et cetera, but it--they didn't think of it as an art experience or anything like that, but it was just the music they, they knew.  When I brought bebop in the house, then, of course, I did what it is the function of all young people to do which is drive your parents crazy with your music.
Speaker 2: It would be the equivalent of bringing rap in the house now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely now, absolutely so, and so they'd say, "Would you turn off that tune, this music," you know.  But, you know, it's, it's absolutely blowing me away.  I actually think a lot about bebop and what it means for social consciousness.  I--there's a line in a poem that I wrote, which is about this particular period, and I, I use a line that you--that, that bebop was news that my people were moving 'cause you can't scat, bop, and bow to a redneck.  And this--I think this is true.  I mean, bebop is, is the first real modernist music in African American culture.  This is--I mean, people would make an argument that all African American music has been modernist and, and, and I--and that's, that's a different conversation.  But the first real statement by the musician themselves is that they were artists, that they were playing serious music that people had to sit down and be quiet and listen to.  This whole attitude as it came through in the music definitely introduces a different mindset and it takes your mind away from what you'd know of a social order and into another kind of possible world.  So at about this time from listening to bebop, I started hearing comments from other friends of mine that A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman] thinks he's white because he's, you know, reading things that we don't read, and he's listening, listening to a different kind of music, and he talks in a different kind of a way that is not like I was acting white in a sense of, of not being black, but more that I'm doing something that they didn't associate with being black.  It's, it's a similar kind of case we hear today a lot about, about kids who are, are into books in inner city areas who are accused of being white because they have some intellectual interest.
Speaker 2: And did you play an instrument at all?
Speaker 1: I sang.  I sang.
Speaker 2: Did you sing in elementary school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in elementary school, I remember being in one competition at the school, and not a big deal competition, school competition, and I remember--what did I sing?  I cannot remember--I should remember the song.  I used to remember the song, now I don't.
Story_ID: 304143
Speaker 1: Also, let me ask you, did you and your family attend church growing up?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  We weren't a very churchy family.  My Aunt Julia [ph.] was very holy and, in fact, claimed once--she had--went into a coma once, but I forget what the cause was, and claimed to have died and gone to heaven and come back, and she, she started preaching.  But, yeah, I--we went occasionally to church.  I got very religious in, in elementary school when I started going to this Catholic school, because every morning, you opened with the Baltimore Catechism.  Who made you?  God made me.  Why did God make you?  Know him, love him, serve him in this life so you can be close to him in the next.  What are the Stations of the Cross?  The Stations of the Cross are--you know, so every morning you got that and you got indoctrinated with this stuff, and I--and it was very interesting.  All this ritual I thought was really fascinating and, and the service with all this incense swinging back and forth and, and costumes, you know, cassocks and surplices and, and all this Latin.  I, I thought that was the most interesting stuff in the world, so I got deep into it for the rest of my years in, in, in elementary school.  I lost it immediately when I went into high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], and pretty much became an atheist, but (laughter).
Story_ID: 304144
Speaker 1: So your elementary school, it went through eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So during like the middle school years, the junior high school years--
Speaker 2: There were no junior high school, you went straight to high school.
Speaker 1: Well--right.  Okay, but during that timeframe, like sixth grade to eighth grade, what type of young man were you starting to develop into?
Speaker 2: I was very bookish.  I--
Speaker 1: What kinds of books did you like reading?
Speaker 2: I read a lot of fiction.  I read whatever I could find in, in, in the local bookstore or newsstand, a lot of the Signet [Signet Classics] novels, things like W. Somerset Maugham, Faulkner [William Faulkner], Erskine Caldwell, all these southern novels, 'Tobacco Road' [Erskine Caldwell], all those things.
Speaker 1: So, at this time, were you thinking, wow, you know, I think I may wanna be a writer?  I'm talking about like during the middle school--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --time.  Okay, but you just enjoyed reading.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking about in terms of--were--did you still have the same dreams about what you wanted to do when you grew up?  You want--you thought maybe you'd like to become a doctor when you grow up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still, yes.
Speaker 1: --around this time.  And so who was influencing you the most you think at this particular time in your life?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman].  She, she was the biggest influence.  I, I talked a lot more to her than I did to my father [Alfred Spellman, Sr.].  He was a good man.  I mean, I, I had--I never have had any problems with my father except for some moments of pubescent madness, but--no, he, he, he was nothing but good to me.  And--yeah, my mother.  There were a couple of teachers who--in, in, in high school.  I, I can't say that--the nuns themselves taught strictly from the workbook so we didn't deviate from that, but, yeah, my mother was it.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: P.W. Moore [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina].  I don't know who--I think P.W. Moore was, was an educator and he may have started the first high school or some kind of school in Elizabeth City [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, again, there is the madness of puberty and bloom--blooming girls.  That, that was the biggest thing which all boys have to face, so there was that.  There was--
Speaker 1: Were you popular with the girls?
Speaker 2: All the way from high school through college, I was in friend hell and it took--
Speaker 1: Meaning--
Speaker 2: --the longest time for me to get out of that.
Speaker 1: Meaning, like, you, you were a great friend but never the boyfriend.
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean, you don't wanna ruin this relationship with sex, you know.  "Yes, let's ruin it."  "No, A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], what we have is much too important," (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: And--so during high school, what were some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: High school--high school was just too easy, it was.  It was like the elementary school.  All (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you went back--P.W. Moore was a public high school.
Speaker 2: It was a public high school and there was no challenge to the curriculum whatsoever.  So again, I'm, I'm not--I'm back to not taking books home from school.  I'm back to doing my homework a few minutes before class.  I'm--you know, I mean--and it's--I mean, again, I finished first in class and all that, but still, there was no--there was no challenge at all.  I, I, I was--I really wish I had had a hard high school to go to.  I know this from being a parent, you know, about how important it is for your kids to go to hard schools, you know.  I know that it prepares you for a lot more.  So when I--I know I'm cutting ahead, but when I got to college, I had no discipline whatsoever and I had no chance at all of passing chemistry and biology curriculum at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I was lazy, couldn't organize anything.  It, it was--I'm really sorry that my high school didn't--pretty much--but I was still reading.  I mean, I'm, I'm reading a lot.  I'm reading everything I can get my hands on.
Story_ID: 304145
Speaker 1: Do you remember like some of your teachers in high school [P.W. Moore High School, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] who may have had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my chemistry teacher, Calvin--not Calvin Hill.  His last name was Hill [ph.] though, I'm pretty sure.  Yeah, Mr. Hill, I, I thought was a really bright man who encouraged me a great deal.  My social studies teacher encouraged me a great deal.  He, he didn't offer me as much of a worldview as Mr. Hill did.  Mr. Hill had seen more of the world and, and could--and made me see there was something bigger out, out there.  But again, this is the segregated South that we're growing up in and you--and what you know of--what you know of the real outside, your community is very limited.  I mean, television shows you a few things, but still, it does not show you possibility because there aren't any black images on there certainly.  So it's still--all of that belongs to white people and none of it belongs to you and you don't see yourself in it.  So I think that--I remember the time when one of--a, a, a classmate of mine, I believe her name was Florene Barco [ph.].  Florene left Elizabeth City [North Carolina] for a year and went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to stay with relatives there.  And when she came back, she told us she was going to school with white kids.  And I--and I thought that was the weirdest thing I had ever heard.  It was--it was like the moon, you know, like life on the moon.  What in the world is that?  You know, but--no, it, it was very--still to find--so by this time, I'm finding myself.  I've, I've discovered the Metropolitan Opera broadcast on the radio; that's another window into something I had--I had never heard of.  As I say, I'm, I'm, I'm reading jazz magazines and ordering records from the--from the record store.  I'm--well sports is a big deal for me at this time.
Speaker 1: Did you play sports?
Speaker 2: I made the basketball team.  I was on the third string.  I do have a picture of myself in a basketball uniform that nobody could believe.  I seldom got into games.  I was the sort of trainer/water boy on the football team, you know, so I traveled with the football team and all.  But, yeah, it was a big deal for me.  I--a, a lot of guys thought I, I would've gone into coaching.
Speaker 1: And what other activities were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had no talent is, is, is basically the, the point we're making here. Okay.
Speaker 1: What other activities were you involved in in high school?  Were you--was there like a glee club or chorus?
Speaker 2: I was in the glee club.  I was in the glee club.  And there were things like oratorical competitions--
Speaker 1: Were you good at that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty good, um-hm.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: And did you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed it.  James Weldon Johnson's, 'The Creation,' you know, was, was, was a popular hit of our times.  And, yeah, I, I, I competed well.
Speaker 1: And did you feel like you--like you had a talent there, like, you know, that there was some talent there and is--or, I'm just curious, you know, just if you thought, wow, you know, this could be something that could lead to something else.
Speaker 2: No, it's more like, okay, there's this thing coming up, who's gonna represent our school?  A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], here's what we'd like for you to do.  Would you be in this?  Would you take these tests?  'Cause there, there would also be academic tests that you would take and see how, how you placed, and so it was more like that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite black authors at that particular time in your life?
Speaker 2: Actually, black authors were less available to me.  I was aware of Langston Hughes and had read some of his work, but there was not a lot of it around.  The African American authors I admire most now were--I, I didn't get introduced to until I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: So what were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I hoped to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Why--what did you know about Howard?
Speaker 2: Howard was--we thought--in Elizabeth City, we thought Howard was the elite school.  There was Howard, there was Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania was, was well thought of then.  So it--that was like the black Ivy League.  But so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there any lure about going to Washington, D.C.?  Was that part of the lure?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I didn't know anything about Washington [D.C.].  I knew it was the capital, but I, I didn't know.  It, it was gonna be a city and that was gonna be news for me.  I had spent summers in Norfolk [Virginia] and that was my only real urban experience.  But, no, I, I wasn't thinking about I'll go to Washington and then I'll see all of these fabulous things.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Story_ID: 304146
Speaker 1: You decide to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And what is--what's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, my parents [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.]--it was my parents' decision.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And were you happy with that decision--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --or was there someplace else that you wanted to go?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they, as school teachers, knew more about what the, the schools were and they had much better perspective on it than I did.
Speaker 1: Were you still gonna study medicine at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you get to Howard in early 1950s and, you know, what's the culture like at Howard University in the 1950s?
Speaker 2: Of course, it's--these are the Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] years and it's fairly--a very conservative time.  The Civil Rights Movement hasn't blossomed yet.  There were--it's sort of nascent at this particular time, so the values were decidedly materialistic and bourgeois, so that people talked about what their parents had or what they were going to have.
Speaker 1: And were most of the kids, most of their parents professionals and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Probably most were.  Probably most were.  I think that there was--there were some who were, from what we would've considered an elite in that they had very prominent positions or for those who had acquired wealth in the large urban areas.  There were a lot of kids of, of those families.  But it was a mixture of kids.  There was a huge range in it.  The D.C. [Washington, D.C.] kids, for example, were basically, you know, sort of normal urban kids.  And, and I think a lot of us came from the South, so there was a mixture of the kind of educational backgrounds that we all had.  But we all thought we were pretty hot stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when did you--was it at Howard where you really started to become exposed to African American authors and poets and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So do you--do you remember like what that exposure was like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, for one thing, Sterling Brown was on the faculty there.  Now, I didn't take a class with Mr. Brown until probably about my junior year.  But he--but, but he--we did have people like that there.  There, there were people--well, you, you--I had sociology from E. Franklin Frazier, I had history from [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin and Rayford Logan.  So, there, there, there was a, a sense of, of, of accomplished black intellectuals at the school, which was absolutely stimulating.  It was--it was something which opened your mind considerably.
Story_ID: 304147
Speaker 1: I think that the most impressive experience I had with the faculty probably was, was with Professor Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin].  Because at that time, the Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] case had now gotten to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and in 1954, I am in my junior year at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I'm taking history from Dr. Franklin.  The moot court arguments for Brown versus Board are being held at the Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and you could go and sit and, and, and see them prepare the case.  And you could see one of the attorneys would be playing the part of John--I think his name is John W. Davis I recall, the gentleman who argued the case for the South, and he would be--he would be doing a very good southern imitation, and he would be presenting this argument.  And there would be Jack Greenberg from the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and the other lawyers like Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Would they actually--
Speaker 1: --Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 2: --be there or would there--
Speaker 1: They would be there and they would be rehearsing for, for, for the Supreme Court presentation.  And it was really a, a fabulous achievement in African American intellectual development because they went into court and they beat the strongest team of lawyers that the South could assemble, really powerful people.  This guy Davis was probably the number one lawyer in the country.  And that crew never thought that a handful of black people and this one Jew would be able to beat them in an argument before white justices, and they did.  The, the, the NAA [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] out-prepared them and had much sounder case.  But then you could go and sit there and listen to this.  And John Hope Franklin would be sort of an historical advisor, you know.  Well what is the historical background of Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] or any of the other sort of landmark cases which were the backbone of segregation.  And he, he would be helping to prepare them.  And so when he came to lecture on--in his history classes, all of a sudden, you get a better sense that history is not some past thing but that it's very much alive in your life.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he would incorporate that in his lectures.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, um-hm.  And he was a powerful lecturer.  So, yeah, there, there, there was all, all of that.  Now as for the African American authors, frankly, they never were my strongest influences.  I read them and appreciated them greatly.  Jean Toomer I think--I thought--I thought 'Cane' [Jean Toomer] was, was, was a great literary achievement.  I found a poet named Fenton Johnson who was not very well known but whom I thought was one of the better poets of the period, and Sterling Brown himself who, who I think was a, a, a master, a master poet and, and storyteller and all of that.  And later as I took Mr. Brown's courses, then that was--again, he was such a warm man and so happy to invite people who are starting to write into the literary life.
Story_ID: 304148
Speaker 1: So were you starting to write at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  About my junior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I started to write.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the first things that you wrote?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm gonna give you a long autobiographical poem before I leave here because there are lines on all of this.  The earliest poems I can remember were--they're all pretty bad.  I mean, you, you, you just learning the thing and you're just trying to learn the craft.  I remember the sort of young man finding himself in, in the world and how horrible the world was to him sort of things.  It--I should mention some of the other people whom I knew in school who my classmates were.  LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] was a year ahead of me in school and became my closest friend at the time, and he probably was the one who sort of directed me more toward writing.  Lucille Clifton was in the writers group that we had at the time, and so--
Speaker 1: But let me ask you this, when did--when did you have this turning point where like you, you started writing and you, you knew you could write and, and it was something that you enjoyed, when did you discover that?  When did you discover like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About--right about my junior year.  And the, the reasons for that are the following.  First of all, I'm now very clear that I'm not--that my aptitude and certainly not my training is not in pre-med, so I'm just figuring out a major so I can just go to graduate.  And, again, I'm a screw-up as a student.  I'm graduating with a C plus average probably, B minus, somewhere in there is what I finished school with and I'm just going to class enough to pass.  But I'm, again, reading everything I can get my hands on.  And meanwhile, about that time, Roi Jones goes off to the [U.S.] Air Force and he starts writing, and we're corresponding, and I'm thinking, oh, this is interesting stuff.  And he has figured out how to do it, how to--how to actually become a writer.  And so that probably is what directed me most toward, toward writing and an intellectual life.
Speaker 1: And what were your parents' [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.] thoughts about this?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't know anything about it until after I graduated and moved to the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and then there was this life up there that they had no understanding of whatsoever.
Story_ID: 304149
Speaker 1: What were some of the other things you wrote while you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I tried playwriting.  I took a course from Owen Dodson.  Mr. Dodson was a very gracious, witty, and creative man, and perhaps one of the most creative people I've ever been exposed to because he was a great director and I was in the Howard Players [Howard University Players] as well.  I was in Howard Players and I was in the choir.
Speaker 1: That's a theatrical group, the Howard Players?
Speaker 2: The Howard Players, yeah, that, that was a theatrical group.  And Howard had, had a full drama department.  Anne Cook was the head of it and she is, is a woman of some considerable reputation in black theater history.  Owen Dodson as I say had been one of the playwrights of the latter part of the WPA [Works Progress Administration], and I think also enjoys a, a serious place in African American literary history.  And Beanie Butcher [James W. Butcher, Jr.] was an actor who had gone probably as far as a--as a black man could go in those days.  And so it was--it was a serious drama department and, and though I was not a drama major, I was in the players, and that was a big, big deal for me.  I mean, it was--there was--I spent a lot of my life around that.  So there was--and the glee club, the choir was, was important, too, because it probably was the leading chorus in the country at that time.  Dean Lawson, Warner Lawson, was the dean of the School of Music [Howard University Department of Music, Washington, D.C.], a very accomplished pianist.  He actually was one of the first members of the National Council on the Arts and was the head of the national choral association [American Choral Directors Association], or whatever the correct name for that is, and, and a man who basically gave all his music scholarships to singers who, of course, weren't accepted into Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and Oberlin [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] as they are today, and so you had a lot of great voices there, so he built a magnificent choir and pianist to accompany these singers.  So there was that.  And, and so I learned music history and all that from being around them and taking some courses in, in the subject.  But basically, I'm just doing enough in my major, which was political science to, to pass and minor in history.  I'm--you know, Dr. Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] once said, said, "Son, if you were my son I'd beat the hell outta," (laughter) "spank your butt."  So you got--you know, you can do all this work and you don't do it, you know.  But at, at the time--that's, that's a matter of some great shame for me.  I should not--I should've--I should've done right by, by professors like that.  But at any rate, so I mean--so I started writing.  I, I met--there, there were a few other kids who were interested in it in school and we got together and we basically taught ourselves.  I did have a creative writing class with Owen Dodson, who basically taught me to write about what I know.
Story_ID: 304150
Speaker 1: I'd be trying to write these very existential Jean-Paul Sartre 'No Exit' plays and he [Owen Dodson] would say, "Mr. Spellman [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], you don't know anything about that," (laughter).  Write about what you know.  You know, and meanwhile I'm reading Sartre and Camus [Albert Camus] and all that and using it on people.  You know, I, I turn the page, read another chapter and then go out and start another argument, utterly pretentious, utterly pretentious.  I remember one particular play that Owen Dodson had me in.  It was called 'He Who Gets Slapped' [Leonid Andreyev] and it was a very dark, Russian play about a man who was sort of a clown and he got slapped.  And it was full of Nietzsche [Friedrich Nietzsche].  It was very Nietzschean play, full of deep meaning, not--more, more Kierkegaardian play.  And so I had decided in my existential pretentiousness that it was not he who gets slapped but he who gets slapped.  And so the line would be, "Who are you?"  And I'm supposed to say, "I am he who gets slapped."  But I would say, "I am he (pause) who gets slapped."  And Owen Dodson was going, "Stop saying the line like that," (laughter), "A. B."  And then I'd go in this big long argument about, you know, being in nothingness and alienation and it was--it--that--I really was probably pretty obnoxious.
Speaker 2: So you, you earn your degree in political science?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, and that's in 1956 from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Went to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] for a year and a half.  That was a complete waste of time, though I was doing well in school.  I was third in the class when they kicked me out.
Speaker 2: Why did they kick you out?
Speaker 1: You know, if you got my transcript today, it would say dropped by faculty for a lack of seriousness of purpose.  By then, I have decided, okay, I'm gonna be a poet but I think I probably need a profession.  Now, okay, here's Wallace Stevens who has made a living as an insurance man while he wrote poetry and Archibald MacLeish who was a lawyer, and William Carlos Williams who was a doctor, you know.  So, I mean, it's probably possible to do it, so maybe I'll go to law school and, and be a lawyer and then write poetry--and, and write poetry, a completely ridiculous idea.  But I was--I don't know, I was--I was sort of becoming like--I was catching on at the tail end of the Beat Generation and I'm being pretty obnoxious probably all day during class and laughing at people when they started talking about how they wanted these automatic car door things and, you know, just generally being, being a jerk.  And so--I mean, I didn't belong in law school and even now and then some of the--now and then some of the people from law school will call up and say we're all getting together and I'm gonna say, you know--I mean, I, I didn't really like you guys then, you didn't like me, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nothing's changed (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.  No, they're okay people.  I, I, I really shouldn't--there, there was--there was nothing wrong with, with the kids I went to law school with, some very dedicated people who have done great things with their lives.  I, I shouldn't--I shouldn't denigrate them at all, but, I didn't belong there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, you went to Howard's law school?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 304151
Speaker 1: But at this point, like nineteen--late '50s [1950s], 1956, 1957, you've decided that you wanna be a poet.
Speaker 2: Yes, I have.
Speaker 1: And, like who were some of the, the poets that you admired and who you wanted to emulate?
Speaker 2: Okay, I mentioned the African American poets, people like Fenton Johnson and like Sterling Brown.  I'm reading--of course, a person like T.S. Eliot would've been an influence on everyone who was serious about literature at that time.  I came to read William Carlos Williams, who was a very, very great influence on my writing.  I'm getting my bibliography largely from LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka], from Baraka, and because we have this correspondence going.  And he's by now back in New York [New York] and he's with some very hip people, and so he's, you know, sort of writing and telling me what he's reading and I'm going and checking those out, and yes, all of that.  I read--I read Joyce [James Joyce].  I, I read pretty much the canon of the day.
Speaker 1: And so what happened after you left law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I hung around D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for about a half a year and then I moved to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved to New, New York like around 1957, '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], uh-huh.  The--in, in the D.C. out, out of school years, I--I'm going to--there was a good jazz club here called A. Bart's [A. Bart's International Lounge, Washington, D.C.] where Buck Hill played a lot, Shirley Horn who has gotten considerable reputation lately but was definitely, you know, sort of a local star then, and I'm hanging out with a--with a group of people like myself who I found who were in the city and, you know, we were sort of a bohemian crew.  Then I moved to New York.  I, I knew nobody but, but, but Roi Jones, and he put me up and introduced me to the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] in the Lower East Side [New York, New York] and sort of introduced me to the intellectual life.
Story_ID: 304152
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.] think about you moving to New York [New York] to--
Speaker 2: Did not understand it at all.  I went home with a beard.  I remember my mother saying, "Please, A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], just let me cut it off.  Let me cut it off.  You won't cut it off, I'll cut it off."  I remember my father saying, "Rosa, don't bother him.  I mean, he's still trying to find himself.  He thought he wanted to be a lawyer, a doctor, then he thought he wanted to be a lawyer, now he wants to see if he wants to be an animal," (laughter).  I had to say, "Well, that's a good one, Dad," (laughter), "I'll have to give you that."  But no, they, they, they didn't understand it.  It wasn't anything that they knew anything about.
Speaker 1: Had they read any of your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now as I say, my father would've done it.  My father--if my father had known about it when he was of a similar age, he would've done it.  No, the, the--I wasn't publishing very much then.
Speaker 1: But just in terms of, like things that you had written.  Had they read any of your--
Speaker 2: No, and I didn't show it to 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I, I didn't think that they would relate to it at all.
Speaker 1: At this time in your life, did you think you were a good writer?
Speaker 2: I thought I could do this.  I thought I could do this.  I knew that I wasn't writing great stuff yet, but I thought, yeah, this is--this is something I can master.
Speaker 1: And what other kinds of things did you do while you were--
Speaker 2: But see, it--it's not just choosing writing, it's also choosing a life.  It's choosing a life of--a creative life, a life where you're gonna be associated with creative people and where your--where all of your synapses are gonna be tuned to making and receiving art.
Speaker 1: So this was your choice, because earlier, you were thinking, I'm gonna have a profession and, and also do art.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, but now, at this point when you moved to New York, you're saying, okay, this is gonna--art is gonna be my profession.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah, 'cause--and law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] disabused me of any notion of this sort of dual life.  And it certainly would be a very difficult thing to do to do something as rigorous and time-consuming as law and medicine or whatever and then write.  That--something people have done it, I don't know how.  You know, 'cause, again, writing is not an easy--not easy work for me.  It is--
Speaker 1: Or for any writer.
Speaker 2: Some people knock it off pretty well.  Then some--there are some other people who don't spend a lot of time revising and probably should.  I revise a lot.  It takes me for--it takes me months to, to feel like I'm through with a poem, like I'm ready to turn a poem loose, and I still find myself going back, revising poems I published thirty years ago.
Speaker 1: But don't they say, like, some of the best, like, writing advice is rewrite, rewrite, rewrite?
Speaker 2: Yeah, revise, revise, revise while there is time.  Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 304153
Speaker 1: When you're in New York [New York], what--what's the--what--what's the political climate like in New York late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, the--again, the Civil Rights Movement is getting bigger and bigger, but largely still, we're talking more about court cases than we are about civil disobedience in late '50s [1950s].  That's starting to pop up, so this would be starting to pop up, but still as I say, mainly it's, it's more about argument than it is about action.  And the--basically, the, the scene I moved into was a scene of letters.  There were a lot of artists who were very influential in New York at the time who really thought that an artist's responsibility was to make art.  Now, there weren't a lot of African American writers in the Village [Greenwich Village] in the Lower East Side [New York, New York] at that particular time, so I'm not hanging out with a whole lot of black people.  Someone like Merce Cunningham or John Cage would've said, your responsibility is to make a great piece of work that you can put before people.  All this other social stuff is just a distraction from that.  All this--all this politics, that, that is just a part of the world that we're not even sure should exist.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you agree with that?
Speaker 2: As, as an artist, did I agree with it?  Probably not.  I didn't think a lot--a lot about it in those days.  You know, I mean, I had a strong sense of civil rights because, as I said, having gone through Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at that time of Brown versus Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], having seen what an achievement it is, how much it meant.  And when I--when I thought about doing law, I thought about doing civil rights law.  That, that--that's what I thought I might want to do.  So, no, I, I didn't agree with that.  But I wasn't yet writing very political work.  I actually never have done topical political poetry well.  I mean, I have some poems that, that are that way and which I think stand up, but it's, it's not--when--my, my political statements primarily came through essays, which--where I could be much clearer about a political point.  But making--I, I, I don't--as I'm not primarily a performance poet, it never has been my skill to translate what might be rhetoric into, into--into art.  Some people do it--do it very, very well, but it, it never has been the core of my work as a poet.
Story_ID: 304154
Speaker 1: And how did you support yourself while you were in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Part-time jobs largely.  I worked in a bookstore, the Eighth Street Bookstore [New York, New York] where I sort of oversaw the paperback revolution.  At the time I got to the Eighth Street, there were very few books in paperback.  I was a paperback, paperback manager there for years.  And, and actually before you had the Signet [Signet Classics] and Penguin [Penguin Classics] lines, but it was not a whole lot.  Dell [Dell Publishing, New York, New York] had a line, but then you started seeing all this paperback stuff come out.  And then small press scene just completely blew up.  There were lots and lots and lots of small presses around, and that was interesting to me to see how artists themselves could take control of getting their work out.
Speaker 1: And was it something that you aspired to do?
Speaker 2: For a small press?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I worked with Diane di Prima once who, who was a very strong poet activist of the period and establishing a, a--sort of a poetry newsletter, but she basically took it over and carried it out.  I, I wasn't much into getting things done like that.  I was more--I was more into writing.  And I started writing a lot about jazz, which I started doing largely out of self-defense.
Speaker 1: And what year was this?
Speaker 2: Jazz--my first jazz writing?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That would've been about, oh, '58 [1958], '59 [1959].  The first thing I wrote in a magazine was introducing Archie Shepp, the jazz saxophonist.  I wrote the first article on him for Metronome magazine.
Speaker 1: For what magazine?
Speaker 2: Metronome.  It was a prominent jazz magazine for many years.  It went defunct in the '60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s], I believe, early '70s [sic. 1961].
Speaker 1: And when you began writing about jazz, did you think, oh, this is my niche.  I found it.
Speaker 2: I, I knew I had found something.  Again, LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] showed the way.  He had written 'Blues People[: Negro Music in White America]' by then, and it was he who hooked me up with (unclear) record company so I could start doing liner notes.  And I had not thought that I, I could do this--I could do it until I started reading reviews of, of music that I knew to be great and reading terrible reviews of it.  John Coltrane, for example, who as he started expanding his sounds was called anti-jazz by a lot of jazz critics, and I, I knew that they had to be wrong.  If they were as clearly wrong about something that's clearly important as what John Coltrane was doing, then they didn't know what they were talking about.  And so--
Speaker 1: Did you--did you feel like there needed to be another voice out there?
Speaker 2: Yes, I very definitely did.  I very definitely did.  And, and I very enthusiastically jumped in--into writing about, about this music.  And I always tried to write from the musician's point of view.  I always tried to get to--get to, to the musicians to know them and largely to, to be their voice.  So I always was an advocate.  I never did try to pretend objectivity.  And I pretty much stayed away from, from music that I didn't like much.  I didn't write a whole lot--I did write some put-down articles occasionally, but I, I kind of--I still regret those.  But basically I tried to write, write in favor of musicians whose work I admired a great deal.
Story_ID: 304155
Speaker 1: So it's 1959, and has your writing career taken off yet in terms of where you're able to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I could see--I could see--
Speaker 1: --support yourself?
Speaker 2: I could see it.  Well, not, not fully, not fully.  And I, I still had to have jobs, but I could see--I could see--I could call myself a writer.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was producing enough work that I could say, yes, I am a writer.
Speaker 1: And so you were writing for various magazines and--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I was writing for various magazines and I was writing poetry, and some small press magazines I was writing for.  I was writing for--I was writing for places like Evergreen Review, and I wasn't doing very much in the establishment press, an occasional piece, but for the most part, I'm writing in the sort of underworld.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by the underworld?
Speaker 2: I mean, the, the, the small presses, the, the world where artists talk to other artists or two people who were close to artists who were intimately involved in, in, in art.  So, no, there wasn't a lot of popular press available to us at the time.
Speaker 1: And were you starting to develop a, a reputation in the jazz community?
Speaker 2: I, I guess so.  I, I was--I was a, a regular contributor to the primary jazz magazines like Metronome, like Down Beat.  Yeah, I was--I was writing for them all the time and my work seemed to be respected by them.
Speaker 1: And, and, and tell me just what are some of your parents [Rosa Bailey Spellman and Alfred Spellman, Sr.] thoughts in North Carolina at this point?
Speaker 2: When I could show them--
Speaker 1: You know, you've been at this--
Speaker 2: --publications, they were happy and proud.  When, when my book 'Four Lives in the Bebop Business' [A.B. Spellman] came out--that was--that was '65 [1965], '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: And that was your first published--
Speaker 2: Book.
Speaker 1: --book?
Speaker 2: By--
Speaker 1: Right.  Not work that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, not, not--well, no--well, first published by a mainstream press.  I was published by Pantheon [Books], a division of Random House.  And so my mother--that was something my mother actually got.  She got that at the local newspaper and she took a great deal of pride in that.
Story_ID: 304156
Speaker 1: The poems, no, I, I don't think my mother [Rosa Bailey Spellman] could get to that.  I published a book of poems called 'The Beautiful Days' [A.B. Spellman].
Speaker 2: What year did you publish those?
Speaker 1: Oh my, 'The Beautiful Days' must've been about '64 [1964] maybe.
Speaker 2: So that was before you published 'Four Lives' ['Four Lives in the Bebop Business,' A.B. Spellman] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Excuse me.
Speaker 2: --was 'The Beautiful Days,' was that your first publication?
Speaker 1: First book, book of poems, yes.
Speaker 2: First book of poems, okay.
Speaker 1: Only book of poems, actually.
Speaker 2: Only published book of poems.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: What kind of poems were they?
Speaker 1: They were a young man's poems, basically a horny young man's poems to tell you the truth.  A lot of 'em were kind of wet, and (laughter), and I don't think my mother knew quite what to make of 'em.
Speaker 2: She couldn't believe this was her son (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, absolutely.  And, and also the way they were written.  The, the, the values of poetry that sort of a Neo-Imagist kind of way of writing with straight vernacular language, rather than a language that might be considered poetic, the--trying to be completely honest and uncompromised in what was stated, and in the way it was stated, a heavy reliance on measure where you would play with mind breaks on the line and where there--you play a lot with doubles, sometimes triple meaning, and a very direct kind of--kind of imagery, assuring a lot of values that a lot of people would've considered to be poetic.  For example, I--I really disliked simile most of my life, that is to say, say this is like something, this sort of comparative imagery.  I've always liked more direct metaphors, so it would not be something that people like my parents would've recognized as being poetic, I suppose.  Perhaps I'm, I'm not giving them full credit, but I don't think they knew quite what to make of the poems. But the book on jazz--
Speaker 2: I was gonna say, I don't think your mother thought those were poetic at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, she, she, she had some pride in it.  It was a book and her son had written it and she could see, okay, I was doing something.  It wasn't that I was just up there getting high and--you know, and, and, and dealing with women all the time.  But she--so that, that, that probably gave her some faith that I was actually about something, which is--which was a hard thing for me to convince them of in my early years in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].  I know I'm actually--don't worry about this, I'm actually doing something.  You know, what is it that you do and that's a little harder to explain.  Just trust me, I'm doing something.
Story_ID: 304157
Speaker 1: We had just began talking about 'Four Lives in the Bebop Business' [A.B. Spellman].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about why you wanted to write that book.
Speaker 2: Well, I was approached by a friend who was an editor at Pantheon Books, Sara Golden [Sara Golden Blackburn], and she suggested I should do a book and perhaps, she suggested the idea of, of biographies of four musicians.  And I thought about which musicians I'd like to do.  And I thought I would like to do musicians who I think were very important to me at that particular time and, and at that time, I was very much associated with writing and support of the jazz avant-garde.  The two most prominent members of the avant-garde, or two of the three most prominent members of the avant-garde were Cecil Taylor and Ornette Coleman.  The third person, John Coltrane, I later approached and asked if he would like for me to do a biography of him, and he at that point thought--said he was going through a transition in his life and, no, he would rather wait until later to do such a book, and then he died much too early.  But Cecil Taylor and Ornette Coleman were two people who were the sort of antipodes of this new modernism that was challenging the jazz conventions, which had taken hold during the 1950s after the apex of, of bebop.  And these two guys were people I knew very well and lived in near proximity to on the lower east side in, in lower Manhattan [New York, New York].  And so, I, I had access to them.  I found them to be interesting people, and I thought the story of how you go about making unconventional and challenging music in an environment, which are required that you make this music in places which are generally associated with popular entertainment, namely bars, that, that those challenges were worth documenting and were worth telling the story of.  And so I--so that's why they were chosen.  Jackie McLean was a very good friend and was an important member of this--well, important sort of extension of the innovations of Charlie Parker of, of generation before, of the bebop people.  And, so Jackie McLean had lived a very interesting and full life, and I wanted to talk about that a great deal.  The other person, Herbie Nichols, I wanted to talk about because of his obscurity.  He was a musician whom everybody acknowledged was a very gifted and important person who, who had contributed a lot to the musical--to the jazz literature largely through his compositions, and also was an interesting--was a very interesting and original piano stylist, but very, very few people knew him, and I wanted to sort of remedy that.
Speaker 1: And of the four, did you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: A favorite of the four?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Ornette, Cecil, and Jackie were all people I listened to a very great deal.  I cannot choose one over the other.  I listened to them for different reasons, but I couldn't say that one was--one was more important to me than the other.
Story_ID: 304158
Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a little bit about the process involved by which you compiled your information and, and wrote the book ['Four Lives in the Bebop Business,' A.B. Spellman]?
Speaker 2: I read everything that, that was published about them, first of all, and then secondly, I talked to a lot of people who knew them.  And then--but for the most part, I went to them.  I've always let the musicians teach me their music if I could and if I had access to them, and these people were very giving in that way.  They were very anxious to talk about their lives and, and, and how they had gone about making music.  And, so I relied very heavily on interviews with the musicians themselves.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you've learned most from writing that book?
Speaker 2: I learned what I knew, but I learned it in a deeper way, and that is that making art in America is extremely difficult and that you'll have as much opposition as you will have support in the making of it.  And if in the area of jazz, if you were gonna make music which was not of commercial value but was of artistic value and cultural value primarily, then you would have a lot to defeat.  You will have a lot of forces to defeat to get that music made and to get it recorded and out there.  And it was obvious that your living would not be luxurious, but at the same time, it, it was not quite so well known to people that it was--that just getting your, your, your work before public would be as difficult as, as it is.
Speaker 1: And what is it that you hope people who read and/or read the book will gain from it?
Speaker 2: One thing is, I would hope that a sense of intellectualism and creativity and innovation in the African American culture would be prominent.  The idea of, of African American artists as modernists as, as, as a vanguard, I thought would--should be well established in people's minds, and I thought that this should be sort of a biopsy of what people could do in other arenas as well, particularly at that time, the social and political area where African Americans were the leaders of change in American society.
Story_ID: 304159
Speaker 1: And did you learn anything about your--yourself and your ability to write when you wrote this book ['Four Lives in the Bebop Business,' A.B. Spellman]?
Speaker 2: I had never undertaken a project as large as that.  It was the first full length--well, I, I guess I have not written another full-length book since.  So, yes, I did.  I, I had learned the, the discipline had to be much more extended than anything I'd attempted before, so I learned that I could do that.  I learned the frustrations of it.  I learned what--I learned more about what I, I was good at and what I was not good at.
Speaker 1: What did you discover you were not good at?
Speaker 2: The really mundane things such as never having become a good typist, that was problem A (laughter), and I still haven't done that and it's still a handicap that I have, so little boring stuff like that.  But the patience, patience I found to be trying.  I didn't realize how little patience I had until I started trying to develop this--this work and to acquire everything that I needed to acquire to be--to have enough material for the book and to be able to organize it and get it down in a fairly literate manner.  So that patience was something that I had--that, that, that I had to, to overcome, the lack of patience, rather.
Speaker 1: And how well did the book do?
Speaker 2: It was a great critical success.  It was very well reviewed in some very prominent magazines including Life magazine and some others.  But it didn't sell a whole lot.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But it sold enough that the publisher [Proscenium Publishers Inc.] was, was--I mean, I made--I earned my advance back many time--a few times.
Speaker 1: And as a writer, what's most important, sales or how it's reviewed and how it's received?
Speaker 2: Well, for me, how it's received is more important than sales.  I never would've expected to have earned a living off a book like this.  I don't think that I've ever written anything--written--I don't know, most of what I write has very little commercial value.  I mean, I spend most of my time--most of my creative time now in poetry and I know I'll never make a dime off that.  So, but I would like for people to be able to experience what I'm trying to prepare for them in a way that matters to them.  So I do think a great deal about my craft and about that--and about how that craft will affect a person who is reading the poems.  But, again, I, I don't see that--I, I don't ever expect that to be--turn into money for me.  I mean, you can make a dollar here and there on readings or on lectures, but you're not gonna sell a whole lot.
Story_ID: 304160
Speaker 1: After you wrote the 'Four Lives of the Bebop Business' [sic. 'Four Lives in the Bebop Business,' A.B. Spellman], what did you do next?  Were you still pursuing like your, your writing career?  Still writing for magazines and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote for a lot of magazines.  I wrote a lot of liner notes.  I think probably more people know me as a write of liner notes than anything else, which I always took quite seriously.  I always thought the liner notes were important because it perhaps was the most that anybody ever read about an artist.
Speaker 1: Can you explain what liner notes are?
Speaker 2: Liner notes are what you see on the back of a record jacket.  It was way better in the days of the LP than it is today because the format allowed for you to write about, you know, four and half, five pages of text, which then could be printed on a legible form.  But today with the CD, you--the, the print is so small and the artistic directors are so weird about how they decide to put--to print it in green against the fuchsia or something that you--that you can't read what's written there anyway, so I think the liner notes have declined in importance in, in records today, which I think is unfortunate for serious music anyway.  So, yeah, I, I wrote--I wrote a great deal of that.  I, same with poetry, I wrote several political essays of the time in, in primarily the radical press.  And, what else?  I, I did radio for a while.  I was at WBAI [WBAI Radio] in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: What, what did you do on radio?
Speaker 2: I did a morning show at WBAI.  That's the Pacifica [Pacifica Radio Network] station in New York.  It was--this was actually before 'Four Lives in the Bebop Business.'  And I played music, I played world music.  I, I was one of the first broadcasters to do world music on, on, on the air.  I played world music and jazz.  I read poetry from the new small press editions and I told everybody where the demonstrations were.  I think I was the first deejay to give the air pollution index; I believe that's true.
Story_ID: 304161
Speaker 1: What impact was the Civil Rights Movement having on your work and your writings--
Speaker 2: Well, the thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, the Civil Rights Movement sort of reached out and grabbed you if you had any sensitivity and any consciousness at all.  I mentioned earlier that I had been exposed to the nascent Civil Rights Movement in the--at, at college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with the arguments that were going on around Brown versus Topeka Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  But, actually when I first got to New York [New York], I was thinking of myself primarily as an artist, living a bohemian lifestyle, caught the tail end of the Beat Generation, and I was concerned primarily with developing a craft and with--living a lifestyle which was as free of most of the major social and other concerns that I found to be so stultifying in America.  As I said earlier--as I said before, this was--this was an America that was intentionally conformist in most of its behaviors and I was perhaps a, a participant in a group--a movement that was trying to develop alternative lifestyles.  However, there was this ineluctable force in the streets that kept rising, and as the issues became more and more con--confrontation and more and more graphically drawn, then all of us had to turn and face it and had, had to deal with it, so that the southern Civil Rights Movement was something that I read about and was very impressed with and was generally supportive of.  I once organized a benefit for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] where Archie Shepp, Jackie McLean, Pharoah Sanders, did this concert at what had become by then a former, former Loew's movie theater [Loew's Commodore Theatre], which had become the Fillmore East [New York, New York], so, yeah, I was supportive of that.
Story_ID: 304162
Speaker 1: But I think the biggest force was Malcolm X.  Malcolm appealed more to the northern, to the urban rising young population and to African American intellectuals in New York [New York], Malcolm was, was something that, that we--that changed our direction in very radical ways so that it, it--I mean, he was such, such a powerful orator, such a great rhetorician that you really had to rethink what you were doing and you had to ask yourself whether this artful, bohemian lifestyle that you were living was enough.  You know, whether you were not living in some kind of isolation from the historic force that you could see everywhere, which was this great movement, which was a great and complex movement, which had many faces to it.  So that became much more political at that point.  There was also a strong left in Lower Manhattan [New York, New York], which was influential and interesting to me.  This was informed from a number of sources there was a Cuban revolution, which impressed us all, at least it impressed me and the, the group I was around.  LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] had gone to Cuba, had written an essay called 'Cuba Libre,' which I, I was very, very impressed with.  And we thought that that offered this ideal when we were talking a few minutes before the camera went on about how, how a young person will be so completely convinced that their view of the world is the right view.  And at--and Cuba seemed to offer, like the prospect of a society that was--that absolutely stripped down all of its institutions and made them new, and made--and, and that newness would be one that was built upon the, the needs of the mass of people and not on any particular kind of economic elite.  And so Marxism was sort of a--another new force in my orientation along with the nationalism that Malcolm was preaching, and so there was sort of this intellectual bifurcation of trying to find a way of uniting and getting those two points of view to (unclear) and to a coherent system of thought which was, again, a common sort of interest among a lot of the intellectuals of my generation.
Speaker 2: Were you able to ever unite them?
Speaker 1: I think so.  I mean, I, I think--I think that I, I came up with sort of--I didn't.  Not I, but we came up with, with an, an approach which seemed to have some, some coherence to it.  There were some, some writers who had written work which seemed to join the ideas somewhat and I read and was influenced by them.  There was a great deal of discussion going on among white and black intellectuals and black and black intellectuals, which I think--which I was a party to and--so, yeah, I mean I--that, that--it did--it seemed like I--like, like I had it at the time.  Now, looking back, I don't--I don't see that a lot of that applies to the world as I know it now.  I don't see that, that seem--a lot of it seems to have been dream and fantasy, but then if you don't have dream and fantasy, you know, then, then what--how do you go about setting goals either, too?
Story_ID: 304163
Speaker 1: And your circle of friends, were they a mixed group?  A diverse group of people in terms of race, intellect, and background?  Or--tell us a little bit about your, your circle of friends.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now when I first got to New York [New York] and moved into Lower Manhattan [New York, New York], this would be the Lower East Side, Greenwich Village a little less so, and then Lower East Side spreading down into SoHo and later NoHo and all that.  When I first got there, there were very few African Americans among them.  And I--so I, I got to hang with a lot of poets and writers and artists who were mostly white at the time, a lot of the Black Mountain College [Black Mountain, North Carolina] poets.  Black Mountain College was a school in Asheville, outside Asheville, North Carolina, which had this, you know, wide open sort of curriculum and had put together a faculty of artists and intellectuals, which was sort of at the cutting edge of everything.  So, poets like Charles Olson when he was in town, Robert Creeley when he was in town.  I got to know a lot of the Beat [Generation] poets, Allen Ginsberg, Gregory Corso.  A guy named Joel Oppenheimer who was out of the Black Mountain school was a good friend of mine.  And Roi Jones [LeRoi Jones; Amiri Baraka] had this sort of salon at his--as his apartment in Chelsea [New York, New York] at the time where people would come by every weekend, and there'd be wine and weed and, and conversation.  Now, gradually more and more African Americans started moving down and I got to know them, too, good core of painters, good core of, of poets, and most of all, jazz musicians.  And so the, the circle got larger and it got to be more diverse.  Not all of these elements talked to all of the other elements, but I talked to all of 'em, and so there was a nucleus that sort of spun around and touched a lot of bases.  The bar scene was one which would have--where you could find your sort of intellectual peers in various schools.  You could go to the Cedar bar [Cedar Tavern, New York, New York] and see the abstract expressionist painters, you could go to Slug's [Slugs' Saloon, New York, New York] and hear new jazz musicians, and so forth.  So it was a very stimulating scene.  It was a scene where you could see--because I said, it became gradually more political, at least my section of it became gradually more political, but it was a scene where you could--you could--you, you, you were constantly in, in, in--involved with people who were making really great work or work that was very promising in the sense that it would be setting new directions.  You could go by Ornette Coleman's apartment and he would say, "Oh, A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], I've got this new tape or this new tune I'm, I'm working on.  I think it's gonna be a good one.  I don't have everything worked out just yet, but here, let me play this for you," and he'd put on something like 'Lonely Woman' which is probably the piece of his that everybody would acknowledge is one of his greatest compositions.  Or you'd go by--I'd go by Roi Jones' and, you know, he'd have some fabulous poem that he was working on and, hey, I'm struggling with this part right here, but as soon as work that out, I'm--this is a new direction for me.  I think--yeah, I, I think I wanna pursue this.  So everywhere you went, you'd go by Bob--and there'd be Bob Thompson, who, who was a--who I roomed with for a while who was a painter and was doing figurative sort of almost surrealist work.  And, you know, so you talked to Bob about what his--he was doing, as well as all of the other, you know, white people, Jewish writers and poets and musicians and composers that'd be there, avant-garde composers, the, the downtown people, La Monte Young and others.  And so--you know, so, so it was extremely stimulating environment.  I don't--I don't--I think that there was more of a scene at that particular time for artists than I've seen since.  That--you know, there are sort of areas still in downtown primarily, but not exclusively where there are a concentration of artists, but I don't believe the scene is like it was then.  But then that just may be, you know, nostalgia for my (unclear) years. So, yeah, that--yeah, there--it, it, it was diverse and, but as the--as, as nationalism rose, as the movement rose, the Civil Rights Movement and human rights movement rose, it, it, it--you sort of started making more choices in, in who you--where you would be and how you would work.
Story_ID: 304164
Speaker 1: What kind of choices did you make?
Speaker 2: Well, there was the choice of ending a marriage, which was not one that--which--I mean, I have--I have no complaints about my first wife at all.  She, she was a good woman who never did me any kind of wrong.  But, you know, the affection on my part started fading and so it was about, you know, getting out of that.  And then I went to the South on a tour of poets reading at historically black colleges [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)].
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967].  And I went to Atlanta [Georgia], and, and, and that's the first time I had been up close--I hadn't been back south since I left in the late '50s [1950s], so it was--it was news for me to go back and see what it was like at historically black colleges at the time.
Speaker 1: How had the South changed since you had left?  And you left like in the '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so how had it changed over the last twenty or so years?
Speaker 2: Attitude.  Attitude had changed.  I mean, black people were not the same as they were when I had left the South.  I had left a sense of certain inevitability that the white people would rule and the--and the black people would submit, and that that was a law of nature.  I encountered people who were willing to stand up against anything to overthrow this, and that was--I mean, I had read about it, I knew about it, I had supported it, but I hadn't walked in it, and that was--that was--that, that, that really made me turn around a great deal.  I went to Atlanta and I met the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] folk there.  I mean, I knew the New York SNCC people, but I met the SNCC folk in Atlanta including the woman I married and to whom I'm still married.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Karen, Karen Edmonds [Karen Edmonds Spellman] at the time.  And she was the head of research at--in the Atlanta offices, in the national office in Atlanta.  And so, so I thought that that was a group that I really should be with and--
Speaker 1: How, how did they accept you as an artist?  What were the dynamics there?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  They accepted me.  They, they--pleasant person, they liked me but they gave me a hard time, too.
Story_ID: 304165
Speaker 1: I remember my, my wife [Karen Edmonds Spellman] saying, let me see now, the--on, on sort of the first time I went by the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office--she invited me by the SNCC office.  Well, here's the story.  I met--I met her at Paschal's [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia].  You know Paschal's?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, Paschal's is--was, was a black-owned hotel in Atlanta [Georgia], and it had a restaurant in it famous for its fried chicken, and they actually still sell chicken at the airport.  And so Paschal's was the place where like the Civil Rights Movement crew SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], SNCC, and the other would gather for breakfast and arguments and sit around and plot meetings and strategies, et cetera.  And I went in there--I, I was staying there and I went into the restaurant there, and I saw [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and I had asked Roi Jones [LeRoi Jones; Amiri Baraka]--he was--he was now Amiri Baraka--I--well, I said, "I don't know anybody in, in Atlanta.  Who, who could I look up?"  He said, "Well look up Julian Bond."  So, he had known Julian, so I walked into the restaurant, I saw Julian sitting there and I, I introduced myself to him.  He was sitting with two other people; one was Howard Moore [HistoryMaker Howard Moore, Jr.] who was a civil rights lawyer, and he was the one who got [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis off, and a really gorgeous young woman.  And so she was--so that, that was Karen.  And so I sat with them and--so Karen said, "Okay, why don't you stop by the SNCC office, you know, if you'd like to see that," and I was happy to do that.  I went over there in the afternoon.  And so what she did--she was really absolutely not impressed that I was a poet.  I mean, she thought it was interesting and cool but it was not something that she, she, she felt that she--she didn't particularly look up to me for anything.  And she said, "Now, let me see now, you're a poet.  Now, what can poets do?  You probably know how to collate, don't you?" (Laughter) So she said, "Okay, we got this stuff coming off"--you know, you--you're probably too young to remember the Gestetner machines where you just sort of ran off these, these copies, so you don't, don't remember those, okay.  But that's--that was the way you printed up your newsletter or your, your material.  You had to sort of--ran 'em off.  You didn't have copy machines in those days.  Yes, there was a time when the world did not have copy machines.  So there would be stuff coming off the Gestetners and she said, okay if you would just collate all this--she gave me these big stacks of paper to collate, and that's what I did, and I sat there and collated.  And then they--then--
Speaker 2: She was impressed by your collating abilities.
Speaker 1: Well, she, she figured that, that, that--that's a skill that a poet would have which would be useful right there.  So then they, they later put me to work as a poet to write a skit because they did a fundraiser every year called Back to Black.  No, first, first there was a, a, a little--some copy for the radio stations and I read a little thing about yes, black is back, come back to black at this so-and-so event.  And then I had, had to write a skit for 'em and so, it was all right.  It was--it was--it was kind of interesting and humbling, but, but these were people who were very proud of what they were doing and you'd see, see them--there'd be some people coming in.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Jennifer Lawson, you know Jennifer?
Speaker 2: From--at HET [ph.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, Jennifer was coming in--
Speaker 2: From PBS.
Speaker 1: Yeah, C--CPB [Corporation for Public Broadcasting].
Speaker 2: Right, CPB, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I remember Jennifer had come in from Mississippi where she had been doing some field work with some of the other people, and these are people who had some--one of the guys had a bullet wound in his leg and--you know, and they were--they were young people and they--you know, they weren't worried about any of this.  This was just sort of what they did.  You know, they, they duck bullets and organized people.  And, and, and they were a little cocky about all that, you know?  So it--I, I found 'em--I found 'em absolutely stimulating.  I was really, really interested in being around these folk.
Story_ID: 304166
Speaker 1: And did you like the fact that you were able to integrate your craft into what was happening all around you as well?
Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't a whole lot that--the integration of craft didn't go all that far.  Later on, I started with my wife [Karen Edmonds Spellman] and a guy named Donald Stone, who was one of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people, a, a magazine which got a few issues out called Rhythm.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That would've been '68 [1968], maybe '69 [1969], in there.  And, and we, we only got a few issues of Rhythm out.  But--and there was one which--where they'd be poems and there'd be some drawings--get, get some of the artists to work, and it'd be, you know, political essays.  But for the most part, you know, there wasn't a great integration of art and civil rights.  There was, you know, the, the--there, there were--there was--the civil rights were--the problem was more a case that--this is when I started teaching, too, and that's probably where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: At Morehouse at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  I was--
Speaker 1: What were you teaching?
Speaker 2: --a writer-in-residence.  I taught a course in African American culture and I taught a jazz history course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 304167
Speaker 1: So you were talking about your work at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes, so it was--so I taught these courses.  It, it was very interesting because for one thing, it--this was a point at which a lot of the colleges were looking for black faculty, not African American colleges.  They had had a monopoly up until just that point, but a lot of white colleges were looking for, for African American faculty because they had--the Civil Rights Movement had forced them to open their doors to more black students, and the students said, "Where are the black professors?"  And the colleges didn't have a clue.  So I had--so courses like this, like this courses in Afro [African American culture] were all--were--these, these were sort of new courses for the--for the black campuses as well.  I mean, they hadn't been teaching much in jazz before this.  And, and we're actually not offering a lot of courses in African American culture per se.  You know, they, they would've--they would've taught more black authors and more black painters and more black composers, et cetera, in, in their routine courses, but they perhaps are not isolated, the subject, as one which was worthy of investigation on its own as a field.  And so I had been involved in the development of the Black Arts Movement during my New York [New York] years as a sort of segue out of the ars gratis artis [sic. ars gratia artis], art for art's sake, toward ars gratis populus, arts for the sake of the people during the years of getting some political consciousness in New York.  So I was of that generation which had established the Black Arts Movement.  Roi Jones [LeRoi Jones; Amiri Baraka] had gone up to Harlem [New York, New York] and started the--oh, what was the name of his center?  The Black Arts Center [sic. Black Arts Repertory Theatre/School (BARTS)]--the Black Arts School--I think it was Black Arts Center or something like that.  And that was one of the early--not the first, but one of the early black arts organizations.  There had been--there had been money on the streets for the development of nonprofit arts organizations including some in inner cities, which hadn't existed before.  The foundations hadn't been funding such things.  It's worth noting that the whole--that basically the whole 501(c)(3) world exploded during the 1960s.  Before that, there was largely few institutions, hospitals, libraries, universities, symphony orchestras and museums and so forth, but now you had a lot of community based organizations and social services and in the arts.  You had HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams], which lead to the establishment of Jazzmobile [Jazzmobile Inc., New York, New York] and some others.  You had the War on Poverty had led to the establishment of some arts organizations in downtown Manhattan [New York, New York] as well, and this was, as I say, happening all over the country.  So the Black Arts Movement started developing.  You started seeing black theater companies being formed, the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company], the New Freedom Theatre--New Federal Theatre in Harlem, [HistoryMaker] Barbara Ann Teer's National Black Theatre [National Black Theatre Inc.] in Harlem, and the same thing was happening in the--in the Hispanic community, the Asian American community, Native American community, all these cultural organizations that were culturally specific, and this was an interesting development.
Story_ID: 304168
Speaker 1: So the Black Arts Movement was burgeoning all over the country, and as one of the early members of that movement, then the sort of understanding of the world and how it was reflected in art from an African American perspective was of interest and value to the colleges including historically black colleges [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)], and later I taught, taught at several of the--several white colleges.  I think it's interesting to note that the integration of the faculties of the white colleges was largely led by the hiring of artists before they were hiring the Ph.Ds.  Because, again, they, they had a hard time finding enough of them who they could move into their--into their faculties, so--
Speaker 2: And who were knowledgeable on the subject manner--
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 2: --as well.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And, and so the poets, you know, were way out (laughter) in front here, you know, because we had stopped to, to, to make this study on our own investigation, so I think this was good to have that kind of perspective on campus at any rate, that is someone who is not fundamentally an academician, but who did have an intellectual foundation.  So--yeah, so I taught these courses at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] was in school there when I taught there, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What do you remember about Sam Jackson?
Speaker 1: I remember him being--acting.  I remember him being--there, there was a guy named Carlton [W.] Molette who taught theater at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], who trained Sam and then he, he also later trained Spike Lee and all, all the actors, you know, from Spike Lee movies or a lot of 'em anyway, and Sam and his wife, Latoya--Latoya, LaTanya, LaTanya Richardson--Latanya I believe it is, who was--who is a marvelous actress.  I mean, she didn't make it as big as Sam did, but, but she was certainly the star of the theater scene down there.  And I remember Sam as being a, a, a very nice kid, sort of quiet, serious, worked hard on becoming a good actor.  You know, you never know who's gonna--who's gonna rise out of it.  I didn't see special gifts in his--his, his wife was way more impressive than, than he, but, but he--but he was working hard and every time you saw him, he was better, which is what you look for, and obviously he found--he found his craft and developed his craft to a very high level.
Story_ID: 304169
Speaker 1: And so after Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], what came next?
Speaker 2: Morehouse, then--well there was this demonstration at Morehouse.  There was a friend of mine named Gerald McWorter who was one of the radical faculty members there.
Speaker 1: Were you a radical faculty member?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess.  Yeah, I probably was.  Yeah, I was.  So he and--so there, there was all these student demonstrations at the time.  It was going on on all of the campuses all over the country.  Had not happened at Morehouse, and students were doing these outrageous things.  So I remember going out of town and coming back, and he had organized this, this takeover of the--this--of, of the board of trustees of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The faculty member had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he--so he, he had this following of students and they, they had--he had organized this thing.  And so there was this infamous Harkness Hall event where, Harkness Hall on, on AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] campus.  This is when, when the (unclear) between AU, Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and, and Morehouse.  And the board was meeting there and, and students went up and locked, locked, locked them in there and demanded a merger of all the colleges into one 'cause you had all the--
Speaker 1: A merger of Morehouse, Spelman, Atlanta, and Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And Clark and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And Morris Brown, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And the--and the Interdenominational Theological Seminary [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --into one.  So--'cause they all had different--separate English departments, they all had separate libraries, and you're saying, well come on, we can do this one thing and we'll have this, this really great university.  Now, it's a good idea on paper, but it was never gonna happen, never has to happen.  But they made this demand.  And so they were all locked up in there and, and there were two faculty members in there with 'em, he and I.  And so we were not appreciated there.  I mean, so, so I got fired for that (laughter).
Story_ID: 304170
Speaker 1: After--and I went--I had taught a semester at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], but I left--I left there and I spent a year on a lecture circuit.
Speaker 2: Just traveling throughout the South or throughout the country (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Throughout, throughout the country lecturing because, again, this was stuff--
Speaker 2: So that was like 1970, 1971?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.  So I spent a year there doing that.  And then I finally got residency, a visiting lectureship at Rutgers' campus, the Douglass College of Rutgers [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey].  And so I spent a year commuting to New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Commuting from where?
Speaker 1: Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --to New Jersey.  And then added on to that, at a certain point moved over to Livingstone College [Salisbury, North Carolina], and after that contract at Douglass was up, and added on--and then I wound up going to Livingstone and then going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on Wednesday to teach, then coming back to Atlanta Wednesday night.  And finally, I took a job at Harvard, a visiting lectureship at Harvard.
Speaker 2: How long were you at Harvard?
Speaker 1: A little over two years.
Speaker 2: So this was maybe from 1972--
Speaker 1: About '72 [1972] to seventy, seventy--'72 [1972] to '75 [1975], I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what were your experiences like at Harvard and what were the students like?
Speaker 1: I had the best students I'd ever had.  These, these were really smart kids, had the best resources for teaching that I had ever had.  I mean, they had forty-some libraries at Harvard, so you could make a complicated research assignment and, and the kids could find the material.  And they were very curious, very strong.  There was a strong Marxism, Leninism, Mao thought movement that was interested in the Afro-American department, Afro-American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies], which is where I taught.  And they, they were stimulating because that kept you in a lot of theoretical, ideological debate.  And they had read a lot more of the stuff than I had.  I mean, I never was able to finish 'Capital' ['Das Capital,' Karl Marx], you know.  I tried it a couple times, but I never was able to get more than a third of the way through the thing, but I, I had students who had read it two or three times.  I had students who read--who had read all of the Lenin [Vladimir Lenin], something I never was, was able to do.  We read all of the Mao [Mao Tse-tung] and, again, read, read a lot of it several times.  And they debated the fine lines of, of, of Marx's [Karl Marx] theory in--into the night.
Speaker 2: Now when you were at--
Speaker 1: But that--I don't wanna say that that was the scripture of all of--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the students I had, but, but, that--it was sort of one particular cord that was--that was very much attached to the Afro department.
Story_ID: 304171
Speaker 1: When you were at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Rutgers [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], did you find that the majority of your students were African American students or did you have a nice combination?
Speaker 2: I had--I had combinations of, of students.  Let me see, were the majority--probably, probably--it probably was about half.  Some, some things were almost all--the workshops were probably mostly African American, but I think probably--a lot of courses were about half.
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about, that today, in 2004, that students who are, are graduating with degrees in African American studies, Afro studies, now the majority of those students are white women.  What are some of your--
Speaker 2: Is that so?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.  It--it's a legitimate field of investigation.  I--I wish there was more of an effort of African American students to continue to investigate their history and their past.  I don't think that they should limit themselves to that by any means; I think that's a mistake for some of those who do, to say, well this is all I care about.  I don't wanna know anything about western civilization or western history.  I think that that is a big mistake.  But I, I do wish that more of them would get to--get more of a foundation on what they came from.  I think that--I think the consciousness among--in the African American middle class is becoming a bit more diffuse.  I think that a lot of African Americans don't have the same--young people today don't have the same sort of identity of themselves as African Americans.  They would see themselves as products of the world and they don't see that the access that they have to the rest of the world is largely result of the struggle that went on up through the '60s [1960s] and late in the '70s [1970s] and the civil rights and human rights movement, and I wish they were more conscious of that history.  But this is the common complaint among people in my generation with their kids, like, "Oh, Dad, you think everything is race," you know.  And I don't think everything is race, but I think race is more important than a lot of young people today think it is, that they're able to live a life that--where they can have that belief is, I guess to some degree is a, a, a measure of success.  But I think that the success to the degree that we have achieved some success in, in that area, it has been limited to a specific class within the African American community, and I think it has left behind this sort of base in, in, in the greater numbers of African American working, working class people, which I think is quite unfortunate, that we, we have become more segregated ourselves from our own--from our own--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --co-racial group.
Story_ID: 304172
Speaker 1: And so, in 1975, you came to the National Endowment of the Arts.  Was it called that at that particular time?
Speaker 2: National Endowment for the Arts [NEA], yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's always been called that.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a classmate called Vantile Whitfield who had been at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and I knew him from the Howard Players [Howard University Players], and Vantile was working here at the endowment as the director of a program called Expansion Arts, which he was the founder of within the agency.  That program had come into existence largely, as I say, out of recognition of the black arts, Hispanic arts, Latino arts, Asian American arts, Native Americans, et cetera, rural arts movement as well.  I should--I should--I should include them in there because there were artists going up in the Appalachians, you know, digging out poems and legends and doing theater and so forth.  But any rate, Vantile was the director of this program whose responsibility was to sort of shepherd that particular field.  And he asked me to chair a panel for him, and I did, and that was my introduction to the Arts Endowment.  Meanwhile back at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--I mean, Harvard was not a good experience for me.  I loved the students.  I loved the facilities.  And I was having some success in Boston [Massachusetts].  I had--I was doing a television show called 'Say Brother' ['Basic Black'] at W--WGBH and I was--I was doing some radio.
Speaker 1: What was the television show about?
Speaker 2: 'Say Brother'?
Speaker 1: What was it--
Speaker 2: Topper Carew produced it.  It was--it, it was a black show and I was--I sort of had--I was the sort of street corner philosopher and Marita Rivera, who was the producer of the show and is now the head of WGBH Radio at least, had, had a lamp post that I would stand beside and I'd give these commentaries from this lamp post.  It was--it was a lot of fun.  So I, I was having some success, but Harvard was a drag.  I mean, it was--you had--the Afro-American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] at that time was headed by Ewart Guinier who was [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier's father, a very good man, old labor movement guy, and he was at war with the rest of the university, which, which had no respect for our department at all.  It's not like it is now under Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.].  But even still, some of the principals that inhibited our, our success as a department still applied, which is to say that we could not and he--they cannot still have tenured faculty which would've voted to the department.  The argument was that as an interdisciplinary department, you had to have--there had to be a co-appointment with some other department.  Now, this largely meant that they didn't think that we could hire an historian who was worthy of teaching at Harvard, certainly not a tenured position.  So--and, and then there were all these other issues, so all, all you ever heard was this--these Nobel Prize winners yelling inferior at you, you know.  And it went on and on and on.  And there were constant fights in the faculty.  And Guinier would stand there very courageously and, and, and duel these people, but there was all this weight against him.  So I was very happy to leave Harvard.
Story_ID: 304173
Speaker 1: It also was--that was sort of the tail end of the conflict in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] over busing, and I actually heard nigger more in Boston [Massachusetts] from white people than I ever heard in the South.  And, you know, you couldn't go to the beaches because you'd get beat up, you know.  It was--it was--it was a bad scene in Boston.  Curious city, some of the most regressive and liberal people you could imagine, and some of the most bigoted, you know, stomp down racist people on the other hand, and the huge shades in between.  I don't want to call the city one thing or another because it's, it's a complex situation, but it was a very unhappy period for me and my wife [Karen Edmonds Spellman].  It was--I mean, you couldn't make friends because of the--there was such transience, you know, there.  There'd be people who were there to finish their degree or, you know, finish their doctorate and then they'd move on, or people were there on two-year appointments and then they'd move on.  And, and, you know, you, you could get--I don't know if it's still the case, but you could get--if you'd be in a large group of African American people and there--you--and four or five people who had lived in Boston would find each other--you'd find them in a cluster talking about how much they hated it.  And so my wife said, "Okay, A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman], you got this, this this appointment, and when this is up, I wanna be out of this town."  She was--she was finishing her master's degree, which she had started at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] in city planning, and she was working, and, and we had--we had a child [Tajun Spellman] then.  And she said, "Okay, you know, after, after I get my degree, after this appointment up, I wanna be outta here," and we agreed on Washington, D.C.  And, and then--so, so I, I met Nancy Hanks who was not the founder of the Endowment [National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)] but was the woman who built it through being on these panels with Vantile [Vantile Whitfield] and I asked her for a job and she gave me one.
Speaker 2: And what does the National Endowment for the Arts do?
Speaker 1: National Endowment for the Arts is a federal agency, which distributes funds to arts--artists and arts organizations.  I say artists in a very limited way because we used to give a large number of fellowships in, in the artistic disciplines, but the [U.S.] Congress took that authority from us with the exception of, of writers and of some honorifics that we give including a Jazz Masters Award [NEA Jazz Masters Award], which is something that I've had some, some responsibility for lately.  And the arts--but mainly supports arts organizations and 501(c)(3) tax-exempt arts organizations and supports them through a whole host of things from commissioning new works of art to, to activities that bring the arts to people.  It's a remarkable agency.  It's a small agency, but it's a very rewarding thing to see our panel books and see how much artistic activity there is going on around the country, you know, that we support.  You'll see really strong and interesting thing going on in places you never would've thought would've had such activity.  And a lot of the stuff exists as a result of the movement of which the National Endowments for the Arts is a part.
Story_ID: 304174
Speaker 1: When you first came on [at the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)], you were director of the Arts in Education Study Project [Artists-in-Education Program].
Speaker 2: I did.  That was--that was the job Nancy Hanks had entitled me.  This--a lot of it had to do with an evaluation of the Artists-in-Schools Program.  We used to have a program where artists would sit in the schools to work with teachers and residencies.  And there was some controversy about that with the arts education establishment, which thought that it was not a disciplined program.  So I was asked to do an evaluation of that, which I did.  And then I became assistant director.  I became Vantile's [Vantile Whitfield] assistant in Expansion Arts.  And then as he retired during the--when--during the--when Livingston Biddle [Livingston L. Biddle, Jr.] took over as chairman, then, then I became director of Expansion Arts.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about--you also helped to establish the endowment's division of civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--that was--that was a short-term activity in between--in between directors of the division of civil rights.  Well, the, the--more from, from an office to a division, and I was interim director of it and so I helped put it together.  But I, I was holding onto my job as, as--was I--I was still assistant director of Expansion Arts at the time, so I helped get that going.
Speaker 1: What was that arm's function?
Speaker 2: It, it largely deals with--dealt with civil rights complaints and did a certain amount of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From employees within--
Speaker 2: With the agency--
Speaker 1: --the, the agency.
Speaker 2: --or, or from people within the field who would be--who had civil rights complaints.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a certain amount of advocacy that went along with it.  And I, I think that--I, I--but, again, it was--it was something I did at, at--you know, on the side as I was assistant director of Expansion Arts.
Story_ID: 304175
Speaker 1: How has the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] changed over the years?
Speaker 2: The Arts Endowment changes as the world changes.  When I first came to the agency, it was in a period of great growth under Nancy Hanks.  It had a lot of cache.  We--anywhere you went, people were like, wow, somebody from the endowment is here.  And it--as I say, it was sort of the peak of, of, of a mountain which was fairly large and that included state arts agencies and--which the endowment helped to create and then local arts agencies were, were just getting started during the early '70s [1970s].  There had been some, but they were--they started growing all over the country.  And endow--so this whole sort of public support of the arts system had the endowment at its pinnacle.  The--and its budget kept going up and up and up every--you get, you know, quite measurable percentages of your budgets and increase annually in appropriations, so I was here when the agency grew from probably somewhere around sixty million or so to over a hundred million.  And, and that was a lot of fun because we were--we were very much the center of things as the only agency that reviews applications of all kinds from all over the country.  You know, there was all of this information here about what was going on in the arts.  That still--that still persists.  And--but there was also all this growth in the arts.  There were these new organizations being founded, not just in the small community based ones, but even some civic organizations like museums and orchestras.  Those fields doubled and tripled, in some instances quadrupled since the endowment was created.  So you were--there you were, riding this huge wave that was just massive and beautiful and exciting.  So, yeah, that, that was a lot of fun.  I enjoyed it.  And then, of course, as director of the Expansion Arts program, which dealt with arts--well, according to the letter of the guidelines, arts organizations that are deeply rooted in and reflective of the culture of minority, inner city, rural, and tribal communities, in other words, all the culturally diverse organizations.  I had this--I had this view, which nobody else had of all of these organizations, all of these artists, and all of these communities working with, with their native cultures and turning them into, into contemporary statements.  And--so I will--had this--I was talking about 21st century American art and how much it would be affected by artists of color as, as long as--as well as by technology, and how this would be the factor that people would see.  And I saw this way, way earlier than anybody because they all was managing it, you know, and it was great to do.  It was a lot of fun.  I could see--I mean, I would meet with--I remember meeting with, with, with a composer in San Francisco [California] who was of Filipino and Japanese origin, and he had grown up in a household where he heard this verified Gagaku court music, abstract court music from Japan on his mother's side, and this funky Kulintang percussion music from the Philippines on his father's side, and you couldn't figure out how to put these together in the music composition until he learned jazz, and then all of the sudden he had--through jazz, he had a vocabulary which could bridge 'em.  So I'm looking to see at how, how, like these--how these communities as they establish themselves in the United States and as they come to terms with their--with, with the sort of relationship of their base culture with new western culture, how they go about this, this synthesis and, and make new art.  And so this--here's this guy doing this concert music, which is not related to--which is not built on a diatonic chromatic system, but which has jazz as its primary discipline and vocabulary.  And that--I'm thinking, this is great stuff, you know?  You see--I remember the dance director going to India once and coming back and saying, you know, I was looking for new dance in India, but all I saw was this traditional dance which is like centuries old and somebody had changed the hand gesture, you know, and--but then you'd--then you'd--then you'd see in Indian dances in the United States who had been here for a while become exposed to modern--American modern dance, and them to be using Indian movements and doing sort of narrative statements on Indian--on Indian American life in, in a contemporary manner, you know?  And it would be great stuff.  I mean, so it, it was a real--it was a real pleasure those years, much more interesting than what I'm doing now.
Story_ID: 304176
Speaker 1: What are you doing now [at National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)]?
Speaker 2: Well, now I'm responsible for guidelines and panels, which is the spine of the agency and, and very serious work, but it's just not as interesting as, you know, actually working in the field.  I mean, I don't have my hands directly on arts organizations anymore.  I do have some fun projects like this Jazz Masters [NEA Jazz Masters Awards] project.  Our chairman [Dana Gioia] has decided to take these Jazz Masters Awards which are the greatest honorific that America offers jazz musicians, and build 'em up in something so that there's some prominence in them so it becomes more like the Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize] or so forth.  And I was given that assignment.  Wayne Brown, the director of music, is, is most responsible for the success of it far more than me 'cause he does all the work; he keeps it all going.  But--so that--that's an interesting thing.  I also--this office does a lot of the analysis of how policy turns into practice.  So the chairman says, okay, I want a--I want a new structure for the agency according to discipline as opposed to according to theme.  Well, there are massive implications on the whole agency of how that will be managed, of how the applications will come in, who would do the work, under what systems, et cetera, and our office figures that kind of thing out.
Speaker 1: And do you miss--are you still able to, to write as much?
Speaker 2: I didn't write for my first twenty years here at the endowment.  It, it sort of--it--I'll never forgive myself for that.  I mean, I allowed sort of my right brain to kind of atrophy as a result of doing so much work in administration.  Writing guidelines is not good for your prose.  And I fought--had to fight myself to, to, to get the creativity back, but I, I am now making poems again.  And I don't--they don't come as often as I would like or as I--as I used to when I was a young man, but I, I do have a body of work that I'm, I'm, I'm proud of that is new.
Story_ID: 304177
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the body of work that you're currently working on.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I put together--I have a manuscript for a book of poetry, which I, I don't know quite what to do with.  There's, there's a problem with working here [National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)] in that we have conflict of interest rules, which are good and useful rules to have because it sort of preempts any kind of corruption going on with, with grantees.  But it means that the small presses who would be likely to publish a book of poetry of mine are eligible to apply to the agency and I, therefore, cannot submit to them.  So, so I haven't done much publishing.  But I do have--I do have a manuscript, which grows slowly, and it, it--it's a work which is--which--of which I hope there is some variety.  A lot of it has to do with me and my perception of things and my experiences with the world.  I--I'm more of an urban poet.  I do not write nature poems, for example.  A few of them are, are, are political, but most are not and, and they basically I hope would sort of link my intuition to the intuitions of the reader.  I, I think a lot of them declaim fairly well, but I don't see myself as fundamentally a performance poet.  And--yeah, I'd, I'd--several of them I do like a good deal.
Story_ID: 304178
Speaker 1: You had spoken a little bit earlier about when you first came to the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] and you all had an, an arts program in various schools and we're starting to see arts and music eliminated from schools due to budget cuts and that kind of thing.  What are some of your thoughts on that and why do you think it's important for children to be exposed to arts and music?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that our educational system is becoming too much a rote system.  It's too much geared to testing so that kids spend all their time memorizing and preparing for tests and then quiet happy to be purging their minds of what they have learned now that the test is over.  I, I think that learning is, is much deeper, much more important than that.  The thing about the arts is that creative activity is perhaps the best way for young people to expand their minds.  It gives them the opportunity to make something out of nothing, which is a skill that everyone needs to have.  I mean, not that you necessarily have to become a poet or a painter or a musician out of it, but just the fact that you start with your imagination and you can turn your imagination into something concrete, which is not only concrete, but is, is, is also organized, is disciplined, and is executed at a level of skill which shows that a certain professional kind of discipline has been applied.  I think this is very, very important for young people.  We in the arts have now a body of data which will show how young people benefit and how much faster and better they develop if they have such experiences, but they have not been able to convince the educational system of these values in today's environment, which is extremely inhibiting of such work.  There's also school budgets of course, and as the arts are seen as being very nice to have but not core, then they often are expunged from the budget.
Story_ID: 304179
Speaker 1: This is unfortunate because I think that it, it means that we're getting much more limited people, much less creative people coming out of the schools, people who are much less capable of facing a situation and finding a solution.  I mean, businesses are learning their importance of say, metaphor, in business because how do you make your employees understand what you're doing or how you make your customers understand what you're offering without metaphor.  And you find--I find that sometimes we read about how banks are on the look more at people who have a creative discipline in their academic background because these people are better problem solvers.  And this, this is all important, but we, we need to sell this idea much, much more because it, it--I think--I think it's a shame.
Speaker 2: What are some of your thoughts about 21st century technology, the impact of information technology on arts and on people's ability to be creative?
Speaker 1: I'm the wrong person to ask that because I am so old school that the information age is, is not only something that I don't necessarily understand, but I'm not sure I approve of it.  And this is basically fuddy-duddy.  This is the old fart in me speaking.  So I think that my, my, my children are able to use it quite easily.  It is a part of--it is an extension of their hands and their arms and it does not seem to have stunted their minds at all.  But they're--they are people who are fluent in computer skills but don't define themselves by it.
Story_ID: 304180
Speaker 1: I have three children, first by my first marriage.  His name is Malcolm [Spellman].  He's a screen writer in Los Angeles [California], like two-thirds of the population of Los Angeles.  He's had some success.
Speaker 2: Anything that we know?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 2: What kind of writing does he do?
Speaker 1: He does--I, I--he, he won't let me read any of his scripts so I, I can't give you a whole lot of information on it.  One amusing story was a script that he sold to Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] a few years ago and it was about a kid who was delivering drugs on a skateboard, and his attempts to get out of that life.  And it was a script that Fox liked because it had a certain social consciousness about his attempt to get out of the--out of the drug life and also it had, had the first like skateboard action scenes, skateboard chase scenes and so forth, so--but then he went to the first development meeting, and they said, "Well, Malcolm, you know, we like your script very much, we think we can work with it, but we have a couple suggestions to, to make.  One, instead of being black and living in the inner city, could he be white and live in the suburbs?"  And the next guy said, "Yeah and instead of delivering drugs on a skateboard, could he deliver newspapers on a bicycle?"  And my son is like, what?  You know, so, so anyway, he's, he's done a lot of--he fixes a lot of scripts.  You, you, you know, people buy scripts and then they say okay well the script needs work, can you--can you dress it up for us?  He does--he does a lot of that.
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: And my oldest daughter is--I, I have two daughters by my current wife, Tajun [Tajun Spellman], who is now thirty--thirty-one, and Tajun is an oboist, and she's in a group called Imani Winds and they play contemporary classical music and they, they emphasis composers of color but they don't limit themselves to that.  And they--their mission is to get classical music better understood and better enjoyed in--by, by people who don't have access to it very much.  And they're, they're having some considerable success.  My younger daughter, Kaji [Kaji Spellman], is twenty-five.  She's a graduate student at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and is--she's in a program called Institute for Sacred Music [sic. Institute of Sacred Music], which is between the [Yale] School of Music [New Haven, Connecticut] and the school of divinity [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], and she's taking--she's taking more theology than anything else, actually.  I think she's gonna wind up with a doctorate in theology or something like that.  My wife, Karen [Karen Edmonds Spellman], is--organizes cultural event--events.  She produces large festivals and, and she's right now organized the, the Association of Presenters of Performing Arts, APAP--Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference in New York [New York], which will have about one thousand showcases, great conference.  So, that's my family.
Story_ID: 304181
Speaker 1: Wow, so all of your children are artistic.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Were you surprised by that at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I--I didn't know what careers they, they would choose.  I didn't raise my son [Malcolm Spellman], so I can take no credit for that, but my daughters [Tajun Spellman and Kaji Spellman] had music training all their lives, and this was a very important thing.  It gets back to the importance of having the arts in their lives because I had no trouble with these kids whatsoever.  They were good students and they always had a purpose and I never had to worry about where they were or who they were hanging out with because they were hanging out with other kids like them.  Say the D.C. Youth Orchestra [D.C. Youth Orchestra Program, Washington, D.C.], they both went through that, and that's all kids of all colors in the city and they get together to play music and study music, and you're getting pure points for getting better on your instrument, doing something better.  You have to develop professional behaviors 'cause you gotta show up on time, knowing the music.  You gotta play it in tune.  You gotta take instruction.  You gotta be able to give criticism and get criticism, all the skills that you need to be a, a good adult.  And so even though my younger daughter I don't--will, will not be a practicing musician, music has helped her to get where she is.  And my older daughter is a practicing musician and, and that's to the good.  I mean, she'll never get rich playing contemporary music on the oboe, but, but she's making a living.
Story_ID: 304182
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for someone who is interested in a career as a writer or a career in the arts?
Speaker 2: I think I advise young people first of all in career selection to find some work that they really enjoy doing and don't worry so much about the money, just be doing something that you'll--will give you some satisfaction and will put you in the company of people with whom you would like to associate.  'Cause a lot of people choose careers according to what will pay the best, they wind up doing work that they hate and being around people that they don't like to be around for most of their lives and I know some very rich but miserable lawyers, for example.  So that's the first advice.  The second thing I would tell people is that discipline will take you farther than talent.  The most talented people you know going into any arts discipline will not necessarily be the ones who succeed.  The ones who have talent and who work hard at their discipline are the ones who will succeed.  So I, I say this--I mean, I say that to any--in any field, I think that discipline trumps talent.  I don't mean that untalented can succeed, but I, I, I think that again, talent without discipline leads to a lot of waste.  I would say--I would suggest that they learn the business.  The arts are loaded with people who don't have a clue as to how to get the payment for their work which is commensurate with the value of the work.  With people who are never sure that the contract that they just signed is fair, and so it's very important that they learn the business.  And the--a lot of people find out that they actually are better suited for the business side of the arts than they are for the creative side, and that's fine too.  So you might be a manager, you might run an arts organization, all kinds of things you can do.  But, I, I think it is important that you learn the business part of it.
Story_ID: 304183
Speaker 1: You had said earlier that you think that the, the twenty-two-year-old you would not approve of the you you are today, why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, the twenty-two-year-old me thought he was a revolutionary and thought he could live a life without compromise, and he--W.H. Auden once wrote that aging is a process of compromise, and I think that that is true.  I, I, I think that the, the twenty-two-year-old me would never see himself working for the government, would never see himself working in an office, would never see himself sacrificing principle to expedience, to get the best solution that is possible as opposed to holding out and storming out in protest over something which was not absolutely as he thought it should be.  I did a lot of quitting and protest when I was in my twenties.
Speaker 1: Which, which, which you do you like the best?
Speaker 2: It's the same me, but it's just the me who was sort of--it's a me with arthritis.  I mean, so I perhaps got a little arthritis in my principles.
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: You mean an event or?
Speaker 1: No, just any--what--anything, and when you, you know, just look back at everything that you've done in your life, you know, from birth to present point, what really stands out the most?  Was it a particular influence that someone had on you or?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most?  I gave you a poem which I hope you read.
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It is interesting to me that it's a long autobiographical poem called 'The First Sixty' [A. B. Spellman] and it talks about all the decades of my life.  And it is interesting to me reading that poem that by far the longest section of it was experiencing John Coltrane live in New York [New York].  So--and looking at that poem and if, if, if this is my own sort of subjective summation of what I have lived, then just by weight of volume, then this experience with John Coltrane seems to be the greatest thing that has happened to me, and it may well be true.  I think that being in the presence of an artist who is so powerful, who is working so hard to break through conventional ideas of, of musical expression including break through the traditional notions of beauty and get to an experience which aspires to the sublime, being in the presence of such, such a, a musician, especially one that's gifted and as intense as John Coltrane is like a life-altering experience.  So if I had to pick something, I would pick that.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: I haven't done yet?  Yeah, I'd, I'd like to--one of the first things that I want to do is to publish my poems again.  I want--you know, I'm at an age now when you start thinking about legacy.  And I don't want to be remembered for guidelines.  I want to be remembered for poetry.  I don't want my tombstone to say, here lies A. B. [HistoryMaker A. B. Spellman].  He wrote great guidelines.  I want, here is A. B., poet.  So that is what I would like to do.  I mean, it's been so long since I've published that I--that I would like to reclaim that part of my life.
Speaker 1: And do you ever wish you would've chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No, never.  I've had a--I've had a good life and I've, I've, I've liked my--I have loved my work and I think that not a lot of people can say that or not enough people can say that.  Yes, the, the--I've, I've done--I've done what I should do.
Story_ID: 304184
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My primary concern is of the African American young people who are uneducated and who are growing up without the sort of role models and guidance and without the forces in life which will shape them into wholesome people, that's my primary concern.  I worry a lot about that.  Nothing in our social and political and economic system seems to be overly concerned with these folk, certainly not the conservative administration which is in power today, which could care less by any indication that I can see about the lives of these folk, and so I worry a great deal about that.  My hopes have to do with continued progressive advance of America and of America and, and its place in the world.  I despair about this somewhat because I see a lot of recidivism occurring in areas that I thought had been settled a long time ago.  I mean, it is appalling to me that we are in a time when almost half the population still believes that God created Earth six thousand years ago and that evolution is, is only--is only theory but not fact and that, that you're having to fight battles like that, the women's rights, women's reproductive rights are still under assault and you have to fight every day for that kind of--you know, that, that, that we have not moved beyond issues of race in, in the structure of our society.  These, these are things which are intentionally bothersome to me.  I am very much concerned that our country has the conservatism.  Political and economic conservatism is on the rise.  I think this is gonna lead to great tragedy in America and in the world, so it has already lead to considerable tragedy and I think the tragedy is only going to--only going to increase.
Speaker 1: And is there anything that we haven't talked about that you'd like to touch on?
Speaker 2: I'll think of something after you leave, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: That always happens.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to thank you for being so gracious with your time and for sharing your story with us.
Speaker 2: I, I had a good time doing it.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 304185
Speaker 1: All right, that picture would've been taken about 1997 or so.  On the left is my younger daughter, Kaji [Kaji Spellman], who would've been about a junior in high school.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Could you spell it?
Speaker 1: K-A-J-I.  That's my wife, Karen [Karen Edmonds Spellman], in the middle, and that's my older daughter, Tajun [Tajun Spellman], on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would've been earlier '90s [1990s], maybe '94 [1994] or so, '93 [1993], '94 [1994], and that's me with, again, Kaji under my right arm and Tajun under my left arm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that would've been about '99 [1999] or so, and that's my wife, Karen.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Good looking woman, huh?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yes, very pretty.
Speaker 2: Our daughters, Kaji--Tajun on the left and Kaji on the right.  That was done, I believe, three years ago, 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.  And let's get the one on top, okay, Matthew [Hickey]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  All right.
Speaker 1: Of course, let's see, I had a waistline then, so that was during my midlife crisis when I got slim and buff, and so that would've been about, oh, I suppose, late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
