Story_ID: 63429
Speaker 1: Hello, my name is Samuel Adams.  Behind me filming is Scott Stearns, and with us in spirit is Julieanna Richardson, who's the founder of the project.  Right now, sir, I'd like for you to state your name, spell it for us, give us your date of birth, and today's date.
Speaker 2: William L. Sheals, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, middle initial L, L-O-U-I-S, Louis, Sheals, S-H-E-A-L-S; January 15th, 1947.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 13, 2002.
Speaker 1: And could you tell me where we are, and the location--the address, and state your profession.
Speaker 2: One Eighty-Two Hunter Street, Norcross, Georgia, 20 miles north of the City of Atlanta [Georgia], and the county of Gwinnett.  My occupation is Minister of the Gospel, now for 26 years.
Story_ID: 63430
Speaker 1: Now, there are five questions we run through just to break the ice and begin the conversation.  Favorite food.
Speaker 2: Favorite food--food grouping is soul food.
Speaker 1: According to the book, Soul Food (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--When the soul food--for me, it's smothered T-bone steak and brown onion gravy with rice and a vegetable other than the green line, so I guess not total soul food because the greens--the collard greens, the mustard greens, turnip greens, those kinda things I do not like; the bean line, yes.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Cruising to any port; and I cruise at least twice a year for the past 10 years.  I don't even get off the ship anymore; I go for the cruise.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I like it cool, or cold.  Summer and heat, I don't particular like.
Speaker 1: Favorite color.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Any particular reason?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it is.  As a matter of fact, the interior of the church is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying, or mantra by which you live.
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying is, "Father, nothing is gonna happen to me today that you and I together cannot handle."
Story_ID: 63431
Speaker 1: So Reverend Sheals, tell me about your father, your mother; tell me about your parents.
Speaker 2: My mother, as a matter of fact, as we speak--I just came back from Florida; she's in intensive care, was on the critical list.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Elma Sheals; she is 85 years old.  She was 85 years old on January 15th; I was 55 years old on January 15th.  I was born on her birthday, as a matter of fact, so we celebrate our birthdays together every year.
Speaker 1: And Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: And Dr. King's, yeah.  So it's Mom, King, and me (laughter), that's what I often tell the church when I says ahh--they say, "Well, we're gonna have a birthday gathering for you."  I say, "Well, have one for Mom, King, and me."  And she's a devout Christian; she's been in church all her life, I think.  She raised us in church, and she lives in Lakeland, Florida.  My father is James Sheals; he's deceased.  He died at an early age--died in his 50's; he died in '72' [1972] in New York.  I was in New York at the time, brought his remains back to Florida, and decided to stay there with mom for a while, and stayed in Florida for about five, six years--longer than I anticipated.  But he was a contractor in fruits and--citrus fruit fields--grapefruits, oranges, those kinda things--in Central Florida.  He contracted to pick the fruit; he was--my father only had a sixth grade education, but you couldn't take a calculator and beat him figuring out numbers.  He would drive through a fruit grove and estimate, very closely, the yield of the grove and how many men he needed to pick it, and how much he was gonna charge the owner to pay him to do it.  And this was back during the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s]--back during segregation time, and times when the owners of the groves were all white, and he was this tall, lean, black man who worked seven days a week figuring out his pay, his men's pay, and all before they could own a calculator.
Story_ID: 63432
Speaker 1: What was your childhood like, specifically?
Speaker 2: My childhood?  My childhood life was--it was a good life, yeah, it was; and you probably have heard this before from some other people you've interviewed, especially those who grew up during the '40's [1940s], '50's [1950s].  My childhood was during the '50's [1950s], and we were poor and didn't know it; we were poor and didn't know it because there was food on the table, there was a shelter over our heads, there was--our needs were met.  But I've always worked, and of course--I believe I got that from my father [James Sheals]; he was a workaholic, as a matter of fact--seven days a week.  But when I was a child of twelve years old, when others were out playing on a Saturday, I was working; getting--doing something to help because I always wanted to have and to give to the point that by the time I was thirteen, fourteen years old, I was--Christmas gifts and Christmas presents--I supplied them for the household; much to my dismise (ph.) sometime, there was nothing there for me because then my siblings would think--and then, eventually my parents, "Well, because you made money all year long and you're buying for everybody else and you could buy for yourself."  That wasn't necessarily true; that's not what I wanted to hear.
Story_ID: 63433
Speaker 1: But--I think I was sharing with you earlier about the Sheals Theater.  At the age of twelve, of developing a movie theater out of a cardboard box, mom's [Elma Sheals] lamp off her end table, a magnifying glass that was then wedged in a piece of construction paper, and then I would cut out the comics from Sunday newspaper or from a color comic book, turn the image upside down, and place it between the light and the magnifying glass, and it would show right side up onto a white wall, and I would cut off the bottom script on the bottom so I can make up the stories.  On Saturdays after mom would leave to go to her job at the hospital, her room, bedroom, had the largest clear, pretty white wall, and she didn't know until I was a young adult that we used her bedroom for my theater.  We would have kids lined up--sometimes 35, 40--a dime to come in for a 15-minute movie, and a nickel for your ice cup, and we would buy--my sister and I would go to the store, buy three packs of grape, orange and strawberry Kool-Aid and make the cups.  And by the time the Saturday afternoon rolled around, we'd have a pocket full of money to go to the real theater.  But then I would save monies; I didn't know--we didn't go to the bank at that time--go save money so that by the end of the year I would have quite a lump sum of money; we would do sometimes fifteen, $20.00 on a Saturday.
Story_ID: 63434
Speaker 1: Later on--because I was a small, small statured--back in the day, and this is probably before your time, when we used to--grocery stores were community stores, and they would deliver to the customers.  So then they delivered on baskets--bicycles with big baskets on the front.  Well, the bicycles alone were too heavy for me, and if you put one bag in there of grocery, then I couldn't push it even; so then I'd negotiate with Mr. Jenkins of Publix Supermarket fame.  Publix Supermarket began in my home town, Lakeland, Florida; it is the national headquarters today, and all the distribution comes from Lakeland.  Well, Jenkins had the stores; he had one store in the black community and one in the white community.  I negotiated to deliver groceries with a basket, and he says, "You can't handle it."  I says, "I'll handle it; you just give me the job and pay me so much per delivery."  Then I went out and hired--sub-contracted some big guys who could ride the bicycle and deliver it, and then at the end of the day, I would pay them. And such my entrepreneurship began and my childhood was that kinda childhood.
Speaker 2: Your mother--
Speaker 1: My mother [Elma Sheals].
Speaker 2: --you said she worked in a hospital.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What was her occupation?
Speaker 1: She was a cleaner; she was not degreed at all, and my mother would do whatever it took to provide for the family.
Speaker 2: It was how many children?
Speaker 1: Eight--I have seven siblings; there were eight of us, yeah--four boys and four girls.  And I have two brothers and two sisters older than I; I began the second four.  I'm the oldest of the second four.
Story_ID: 63435
Speaker 1: Can you continue on with your childhood?  You were saying?
Speaker 2: Childhood--again, other than loving to play sports, football particularly, which developed my skills to play football later on, the childhood was--was a fun time.  Of course, growing up during segregated times--it was a black high school, black grade school, black high school--two things that really occupied my time during childhood, and one was playing football.  Second one was being in plays--school plays; both of them were challenging but also rewarding to me, and--again, those things that seemed to attract other children and what they wanted to do with their spare time didn't interest me as much; so much so that during Easter and Christmas time, I would--as a child, I was hired out to other churches to produce their Christmas plays and their--produce and direct their Christmas plays and their Easter plays--pageants, as they were during that time, and I enjoyed doing it.  And when I say "hired out," it was at no pay; I was asked to do it and I enjoyed doing it.
Speaker 1: At that time, who was your favorite actor or person in theater (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Of course Harry Belafonte [HM] was the only one that you knew at that time, and then later on, Sidney Poitier.  I tried to model myself again with this--Sidney Poitier moved, and act, and talked with such grace, so then he would be a role model, I would think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Did your parents also get into the arts like that?  Did they take you to the theater?  Did they--
Speaker 2: No.  My father [James Sheals] did to the movie theater--yeah.  He and I were very close; Like--as my mom and I are today, so then on, it was Saturday ritual to go see the western movies at the only black-managed theater there in Central Florida, and it was a Roxie Theater and it was later owned by my godparents, and so that's where we would go to the Roxie Theater in Lakeland, Florida; it's the only one in the Central Florida area.
Story_ID: 63436
Speaker 1: Did the segregated life of Jim Crow affect you in any way at that age?  Did you have the understanding that, 'me as a black person, I have to look like this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they have opportunities that I don't have,' and how did that affect you?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did on two occasions; one was with my mother [Elma Sheals] and one was with--the other was with my father [James Sheals].  With my mother, it was going downtown and going into a store; it was extremely hot in Central Florida--in Lakeland, Florida--90 degree weather.  It was on a Saturday afternoon, we were downtown shopping; we went into a store and it had a colored fountain and a white fountain.  Colored fountain was an old gray fountain with warm water; the white fountain was a pretty white fountain with frost around it from the cold.  And I tested the colored water and it was warm and not good, and then I tested the white water--quote-unquote; it was cold, good and refreshing, and that's where I drank from.  And the entire store stopped, and my mother walked over and pinched my arm; she says, "You know better."  And I says, "Yeah, I think I know what you're talkin' about, but this water is better," and I continued to drink, and she promptly ushered me out the store to teach me the difference, and that stayed with me for a long time.
Speaker 1: How did she teach this difference?
Speaker 2: Well, to teach me the difference outside the store was to tell me that, you know, whites and coloreds, we don't mix; that's why a white fountain, colored fountain, white bathroom, colored bathroom, and I couldn't accept that; I didn't accept it, and I decided that I would never--whatever I would do in the future would make a difference.  With my father, I was going to work with him one day, and stopping at a service station--my father had this ritual of purchasing a new car every year; that was--that was a vice with him.  Every year, he would drive home with a brand new car, and he had this brand new car and he stopped to gas up and there were a couple of white gentlemen who stopped and they were admiring the car until we walked out, and then it became a confrontation about, you know, where did he steal the car, "Where'd you get it from, and why do you have a car like this?"  And of course, my father was a maverick and he--when I saw him swell up with indignation, I knew that trouble was getting ready to brew.  He always kept a baseball bat in the trunk of the car; I know he used to play baseball when he was a child and I thought maybe that was some connection; I never knew anything else, but that was his weapon of choice and he proceeded to get the baseball bat and chase five or six people down the road with it.  And so that one stayed with me as well; and those are the two instances I can remember the most, I guess.
Story_ID: 63437
Speaker 1: Teachers--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --which ones had the greatest influence on you when you were in school?
Speaker 2: One was my English teacher who was also my drama teacher, William Balloon (ph.), who's deceased now; the other was Miss Taylor, who is still alive.  She was my fifth grade teacher, and up until two years ago, every year at my annual anniversary here at the church, she would come up--she would come up with a church from Florida--my family church and the church that I was licensed and ordained in in Florida.  She would come up to see her quote-unquote, as she would say, "Star student"--fifth grade teacher.  Again, when I go home to see my mom [Elma Sheals], then I go by to see Miss Taylor.
Story_ID: 63438
Speaker 1: Now, the community you grew up in (unclear) I'm assuming it was a close-knit black community--
Speaker 2: Right--it was.
Speaker 1: How important was the church in that community and also in your life?
Speaker 2: The church was very important; the church played the role in my life and in the community then that it plays today in the black community.  It was a source of activity, of strength; it was a place where the Boy Scouts would meet.  I guess the thing I--the image of the church, most of all, was that the doors were never locked, and when we would meet at the family church for Boy Scout meeting and in a different hall of the church, and then go outside to play and wanted to get that drink of water, we'd walk in the front door of a church that was unlocked, and I also remember very vividly one day, all of us running into the church, and once we got into the little foyer--little gathering area, we all stopped and quietly tiptoed to the water fountain.  Even though it was empty--the church was empty, I should say, or no one was in the church, there was no activity there--the church was dark, but it was the reverence that we had for the church, the church building, the sanctuary, the reverence we had for this facility and what it stood for that even as little boys, that we would, on a weekday or Saturday, whenever it was, when the pastor wasn't around, the church was darkened--that we were a reverenced church.
Speaker 1: Who was the pastor of the church?
Speaker 2: The pastor of the church was Pastor Bolden (ph.).  No, no, I'm sorry, Pastor Robinson.
Speaker 1: What type of man was he?
Speaker 2: He was a traditional gospel preacher, and I also remember that he was warm and embracing.  And then later on, Pastor Bolden, for me, who's deceased, was the same--warm and embracing.  When I say warm and embracing, that you could, as a child, communicate with them, and they would take time to communicate in return.  And I think that both of them had an impact on my life to the point that that's the kind of pastor to have now--
Story_ID: 63439
Speaker 1: --Did you ever feel that any--inhibited during your childhood?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Inhibited--did you ever feel inhibited as if, 'I can't do this, I can't go there?'  Did your parents or family instill in you, "You can do anything?"
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father [James Sheals] did.  He did without saying it, by his action, because of his--I mean, his maverick attitude was that, you know, 'I worked to earn what I have, nobody's given us anything, and I've worked seven days a week to provide for my family, and that being the case, then I will not be denied.'  And because he had a--again, he had a--he didn't have a product, he had manpower, and he had numbers; he had something to offer, and he knew that, but without saying that, because he was a very quiet man except when he was drinking.
Story_ID: 63440
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights era--how did that affect and touch you in Lakeland, Florida--as growing up, still in high school--junior high?
Speaker 2: The Civil Rights Movement and high school, I think, did not really affect until afterwards, actually, because with--what we knew and what we did in the community was what we were aware of and what we were involved in.  If you don't know what's going on or what should be going on, other than those things that were instilled in you as a young age, then there is no real challenge or real desire to make a difference.  Now, in--the Polk County area and the Lakeland area was a great place to grow up; the agitation or friction between races we didn't--was not, was not a reality.  It was a--again, when the bus came through the black community then, you know, then you sit on the bus because there was a black community bus that went downtown.  So it was--there really was not challenge, and it was later on that it was when seein' the other side and knowin' what was available and what should be that--what was planted in my--and (unclear) in my spirit as a youth then began to rise to the top.
Story_ID: 63441
Speaker 1: In high school--
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Four more years left, and you're about to graduate in high school.  Your perspective of what you wanted to be, where you wanted to go, how was it affected during those years in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school--got me in every play production in high school because of this ability that I didn't know I had until one challenge one evening that pushed me in the front.
Speaker 1: Share that story.
Speaker 2: I'll share that story.  Again, bein' a football player and loving to play football, quarterback of my team; second string quarterback, my freshman year, getting out early because I was small in size, I knew I had to compensate, so I would get out and run five, 10 miles before the other team members got out; I would run in the morning and run before practice, even before it was time to run laps.  That increased my endurance, but also my claim to fame was in (ph.) my swiftness and my speed, so that's how I could survive bein' a small statue.  But after havin' worked out and then waiting on the team to come, I would go into the auditorium to watch play rehearsals because I just--I took a liking to productions--live productions; and watching a senior play one--doin' season and would say--a play about some college students, and I just watched it every day until I knew everybody's movement; I didn't know their parts verbatim.  The night of the play, I would always go--William Balloon being a friend of my godparents, and my English teacher, drama teacher later on, would go backstage early and assist in prop, and dressing and ready.  The star of that play developed a nose bleed and could not go on with the performance; they delayed it for about 15 minutes, and then finally said--Balloon came to me and said, "Sheals, do you know Sam Johnson's work and I mean where it should be--his markings?"  And I said, "Yes, I do."  He said, "You're back there every day, you gotta know."  I said, "Yes."  I says, "I don't know all of his part, but I know where he's to be, when he's to exit and enter."  He says, "Okay, you take this book.  I'm gonna say to the audience you read that you're a stand-in for Sam, who's ill; that's why you're reading the part.  I'll do that before the curtains open."  Well, before the curtain, and because of all of the frantic movements and everything goin' back, he went out and he introduced the play; curtains open up, he forgot to tell them I was a stand-in.  Where this came from, I don't know today; when it was my time to speak, I adlibbed immediately.  I says, "Look, guys, I'm reading this book; you'll see my face in this book from time to time, but I'm studying for my finals, so never mind what I'm doing, I'm just--that's what I'm doing."  So then that gave me the reason for havin' a book on the stage for the audience; and then I went on to say my part--read my part, and then I would find myself, as the production went on, reading my, my, my role, and then speaking it--sometimes adlibbing (laughter) in-between, but giving the que--and queuing others on the stage.  Well, William Balloon went out afterwards--after the play, to a standing ovation, and said, "Look, William Sheals and, you know, this senior class play, he's a freshman, but he was not a part of this play; he was reading the role," and everybody--"Whoa, whoa."  He says, "A genius we got--we got us a genius here."  So from that point on, I never auditioned again for a--any class play; I was--I got the star role, much to the dismise of my head coach for the football because it meant that, you know, I was gonna spend a lotta time--sometimes two, three plays at a time I was studying for while playing football after becoming first string quarterback in my sophomore year.  And our best season was my junior year and senior year when another coach started assisting.  But it was--it was that kinda thing that, again, planted my life, I'd say, in wanting to be an actor, wanting to be on stage, and that's the direction that I thought my life was gonna lead, and it did.
Story_ID: 63442
Speaker 1: After I was drafted into the military during the Vietnam era--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: So did those dreams--the acting dream--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did that take your mind--that 'I might have to leave Lakeland, Florida'?
Speaker 1: Definitely--definitely.  I didn't know that God was planning it for me, and so that meant drafted into the military was not--was not a part of my plan, but it was a way to get me to New York.
Speaker 2: In what year were you drafted?
Speaker 1: That was in '67' [1967].
Speaker 2: Upon graduation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Upon graduation, in six--no, that was in 60--I graduated in '65' [1965], but in two years of junior college and then--and two in the military.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So where did you go for your training?
Speaker 1: For--
Speaker 2: Right after they drafted you.
Speaker 1: Went to Fort Bliss, Texas for--after going to Fort Jackson, South Carolina, and boot camp, and of course, you're testing--like everybody has to go through.  Electronics was something I was interested in, and science and those kinda things, so--then I was drafted, did the testing; after boot camp, sent to Fort Bliss, Texas.
Speaker 2: Were you scared at all?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: Any fear?
Speaker 1: No, no fear at all; and especially when I was sent to Radar Electronics School, and this was because I tested well there in that regard, and spent 11 months in Radar and Electronic School in Fort Bliss, Texas with many people--many men bein' draft--bein' sent over to Vietnam, then our home side--home defense needed radar technicians and operators at the time that Nike Hercules--Nike Hercules Radar System was our top national defense radar system; that's what I was trained in.  So then after graduating automatic rank and, you know, that was Sergeant E-5 rank because I went to East Windsor, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 63443
Speaker 1: So--Vietnam, was there any fear?  And what were your thoughts on it?
Speaker 2: No, there was no fear; I felt that that was--like most American--why, why are we there, bein' drafted and having, again, been going--the schooling in Fort Bliss for radar technician, automatic rank to Sergeant E-5, bein' transferred to East Windsor, Connecticut, which is nine miles north of Hartford on a secret--top-secret radar site at that time; we would think it was a farm.  I can talk about that now because its obsolete; sworn to top secrecy during that time, of course, after--and the top secret swearing was to be a two-years afterwards even, but it was obsolete--a few months afterwards.  The--it was a good--good tour.  There was some temptation and persuasion to stay in, you know, a little while longer.  You know, your country needs you, why don't you do this--do these things; but I had other aspirations.
Story_ID: 63444
Speaker 1: Again, being only a few hours from New York [New York City, New York], and my aunt and uncle lived there, and relatives who lived there, and my family had lived between Florida and New York.  After getting out of the military, then I moved to New York with my aunt and uncle for a little while, and then established--got established.  I remember my first job before going to New York City College was Beneficial Finance Company as Assistant Manager there; then, finally managing a branch and--while in school--and then getting a job as a vice president of a bank there in Harlem [New York City, New York].  I went there running to the bank because I had been robbed a couple of times at gun point at Beneficial Finance Company and was ready to get outta there; it was in South Bronx [New York City, New York]--ready to get outta there.  In Harlem, it was a--it was a good time; it was a time when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What year is this?
Speaker 1: This was in '69' [1969], '70' [1970]--in that time frame.  Shortly afterwards, then I opened a record store in the Bronx in a great location, where people had to come by to get to the subway and, and it was quite a lucrative (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And types of customers.
Speaker 1: All types--all types of customers because back in the day, you put a speaker up to--outside the store and you blast the music and you draw 'em in.  And then--and bein' the Vice President of the bank and then hiring somebody to run the record store, I tried for a couple of parts in open auditions for plays and movies and what have you, and was successful in several.  One role, Cry the Beloved Country was the name of the play, a very popular play; I played the role of Epsilon Commollo (ph.) an off-Broadway production; Sidney Poitier played that role some years before--and a couple of movies; one movie was Come Back Charleston Blue; it was the sequel to Cotton Comes to Harlem.  Believe it or not, had a extra role there in the French Connection, which was an Academy Award-winning movie; we had accidents there with the camera, the car-mounted camera, as the chase during the--on the El that was done in Brooklyn, two or three days in a row, until they kept setting it back, setting it back, and cutting out, so when I went to the movie, I was nowhere on the film; I just got a good payday--but several off-Broadway plays; and then I started directing plays afterwards, then got into radio.
Speaker 2: What radio station?
Speaker 1: Radio Station WTMP in Tampa, Florida.  I did a small radio station out of New Jersey for a couple of months or so; shortly after that, my father passed and I moved to--brought his remains back to Lakeland [Florida] where we had the funeral--
Story_ID: 63445
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So at that point in time, when your father passed--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --did you assume the role--the head of the family?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Even though I'm, again, middle child--
Speaker 2: And what's the names of the other--your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: My oldest brother is James, named after my father--James, Jr.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--his occupation?
Speaker 1: James is retired.  And Mark lives with my mother; he's an amputee, he lives with my mother in a home I have in Florida.  Gracie, who lives in Lakeland, Florida as well; Mary, who lives about three blocks away from my mother, who actually gives care to her now; then, myself;  then Delores, who lives in--she's a nurse at Vandevilt (ph.) [Vanderbilt University Medical Center] Nashville [Tennessee]; then Doris, and Horace; those are the last two.  And Doris is in Orlando, Florida; Horace is in Lakeland, Florida.  So other than my sister who's the one after me, and I, everybody is in Central Florida; she's in Nashville and I moved here to Atlanta [Georgia] in '79' [1979].
Story_ID: 63446
Speaker 1: So when your father passed, you assumed--
Speaker 2: I assumed head of the family, and--
Speaker 1: You were how old at the time?
Speaker 2: Thirty--30 years old at the time; 30 years old.  So then I moved my record shop down to Florida and opened it up on a dare.  There was no black record store in the area, and I opened it up--the store; and later, then a clothing store and sold the black power--black empowerment kinda things, and the posters of that time, and the clothing of that time--the dashikis and all, and it was, again, quite lucrative until this bug to be on radio or in television or something bit again.  WONN was a top-40 station in Lakeland Florida; I got a evening job with them--graveyard shift, actually.
Speaker 1: What was your name?
Speaker 2: It was, it was Bill Sheals at that time; just Bill Sheals.  And I'll tell you of the handle that changed when I went to R and B station, but Bill Sheals at that time.  And on Fridays and Saturday, they would allow me to go into R and B music, and the R and B music would start at 11:00 at night until the wee hours of the morning, and then the show became so popular that then we kept moving up in the evening--'til 10:00, 'til 9:00, and then several days a week, then every day a week, and by this time then, I was recruited to WTMP in Tampa, Florida because of the popularity of the program.  WTMP is, today, one of the top R and B stations in the south.  So I was recruited there, and after there, only just a few months then, I got a prime time drive with WTMP, and shortly afterwards was the number one disc jockey in Central Florida.  Then I got into concert promotion.
Speaker 1: What was your name when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Mr. Magic.
Speaker 1: Mr. Magic.
Speaker 2: Mr. Magic, yeah. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--How did you get this name?
Speaker 2: It was a need to be--have a cool name.  You know, Bill Sheals--So Bad was the handle--So Bad Mr. Bill Sheals; I needed a cool name.  There was Jim the Angel Murray, CJ the DJ, and so just Bill Sheals didn't(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--How did you come out?  Let's hear the voice when you'd come on the radio.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  You're hearin' a little bit of it now, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: How would you come on the radio?
Speaker 2: How would I come on the radio.  Grover Washington, Jr.'s jazz piece, Mr. Magic, was my theme.  "(SINGING)--Doont, doont, doont, dono noont doont; Mr. Magic Bill Sheals on your radio on a Saturday afternoon, bringing you the grooves, the smooth grooves.  I'll see you on the flip side of news with Mr. Magic--Bill Sheals."  That's enough; let's move on (laughter); good ole' days.
Story_ID: 63447
Speaker 1: Went into concert promotions--Concert Promotions, Triple X Productions, Sheals Sights and Sounds.  Then, all of the R and B--again--shows that were comin' to Central Florida area then, either came through Triple X Production or I brought 'em there--Gladys Knight and the Pips, the O'Jays, Barry White, you name the tops of that time.  As a matter of fact, my last concert--I've got a poster in my game room at home--was Earth, Wind and Fire with the Emotions; the ticket price was $6.50 in advance, $7.50 at the door; 1976 was my last concert.  After leaving WTMP, then one of the, the, the sales manager and I, and a couple of others, went to W--we bought a station in--a country and western station in St. Petersburg, Florida, WRXB, and continued for a while and, again, was single, brand new home, couple of automobiles--livin' large; called livin' large as they said--livin' large.  Never did drugs nor alcohol in my life, never; and I did concerts--I did.  I was there durin' that time when people were doing--smokin' grass, as they called it at the time, and it was prevalent--except for Earth, Wind and Fire.  Could not--I mean with Earth, Wind and Fire--in their contract, if there was the smell of any drugs or usage, or hard liquor back stage, they would not perform.  That was incredible; that was--I mean they--that's--if you listen to the music and the kind of image that they had in their music even, that's the kind of--they were real.  Soft drinks, water, sandwiches, chicken boxes, whatever backstage, but backstage hands or anybody with the venue that was hosting could not be backstage (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So were you close to any of these artists?  Did you build close relationships?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't.  I was a celebrity of sort myself then.  Again, back in the day, in the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s], disc jockeys were personalities then, I mean real personalities because, you know, you had to rap, you had your following, you had your own groupies, it was not five-records-in-a-row Station ID; you were--you, you rapped, you entertained, and during that entertaining, then it gave you a certain status.  So then when these artists would--when groupies would line up at the stage or backstage or outside when we would exit for the artist, they would also line up for Mr. Magic; so they would have a line, I would have a line in autographs.  So I did not--and, it was--it was only business for me; it was.  It wasn't--it wasn't the money; it wasn't about the money, and I made a lotta money during that time; it wasn't about the money, it was--because some venues that didn't pay well, or the checks would make 30-day--30 days later they would cut you a check, and then they would have to give me cash; I wouldn't accept anything else.  So then I would leave there with 30, $40,000 in cash, and it would be under the bed for sometimes a couple of weeks.  I'd say, "When I don't think we did a deposit this week," to my brother, who would do the posters and the things for me; 'cause it wasn't about the money, it was, it was about achieving, it was about takin' a empty auditorium for 8, 10,000 people, pickin' up the phone, makin' a couple of phone calls, writin' a check, fillin' up that arena, and in bein' successful in doing it.
Story_ID: 63448
Speaker 1: During this time, were you attending church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, always.  Again, mom [Elma Sheals] brought us all up in church, and on a Saturday--and interesting you say that; if I'd had a concert on a Saturday, then, of course, you would have to have an after-party for the artist and all at a hotel somewhere; I would make an appearance and go through and "hi, hi, hi, hi," and get out because I had to be in church on Sunday morning.  By the time I would get home and get--and wind down, it was 3:00 in the morning.  But then, after the shower and then lay-out of clothes, then I would be in Sunday school because I taught Sunday school, and I was in church every Sunday.  That was--that was my, my real love and my real joy; it was in the heighth of my entertainment career as the number one disc jockey in Central Florida and promoting concerts and just quote-unquote "living large," that God called me to the ministry--at the very heighth of it.  One Thursday morning it was--we're havin' a revival and New--New Mount Zion Baptist Church in Lakeland, Florida and I was leaving the station at night and going to the revival.  And that Thursday night of the revival--that Wednesday night of the revival, after havin' prayer at home and before the break of day on a Thursday morning, I was awakened by a vision in that--it's a very large bedroom--a vision of four men in my bedroom with--surrounded by a cloud, so I could just see their feat--the image of men carrying a large pillow, about the size of the hood of a medium-sized car, and when I saw this vision, I looked and then there were two men, one on a left, and one on the right side of me with their heads bowed, and I looked at them in this vision, and I kept looking at the image and then they start walking in my bedroom with a cloud with them, and I looked up to see who was sitting on the pillow, and it was a man with muscular arms--brown arms, thick, black mustache--that's all I could see, and when I looked up for the face--and a voice said, "Don't look at Jesus"--those four words, but very pronounced, very dramatic--"Don't look at Jesus."  And things began to tremble in my bedroom, and I bowed my head and they walked right past--the vision did--right past my bed.  I saw the fringes of the pillow and they went right to the east window of my bedroom with the cloud and all, and--but when I first--I mean I was so frightened, I was just--sweat like great drops of blood, and so much so that with the trembling of the voice, I mean my bed was just torn up--the, the the sheets and all.  But when the image passed my--the vision passed my bed and I saw it, and I laid back down, then a peace that I've never felt before, that has never been duplicated in my life, my entire life, came upon me.  This is 27 years ago.
Story_ID: 63449
Speaker 1: And the sheets began to straighten up on my bed--the comforter on my bed; and I felt that happening and I wasn't afraid anymore, and I went back to sleep.  I woke up that morning and--I had a custom-made round bed; it was over-sized bed and so the sheets were custom-made, about a two-foot platform around the bed; you walk around the bed, so to make this round bed up and get in it, like I was right in the middle of the bed with about a 12-inch fold-back of the sheet tucked all the way around--fresh, crisp sheets with a--the only way to have this happen, one would have to made up in that sheet--made up in the bed, and that was further validity that something happened that morning.  And I called my mom, I told her about a call; her pastor called my pastor and my pastor said, "I don't know of--only one other pastor has had a vision similar to a man on the other side."  He say, "Go talk to Bishop Ross, and he told us in Ministers' Union a few weeks ago about it.  Why don't you go talk to him?"  He was standing in the middle of the road, there was this image floating behind him waste-high, and yours was waist-high, and when he looked around, the voice told him not to look upon God--is what it said to him.  But anyway, I said "Okay," and I did, and then Bishop Ross and I began to celebrate and cry, and praise God; I still didn't know the meaning.  Thirteen months later, the Lord came to me and said, "I want you to preach the gospel."  It was early one morning, and I ignored it.  He says, "I want you to preach the gospel."  And I didn't tell anybody 'cause I was havin' too much fun; I was too free and too wealthy materially at that time.  And I ignored, I ignored until finally, my desire and excitement about--driving over to the radio station from Lakeland to Tampa is about 30 miles became a burden rather than a joy.
Story_ID: 63450
Speaker 1: My gift of gab--I would get there--they would be playin' my theme song sometime when I would leave my shop or leave my promotion office, Sheals Sights and Sounds; they would play my theme song when I'd rush in the door, put the headset on, and--all the way live.  But I found myself writing down little things to say and, and bein' burdened 'bout getting there, and then getting on the air and not havin' that quick wit.  So then I said to the owner of this--the manager of the station, "I'm gonna give you a month to replace me, but I've gotta go."  And he says, "Oh, man, you're gonna go to our competition, you know; why you wanna do that?"  I says, "No, I'm not; I'm just getting out."  The owner of the station, who was a black gentleman--lives in New Orleans [Louisiana], McCloud, came up  and says, "Hey, Magic, you want more money?"  I says, "No, it's not about--I'm makin' more money than I can spend right now; you know, this is just a catalyst, I mean you--you, you can't get--" and he offered more money, and he made it a--quite a bit more money, so--convinced me to stay.  Another three months I stayed, but I says, "You know what, I can't do this; I don't wanna die on radio, I wanna go out feelin' good about, you know, having a successful program."  And, you know, two weeks, he say, "I can't replace you in two weeks."  So I hung around, hung around, hung around; finally, I says, "Man, if you don't have a replacement in--next month, then I'm gone."  And I left.
Story_ID: 63451
Speaker 1: For over seven months, then I didn't do anything--nothing; seven months I couldn't work, I couldn't do--and I lived off--again, the resources that I had accumulated.  So did everybody else in my family (laughter), and everybody I knew, you know, needed something at a time and--but I was--what I neglected to say that I was still active in the community; I was President of the county NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I had founded the Save the Children Movement in the area, I was on the Mayor's Advisory Committee--this is while radio and promotion and all these things.  Well, I just dropped out of all those; in seven months, I became a hermit, so much so, my mother [Elma Sheals] and a couple of siblings came over to the home one night with a family doctor, who was a friend of the family, to see if I was okay, and when they came, I finally opened the door on the second visit, and so Dr. Jackson and I, who were good friends, we started laughin', I says, "They think I'm crazy; you're an internist, you're not a"--and I says, "I don't know what's goin' on, man."  He says, "Well, are you eating?"  I say, "Yeah, don't I look like I'm eating?"  He say, "Yeah, you're gaining weight, you know; they say you just stay home all day and send them out to get meals, or have 'em come over and cook meals."  I say, "Yeah, and they don't tell you they write their own checks and then just--and then--and go in and get money," I says, "Yeah."  Well, this happened for seven months, and then I says, "Lord, I gotta get outta here; I can't stay here.  The money is drying up (laughter); I need to do something, plus, I am drying up, and I need a job."  That was on a Thursday evening.  That Monday, I got a call from--the City Government said, "Magic, we've never had a black executive of the Housing Authority, and 90 percent of the tenants are black here in Lakeland [Florida], and we've got a deputy director position open and we want you to apply for it because you got rapport with the community, even though you've dropped outta sight for seven months."  And I says, "Thank you, God, for the job."  I told my mother, she says, "You got it?"  I said, "Yeah, well, I prayed for it."  And this was not just an accident; this is my--and it was.
Story_ID: 63452
Speaker 1: Seven months of being Deputy Director of the Housing Authority, God came back again, preached my word; and I woke up one morning with that settled in my spirit and I couldn't get rid of it.  After a shower, the water just steamed, and it seemed like I was in there for hours; I know I wasn't.  And I don't remember getting dressed, I remember getting to the Housing Authority office, remember the executive director comin' to me and sayin', "What is wrong with you?"  I says, "Well, what do you mean?"  He says, "I don't know, you just act different, you look different; what's going on?"  I said, "I don't know, I need to--I need to get away a while; I'll see you later."  Got in the car, next thing I know, I was 50 miles away right outside of Orlando, Florida sitting on the side of Interstate 4.  I says, "Okay, Lord, I hear you."  I went and told my pastor, and he says, "Okay, when are you gonna tell the church?"  I says, "I don't know."  And that very next Sunday is when I wound up acknowledging the call.
Speaker 2: What's the date?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: What's the date?
Speaker 1: That date was 27 years ago, whatever date that was--I acknowledged the call.  I don't remember that date; I remember the initial sermon.
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Five [1975]?
Speaker 1: Yeah--no, no, no, it was just 25 years ago.  It was 27 years ago, the calling started; the acknowledgement was 25 years ago because it was right after my last concert, which was in '76' [1976]--yeah, so this had to be in the--it was in '77' [1977]; '77' [1977], I acknowledged the call.  I don't remember the exact date.
Story_ID: 63453
Speaker 1: Well, hmmf--and my initial sermon--because, again, being this, this guy--the newspaper covered my--the actor coming back home, and radio announcin' also then bein' this quote-unquote "local celebrity," then there were television cameras and radio there for my initial sermon and standing-room-only people just were standing around the church; but at my initial sermon, fifteen young people accepted Christ as their personal savior; I've never seen that happen before nor since.  I've never seen--I've never witnessed, at an initial sermon, that--some people call trial sermon--I've never seen--I've never witnessed fifteen people accepting Christ.  I mean coming to be saved.  And I didn't know then because I was a babe in Christ, but after entering Florida Memorial Seminary, learning that--about gifts and callings, that that was a special anointing on my life.  One-third of my congregation is or came through new converts; they came to be saved.
Story_ID: 63454
Speaker 1: Question--how, in your preaching--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --how do you think those other talents you have from radio and acting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And banking.
Speaker 1: Banking.
Speaker 2: And housing.
Speaker 1: Housing.
Speaker 2: They were all pre-requisite for what is happening now.
Speaker 1: And when you're in the pulpit, how do you draw on any of those?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I draw on those in the pulpit; perhaps in speaking ability, and speaking before large crowds because we have 3,000 people in worship service in three services per Sunday, and just last week--two weeks ago, I was before almost 4,000 Southern Baptist, most of them bein' Southern Baptist pastors teaching on church evangelism and preaching in Louisville, Kentucky.  So then I know then the ability to get up and speak and address large crowds and not be stage fright, or the fear; that was part of God's orchestration.  Then, of course, the spirit of fear that has never been there was God's planting and God's ordaining, but with the banking and the Housing Authority and all, that was preparin' me to build The City of Hope, I'm sure.
Story_ID: 63455
Speaker 1: So, after Florida Memorial, what brings you to Atlanta, Georgia?
Speaker 2: God said, "Move to Atlanta, Georgia."  In 1978, the fall of 1978, he said, "Move to Atlanta, Georgia."  The late S.A. Baker--Dr. S.A. Baker, who's the pastor of Mount Vernon Baptist Church in Atlanta, was preaching a simultaneous revival there in Polk County [Florida], and I went.  Well, one Saturday afternoon, I opened Ebony Magazine, and in Ebony Magazine, one beautiful Spring Saturday afternoon, and it had cities where blacks were heading up governments and, and, and--they call 'em black mecca and blacks movin' in Houston [Texas], Atlanta, Washington, DC at the time, and Detroit [Michigan] and a couple of others, and I was just flippin' through.  Maynard Jackson was the Mayor--newly-elected Mayor of Atlanta, and he was standing up bigger than life in the front of the skyline; I remember that vividly.  And something just pressed upon my spirit.  Now, what I remember, at this time, I was--I was settled, I was, I was, I was newly-wed only a year and, you know, a home that was paid for that my mother lives in now, and just really comfortable in my life, and had no reason to pull up roots.  I had never been to Georgia in my life except to change planes at Huntsville Airport, but the Lord pressed upon my spirit to move to Georgia--to Atlanta, Georgia, and I just dismissed that as a desire, but then why the desire?  Well, a couple of evenings later, I went to this revival, and Pastor Baker bein' from Atlanta, I says, "Pastor, I'm gonna come up to Atlanta and see you."  He says, "Yeah, you're the radio announcer, aren't you?"  Because then I had gotten into gospel radio; I just still needed to use those juices up.  But I wouldn't do it as a regular thing, I would do it as a regular thing, I would do guests.  And Saturdays I had a program called Black Contact, and it was a 'let's be real, let's tell it like it is' kinda thing, and I would challenge the establishments that didn't hire blacks and that didn't hire minorities and those kinda things, and I would do it on Black Contact.  So we would do that program and I would talk about the big events that were occurring in the town, and this, of course, simultaneous revival for the county was one of them.  Pastor Baker says, "Yeah, you know, I wanna get on radio.  Why don't you come up and visit me?"  And I said, "Well, I'm not coming to do your radio program, I'm just gonna come visit."  My brother, nephew and I came up to visit and we looked around and they talked to him; nothing happened, and we left.
Story_ID: 63456
Speaker 1: What brings you back to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: The Lord's inspiration to come back to Atlanta again--and I did; and when I came back the second time, then gettin'--visiting the late Dr. S.A. Baker, and he says, "You really oughta consider moving," and I said, "Well, you know, if I was unmarried, then there'd be no problem because I'd just make the decision and do it.  You know, I've got a new bride; you're married, and we need to do this together, and I'm not sure.  And then what am I gonna do when I get here?"  He said, "Well, you can probably get on radio," and I says, "What am I gonna do when I get here--to live and to take care of my family?"  And he said, "Well, you're with the Housing Authority, right?"  And I says, "Yeah," he says, "Well, they're having some problems with the executives at the housing--matter of fact, they fired all the executives at the housing--you know, why don't you check them out?"  I said, "I'll do that."  I went by before we left town and made application, and 30 days later, the Housing Authority--Oh, God, this is how--the spirit of God moved.  God planned it, God orchestrated everything.  Thirty days later, my brother and I came up--again; talked to Dr. Baker and he says, "You hear anything from the Housing Authority?"  I says, "No," I says, "But I think we'll go by and check with them and see the progress because now I'm really interested in movin' to Atlanta and my spouse is as well."  So we pulled up to the Central Office on Fourth and West Beach in Atlanta, Georgia.  Roosevelt Profit (ph.), who was the Assistant Director of Personnel of the fifth largest housing authority in the countyr, was standing outside, and he says, "Hey, Mr. Sheals, you're runnin' late for your interview."  I said, "What interview?"  He says, "You were supposed to be here 30 minutes ago; we were gettin' ready to close down the interviewing team."  I says, "What are you talkin'"--he says, "Come on, come on, we'll talk."  We ran in the building, got on the elevator, he says, "Didn't you get my letter?"  I says, "No."  He says, "Well, I sent you a letter making you an offer."  He says, "Actually, this is a--to see if you're gonna accept the position."  And I said, "You what?"  He says, "Yeah, yeah, I sent you an offer and we'll move you here, the whole nine yards, but we"--I says, "I didn't get it.  I said, "My brother and I just happened to be up here and happened to come"--and I said, "Okay, Lord," I says, "Well, okay."  We went in, interviewed for about 15 minutes.  They say, "Okay, when do you wanna move?"  I says, "Let's talk dollar signs first."  And when they told me the dollar signs, I said, "I'll move today."  Well, a couple of weeks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--How did your wife feel about this?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't believe that it happened like that--my former wife--that it happened like that, that it could--I says, "God is moving us to Atlanta.  It's not the Housing Authority."  I says, "I mean, one chance in a million that we would be there, that we would have stayed over 'til Monday and have gone by the Housing Authority and be there just 30 minutes late--30 days later, God is orchestrating this; let's pack as fast as we can."  So, January 8th, 1979, I was then with Atlanta Housing Authority as an Area Manager.
Speaker 1: What were your responsibilities?
Speaker 2: My responsibility was for a portion of the projects as an area manager; there were four areas, so then the Housing Authority was split up into four large areas with area managers at Central Office and then we had those managers and--maintenance superintendents and staffs at the project level.
Story_ID: 63457
Speaker 1: Eight months later, I was then Assistant Director of the Atlanta Housing Authority which was next to the Executive Director of the Atlanta Housing Authority, and at one of our executive meetings, evening meetings, a lady who had a theater downtown--a small--didn't have a theater downtown, but she was meeting downtown right where Underground Atlanta is now; all of that is torn down--brought some kids from the projects, and they put on a production that was just excellent, and she called it the Billie Holiday Theater.  And she was asking for some funding and some monies and all; she says, "This is what I'm doin' with the project kids, I'm teachin' 'em dance and theater, self-esteem; and these are project kids that you see; and all of 'em came from various projects."  I was so inspired.  I got her name, telephone number, and I says, "We're gonna help you raise some money."  I says, "There's a play called 'The Night of January 16th' by Ayn Rand, simple play, it's a courtroom comedy-drama.  Our prop is to build a judge's bench, a witness stand, couple of tables, couple of chairs, costumes of today's dress;" and I says, "Let's do that."  She says, "Will you do it?"  I say, "Yeah."  Came down, put an audition in the newspaper, and people start callin'.  Had an audition that Saturday with 100 people standin' in line from Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--a lot of 'em from Clark Atlanta, Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--a lotta these kids--you know, here's an open audition in Atlanta for a play, and so we got the cream of the crop.  Several of the college students were in this play, and--says, "We can't do it here; this is too small."  We went to the Peachtree Playhouse, and we did it again and again; raised a few thousand dollars for her to keep teachin' my children and encouraging my children.
Story_ID: 63458
Speaker 1: Well, in the midst of our praying, the night--the dress rehearsal night, Hopewell Baptist Church called because they had called and asked me to come up here to Norcross, Georgia and to preach for them; they were looking for a pastor, and after hearing me once at Mount Vernon--and I came up, I preached, forgot all about 'em.  They called my former wife, she called me at the theater and said, "Look, this little church you went to, they wanna talk to you."  I got to the phone, and the gentleman who was here just earlier, Deacon Dunnigan (ph.), said, "You know, we voted tonight between you and Dr. Martin Luther King's nephew--one of his relatives, and the church chose you, if you will accept."  And I says, "I will."  And so Easter Sunday, 1980, then I became Pastor of Hopewell Missionary Baptist Church in Norcross, Georgia, 20 miles north of the City of Atlanta.  The street in the front of the church was still dirt; the church had little roll-out (unclear), Miami-type Dade County windows with two lights in the ceiling.  The little wooden door, you shake it and opened, no lock, and I said, "Okay, Lord, is this really where you want me?"  And he said, "Yes."  That was Easter Sunday, 1980.  We're now 22 years later, come Easter Sunday this year.  The church was meeting only twice per month, first and third Sundays only, for 115 years; the church is 137 years old--115 years, two Sundays only--first and third Sunday.  I couldn't believe that; never heard of such.  One-acre property, one building; now, 22 years later, we have three services per Sunday, 30-acre development, 17,000 members on roll instead of the 200 roll, and a campus called The City of Hope.
Story_ID: 63459
Speaker 1: Tell me about the vision.
Speaker 2: The vision occurred 10 years ago.  While standing at the top of the hill looking down at the--what was then the junkyard; it was a junkyard that was filled with old cars, filled with tires, filled with just ditches and holes in the ground; it was a very unattractive piece of property that was right in the back door of my church.  The church then had grown to about 1500.  Being 1500 and not havin' the space to expand and to grow, we built an intermediate building, which was a multi-purpose building, a metal frame building, and we began worshipping then a couple-a times a Sunday, then three times a Sunday.  The first service was 6:45 a.m. in the morning, then 8:00, then 11:00, then at 6:00; we have four services--three morning services to accommodate, and we could seat a thousand people at that time, and the growth was phenomenal to be, again, in a rural area outside the city.  The media start coming and writing about this little church bursting at the seams, and television cameras started coming.  And while standing up on the trailer that's still there--my office used to be in that trailer--one Wednesday evening before bible study, I saw the vision of the church rising up out of the junkyard like the Phoenix, and I have a drawing right there by my desk that I drew of this vision.  I ran back into my office; when I came back, the vision was gone, so I prayed and asked the Lord to bring it back and he did.  And I didn't have any paper left because I drew--there was one sheet left on a legal pad, and I drew what I thought I saw, and so then the cardboard backing for the legal pad, I took a pen and began to sketch this church that you see here now, in the middle of the junkyard.  And you'll see then 10 years ago, almost a duplicate drawing, except that one building is--this building we're in now is on the left instead of the right.
Story_ID: 63460
Speaker 1: And you're saying the creation of the quote in the paper, that it was a walk by faith.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain that.
Speaker 2: Walk by faith and not by sight; it was a walk by faith because we didn't have the monies.  The junkyard--what I thought--we thought were the owners were not even interested in selling an acre of property because we needed additional parking, so the owner says, "We're not interested."  So then, after God showed me the vision and I drew the vision, I called the deacons in and said, "Brethren, you need to meet me tomorrow night," and they said, "Well, what's wrong?"  I said, "It's an emergency meeting."  And I showed them the vision and they says, "It's big."  I says, "Yeah."  They says, "Where?"  I says, "Come with me."  We walked outside and I pointed to the junkyard and I felt the doubt, I felt their laughter; they says, "Pastor's lost it."  But then we would not be deterred; we began to pray and ask God to make a way.  Three weeks later, a gentleman who was managing the property for the real owner of the property, who was not the one who had the junkyard (laughter), came in and said, "I have met with the city of Norcross [Georgia] and they have agreed, and they will be just elated with my plans."  I said, "What are your plans?"  He says, We're gonna move that junkyard outta the back door of your church--that 15-acre junkyard--we're gonna move it; we're gonna move all those cars and all that stuff."  I said, "What are you gonna do?"  He says, "We're gonna put play-for-play softball fields there."  And I says, "I beg your pardon?"  "Pay-for-play softball fields--yeah."  He says, "Well, the reason they sent me to you is because we're gonna be open on Sundays and they--the city father said if you agree to it, and because we'll be back here, there'll be some noise, but if you agree to it, then we'll do it, but we know that you would not object to the movement of a junkyard."  I says, "Well, I do not object to the movement of a junkyard; however, I do object to the usage of the property because that's where our future is; that's where our church is gonna be built."  He say, "What do you mean?"  I says, "You know"--and I showed him the vision; and he says, "Well, I don't know if the owner wants to sell the property, you know.  We're gonna clean it up and we're gonna make some money here off the property, more than we're makin' because this guy is late on his lease of the property and he hasn't been paying; we're gonna kick him out anyway."  I says, "We thought he was the owner."  He says, "No, the owner is in Hawaii."  I says, "Well, get him on the phone, let me talk to him."  He says, "Why?"  I says, "We need to talk about purchasing the property."  He says, "No, I'm gonna put my softball fields here and you and the city cannot--and you don't have a say-so.  I'll see you in court."  He slammed my door, left out.
Story_ID: 63461
Speaker 1: Three weeks later, he came back--said, "Okay, let's talk a deal here.  If we give you an acre of property, then we can build on the other 14 acres."  I says, "No, acre is not enough; it was what we thought we needed in the past for parking, but we need the entire 15 acres for the vision."  And he says, "Let me call (unclear);" he called the owner, we talked over the phone-Ron (unclear)--we're friends today; he says, "Chip told me what you wanted to do."  He say, "It's very ambitious."  He says, "You know that junk--even though it's a junkyard," this is Gwinnett County [Georgia], Peachtree Corners area.  He says, "That property has gotta be worth at least 70 thou--$75,000 an acre--$75,000 an acre for a junkyard"--naaah!  Well, after an appraiser came through, it was $91,000 an acre.  We paid $91,000 an acre for a junkyard; but it had to be here because this is where God gave the vision.  Three months later, then Ron came to Atlanta [Georgia] and he says, "We need to sit down and talk."  And we did, and he says, "Do you have the money to purchase this (unclear)?  I'll unload it."  He says, "Really, do you have the money?" I says, "No."  He said, "What do you mean, no?"  I says, "Well, we can generate the monies if we had more space because--and we've got people who are tithing, but we have turn-away crowds every Sunday, so we gotta build.  And the first thing we build is this sanctuary so that we can--the numbers increase and the mercenary side is then a given increase."  He says, "That makes sense."  He says, "Okay."  I said, "Well, I haven't finished yet; I've been to all the banks, I've entertained them and we've talked about the vision, and they are enthusiastic about our growth--they are overwhelmed with our growth, yet we don't have collateral, so they cannot work with us."  I said, "so I've gone to the church bond market." I've started putting together--back to the banking and the Housing Authority, knowing about bonds and those kinda things.
Story_ID: 63462
Speaker 1: I didn't know about church bonds, and that's what I teach now when I go out.  We go into Michigan and back to Kentucky to teach, again, church growth, church building, and church bonds.  Many of my people, especially my black pastors, do not know about church bonds, but if you do not have the collateral-- you've got numbers, you've got a good management, you've got a strong church, but you don't have collateral there.  There is a vehicle out there that's been out there for years, I mean years--60 years--called church bonds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah--called church bonds.  And with the church bonds, you pull together a prospectus and, like we're doin' now, you talk about the life of the key man, and his background and education and abilities, and then of those people who are in leadership position, and your financial records.
Speaker 2: Is this something he understood?
Speaker 1: He understood it well.  He was an investor in real estate; he made his millions and became a graduate of University of--Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia], saw the potential and--born and raised here in Norcross [Georgia], saw the potential that was moving this way, bought up properties; this property he sold for $91,000 an acre, he bought for $5,000 an acre just 10 years earlier, but saw that potential, bought up thousands of acres of property and is wealthy today.
Story_ID: 63463
Speaker 1: Well, he understood what I was talkin' about.  He says, "Okay, great."  I says, "But now we gotta have at least five acres for the footprint of the building, and we gotta own that in order to go to the barn market to do it."  He says, "Okay, so that means you've got half a million dollars," and I says, "No, I don't have any millions, I don't have anything right now for you."  He said, "What do you mean?"  I says, "I need you to trust and walk by faith with me on this one.  I need you to grant to me, to the church, five acres of the property owner-financed, prime plus one, and we'll pay you, but I need to own the property."  He says, "Boy, you sure do some fast finances."  I said, "What do you think?"  He say, "Let me think about it."  I say, "Okay, how long you think?"  He say, "Well, give me a couple of weeks."  Actually, I only got a couple of days, really a couple of hours.  Before the day was over, he says, "Okay, can you meet me in my attorney's office next week?"  I says, "Boy, that's really pushin' it tight."  He says, "That's the best I can do; what do you want?"  I says, "Okay."  We met at a Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia] office and we walked in, the chairman of my deacon and I, with a briefcase with the church seal, a ballpoint pen and the Bible.  And he signed over half a million dollars to us, much to the disgust of his attorney, who said, "If the pastor dies today, they own half million dollars' worth of property."  Ron says, "Pastor, are you gonna die any time soon?"  I says, "No, not until the Promised Land has been built--and paid for."  He says, "That's good enough for me."  He walked by faith and didn't even know it, and that's what we were doin' as well.  It was a faith walk, so we stepped out on a junkyard, and God built a churchyard.
Story_ID: 63464
Speaker 1: So then in April--third Sunday in April, 1993, we marched down this hill into that new sanctuary; that was the only building on the site.  But at the dedication of that building, on the back of the dedication program, God had me draw the additional acreage to this that was actually owned by companies that had all kinds of businesses rented out to them, and I drew it because that was our future and I--I just drew blocks and I put names on them.  I drew the gym--God drew the gym, the senior citizens center, he drew the fitness center, the Christianomics (ph.) Mall--all on this man's property that was occupied at the time.  Another owner that was adjacent to these 15 acres--
Story_ID: 63465
Speaker 1: Now, how do you translate vision into purpose?  God gave you the vision; now, how did you explain to investors--into--how did you explain to your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Congregation first--
Speaker 1: --congregation the purpose--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of this vision?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why do we need these things?
Speaker 2: We need these things because of--to explain it to the congregation is that we need--first of all is a sanctuary, and so the vision--I could not--I didn't even share with the leadership the full vision because I didn't believe they could handle it; it was difficult for me, who is a faith walker.  Faith, to me, is steppin' out on nothing.  If you can see it, then you have no reason to hope for it; but literally steppin' out on nothing--God said it, then God is gonna provide in due time.  You can't get ahead of God.  All these eagles you see in my office have a purpose for me because of--a virtue that God is still workin' on with me is patience.  When God gives a vision or when God settles in my spirit, then I take off, but that's been all my life, was a doer.  I want to make things happen, to take nothing and build it; but because God gives the anointing, he doesn't always right then give the appointing--with David--when David was anointed the new King of Israel, he was not yet appointed; he had to go into Sol's court and learn Kingship 101 because he was not ready; it was not God's appointed time, and that's why the eagles remind me of Isaiah 40:31, "But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, shall mount up with wings as eagles, shall run and not be weary, walk and not faint."  So then that's what I had to work with.  Well, then to the church, here's a vision, here's our future, here's what God said.  Now, we gotta walk out on faith; right now, you see a junkyard, but what God has promised and what is in this spiritual realm is actually churchyard.  It is The City of Hope; that was the first time that phrase came up without me thinkin' about it was the City--is The City of Hope, and--because God did not impart to me all of the vision because I couldn't stand it as well, so I thought I had it all, but I didn't--I didn't see the entire vision all at once; he gave me impart as well.  I shared on the sanctuary with the congregation and then later on at dedication, then I shared with them the full vision because we all saw it, and we were walking into the promise.
Story_ID: 63466
Speaker 1: So why do you think it's here in this city--in Norcross [Georgia]--for this community?
Speaker 2: This community--the church is older than the City of Norcross, and this community here, that's been here for these hundreds of years--that's only 100, 150 families; it is a small community.  I believe God chose it because--well, let me preface this statement by saying there were those who said, "If it is true that God is gonna build a multi-million dollar complex there in the middle of that junkyard, why put it in the junkyard when you should be out visible, or be out on Jimmy Carter Boulevard, or be somewhere else?"  I says, "Well, if that's where God was gonna bless it, then that's where it would be."  In this affluent majority-white community, we don't have a gathering place; we're growing in numbers, we were only six percent of the county when I came, and still only about eleven percent, but still there--it's just not there.  We don't have the barber shop, the beauty salon; we don't have the church that can offer to our children and to the families a full ministry; it's not here.  We have in Atlanta [Georgia], and in South Atlanta, and in West Atlanta and Decatur, and those areas and Cobb County--we have those communities and community churches, but in North Atlanta, we don't have one; that's why he's building it here.  And it's a city of hope, so it must be full.
Story_ID: 63467
Speaker 1: So you believe the necessity of the black church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  The black church during my childhood, and before my time on this earth, and 21st Century, and until the Lord comes back, the black church will be the center of our community.
Speaker 1: And what's (ph.) its purpose today--different from what it was when you were a child and before you were born?
Speaker 2: There I no difference.
Speaker 1: So it's the same purpose.
Speaker 2: It served the same purpose, but now the purpose is expanded.  That means then the visionary must expand his vision.  No, he can't expand his vision; he must expand his focus.
Story_ID: 63468
Speaker 1: How have you done it?
Speaker 2: By listening to God and daring to step out on nothing, and building by necessity; and that's what I teach in the seminars that I do around this country is--you cannot build by desire only; if you do, then God may be in it and may not be in it.  But if you build by necessity, meaning that God has blessed you to that area, God has moved you to the--God has--God has swollen your membership to that area; that you're bursting at the seams and it's by necessity, and then with the amenities to equip the entire family.  The City of Hope vision was--is that when you drive under that arch that says, "Welcome to Hopewell Baptist Church, Welcome to The City of Hope," that lights up at night, all of the trees that are lining Faith Boulevard that lights up at night brings you onto a campus.  Tonight--if you're around this area tonight, you'll see it bustling, seven nights a week, with activity--something for everybody to do in your family; that's why the Christianomics (ph.) Mall that is adjacent to the sanctuary here.  A Barber shop, a beauty salon, a nail shop, a clothing boutique, a gift shop, a credit union, a youth bank, a restaurant, a book store--all those are those things that we spend our money outside of the community, especially in the service area, as a people, are here on The City of Hope.  So that you come here on The City of Hope, you can--your family can eat at the--and, and if everybody on the family, or in the family, got something to do on the campus, whether that night or any night, you can do it here, and not worry about your family--a babysitter and all this because we have evening care; we have the state-of-the-art child development center that houses 155 children, and so that evening care cares for your child; your child--you can drop your child off at the evening care, or your baby--at the evening care.  If junior needs to do his homework, he can go into the library and then afterwards can play ball, basketball, on a full court gym.  We had, up until this year, the only--there were only two gyms in this entire county, the one that we built six, seven years ago--six years ago, and the one in the county seat; we built it out of necessity, because of the young congregation and the need in our community.  The fitness center because we believe in the holistic approach to ministry, both body, soul and mind and spirit.
Story_ID: 63469
Speaker 1: Again, let's say you, for instance; you drive on this campus and you drop--you and your wife drop your child off at--your baby off at the Child Development Center for Evening Care.  You and your wife, and junior and Mary, you go into the restaurant and have your dinner.  "Junior, you got any homework?"  "I already did it."  "Well, you can go play ball, or do what you gotta"--your wife's going to a women's class, you going to a bible study class, and Mary wants to do shopping in the mall to get her nails done or get her hair done, whatever; it can all be done here on campus.  The inspiration for the Christian Academy was to let us train some Christian giants academically and spiritually, so then--five years ago, then we established the Hopewell Christian Academy; it has over 200 students.  Now, right outside my window, then, is the high school for 500 students that we will--18 months may--and development of this state-of-the-art school, complete with computer labs and media centers and the whole nine yards.  Back to the mall and the child development center and the invent (ph.) of the academy.  The mall--teaching economic empowerment, keepin' the money in the Christian community and in my black community just a little while longer--it's reciprocal, it's a law of reciprocity that God taught us.  He says, "If you give, then men will give unto you, but I'll cause him to give unto your bosom.  Press now, shake it now, we're runnin' over."  Shall they give the law of reciprocity, and then it occurs here, as we enrich those who are store-owners in our mall who must be members.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You don't allow your opinions--
Story_ID: 63470
Speaker 1: As a minister--oftentimes, ministers feel inclined that their words and their activities need to be centered specifically in the realm of what goes on in the church grounds but you, for instance, that's not the case.  Please explain how--your programs outside the church and your endeavors to help the young people and children in your social endeavors.
Speaker 2: Well, one of them is bein' the founding President of the 100 Black Men--of North Metro 100 Black Men.  I found it necessary with the--with the rapid growth of minorities in the North Metro area, specifically here in Gwinnett County, that we needed male role models, but not just any.  Now, before my bein' chartered as North Metro 100 Black Men, I had the Concerned Black Men of North Metro, and they were members of the church, and we would make our presence known in the schools, to encourage kids in the school, especially the young black boys.  I have some 70 educators in my congregation, and what I was hearing from them when I would have community meetings and have political action kinda meetings, I would hear from them.  "Poppa"--and that's the name that about 75 percent of my church call me.  Say, "Poppa, did you know that those kids that you give a dollar to every report card period--you give a dollar for every A. "If they are satisfactory in their conduct, then they get a dollar for every A; if they got unsatisfactory in conduct, then they don't get any monies at all if they got all A's--so it's--you know, we want to raise and encourage and give incentives for a well-rounded individual.  And they says, "Those kids, especially young black boys that you're givin' all these dollars to in elementary, when they get to middle school," he says, "something happens."  He kept saying, "something happen."  And I says, "Well, you guys gotta tell me what's happening."  And we started analyzing and going out to the schools and getting back with the educators, and what we found is in elementary school, then it's hands-on.  Hands-on--the little black boy cannot have an option to get his work or be quiet, or sit in the back of the room and do nothing.  The mandate was that whether it was a black teacher or a white teacher, male or female, but then when they get to middle school, then now you are grown enough to make your decisions; that seems to be the attitude, and if you wanna come here and clown or you wanna come here and, you know, and be macho or be cool, then you can sit in the back of the room and do it.  And too many of them were doing it and we were losing them there.  We were losing A-students in elementary going to just one grade later, and having problems; and the parents--'course we know that there's that growing up thing that's happening as well, and their interest in girls and sports and all.  But we needed to get a handle on it, so then The Concerned Black Men--we started that, and we were out there for them and we were encouraging them, and we were grabbin' 'em by the nap (ph.) of the neck, and saying, "Hey, straighten up.  We know your parents, we're gonna take you to Poppa's office," and we did that.  And then an opportunity that we had--an organization without the real recognition, and with the embracement of the community that we needed, and some funding we needed for things that we were doing.  So then, we sought and successfully succeeded in getting chartered as 100 Black Men North Metro, and we continue to do such now--extremely active.  I get mail today, and it's been six years since--five years since I was president of, and those quote-unquote "movers and shakers" in the county still call and still ask and want our involvement.
Story_ID: 63471
Speaker 1: I think it's necessary goin' back to the church involvement in the community, but always--this is, this is, this is our independence.  And now we have many businesses that we've opened, and we've made many achievements.  The black church will always be important to our community; and the black pastor because he does have--not just a degree of independence, he has independence, and he can say things that others can't say; he can move among people that others can't move, and he must--we must operate.  Remember we--in our bulletin, it says, "Enter to worship, depart to serve."  When we come in to the sanctuary, some of us seven days a week, we enter to worship, even though we're teaching and training; but our service begins outside.  There's service on this campus because we have the fitness center and a gym, and the Christian Academy, and the day-care centers, and the Christianomics Mall with the stores here on campus, but that's serving--pretty much the community does come in, but we're serving ourselves and enriching ourselves, but outside--the outreach has to occur as well. The bag you asked me about earlier, the clear bag--I call it Bag the Crime, was an effort to prevent weapons bein' brought into the schools in book bags, and to give those bags away; we didn't want parents to even buy them, so we went through corporate financing and what have you, and we didn't get any.  We tried some of the athletes that are members of our church, and we didn't get monies to do it, so then that was the catalyst for preparing for the Mission Ministry--my personal ministry.  The books that I've written and the other activities I'm involved in that raises monies to help scholarship funds for both the academy and to help with those kinds of deals, so then we gave the bags away; we purchased and bought the bags and gave them away.  Now, they are imprinted with 'Bag The Crime', and 'Can The Violence', so that the message is out there; it's a clear bag, it's yours for free, and you can see everything that's in it, and there was--it was a purpose behind same.
Story_ID: 63472
Speaker 1: Your authorship--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Talk about some--talk about a few of the books you've written.
Speaker 2: Oh, the books that I've written is clear out of our bible study.  Tonight, I'll have between 6 to 700 students in the advance bible study class that I teach.  We have five bible study classes on Wednesday nights goin' on concurrently, but they grew out of necessity going to the book store and getting books and getting series, and some of them would be repeaters, some of them would be more of the same, and we needed to speak to the Spirit Man, and I am convinced that when our growth began, here at our explosion, from 200 members to 17,000 members, was when I introduced the church to a third-party in the Godhead, and that is God the Holy Spirit, especially in the Baptist church.  For so many years, you know, we just--He was somebody we mention, write about, sing about, but He wasn't real.  The power and the influence of God, the Holy Spirit, the one whom Jesus said in John 14 and 15, "I'll pray to the Father, and he'll send you another comforter--another paraclete "--the Greek word for "One just like me."  I'll send one just like me, but the difference is He'll be with you, in you, and He'll be everywhere you are."  See, here, while I'm here now, I can only be with you when I'm with you, but He'll be in you and with you.  The world can receive Him because He's coming for you, and He'll be the power and influence of the church, and both for your mission in reach and outreach.  So when we start teaching him and embracing Him, then our growth began to just burst at the seams.  Then, I was seeking books on the Holy Spirit, and some of them were acceptable, some were not because they--many of them focused and dwelt heavily on the side of gifts, and what He'll do for you, and that's not the reason to be filled with the Holy Spirit.  Ephesians 5:18 says, "Be not drunk with wine wherein excess, but be filled with my spirit sayeth the Lord."  And that 19th verse says, "Speaking to one another with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; singing, making melody in your heart unto the Lord."  The 20th verse--"Submitting yourselves one to the other."  So then, it really is not about me.  When I'm filled with the Holy Spirit, I'm filled so that He may use me to do and accomplish those things that God desires through me with others who are spirit-filled as well.  So it takes the focus off the spiritual gifts and focus on bein' available and a--a spirit-filled vessel that will be used by God.
Story_ID: 63473
Speaker 1: And then, even in the midst of marriage--no, not even, but especially in the midst of marriage, because in that same Ephesians 5, then the 21st verse on down, the Lord like--talks about marriage--husbands, the head of the wife; wife--husband, love your wife as Christ loves the church, and then he likened the church and Himself, the Lord did, to the husband and wife, but it all came after bein' spirit-filled, being empowered, being controlled and directed, and powered by God, the Holy Spirit.  So then those are the books that I wrote.
Speaker 2: Specifically, on the marriage book, what do you take from your marriage, your mother [Elma Sheals] and father [James Sheals]--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --when you were writing that book and putting it together?
Speaker 1: Well, after the series of speaking the Spirit-'Living the Spirit Filled Life', 'Walking the Spirit Filled Life', 'Speaking the Spirit Filled Life' Series, then--of course, averaging 50 weddings per year here, at this congregation, and having a average age of 36--I have a lotta babies--don't have funerals--I have a lotta babies and a lotta marriages, then of course, a lot of counseling.  So I have counseling teams, and there's no way I can counsel such a young congregation with all of these marriages and with all of the problems and concerns that come with the newly-weds as well as those who have the stress and strain of today's society on marriages, so it was a necessity to write this book that's entitled, Poppa--that's what people say on the inside--but the title of it is 'Pastor Help! My Marriage Is In Trouble!' [2001].  When they called me, they said, "Poppa, help, my marriage is in trouble."  I kept hearing this, hearing this, and then the development of Pastor, Help, My Marriage Is In Trouble.  I did use some clinical things in there, some things I learned from seminary; but they were there with scriptural backgrounds and backup.  But I took out the fluff and the fat, and came up with a book that you can pick up if you got a problem or concern in your marriage and you can use it as a manual to help you--real things of, again, 23, 24 years of pastoral counseling.
Story_ID: 63474
Speaker 1: I was married for 17 years, and have--with a church my size, of course, I have people from all walks of life, from celebrities, both in the music business and the entertainment business, and the sports field.  I have people--I have doctors and lawyers, but I also have clerks and store owners and street sweepers; so I've got the full gamut, and I've heard--we use the terminology, "heard it all," I think, pretty much so because it keeps repeating.  And I narrowed it down to five major areas where couples have--anytime you categorize things, you can come up with sub-topics and sub-categories.  But there are five major categories that are included in this book; number one is lack of communication, or poor communication; infidelity, third-party involvement, poor budgeting, and poor bedroom.  Those five areas keep repeating over and over, and over again.  But the number one in this 21st Century--number one--educated, well-rounded people; the number one reason for having concerns and problems in the marriage is poor, or lack of, communication.  With a beeper on every hip, a cell phone in every purse, in every pocket, all of this instant communication, sitting down as you and I are right now, lookin' each other in the eye one-on-one, eye contact communication doesn't happen very often anymore, so it is important that we teach that to people as a way of working through some of the problems.  Just sit down and communicate.
Speaker 2: Is that what your parents did?
Speaker 1: No.  That's why it's--again, I drew from that because my mother [Elma Sheals] was outgoing.  My, my, my, father [James Sheals] was--is--I am the victim of society, like--even the young men like yourself in the 21st Century--strong, silent type.  By nature, men are the poorest communicators in relationship; we just are.  Women are better communicators when it comes down to relationships.  We can communicate in a board room, in the exec room, before a crowd, but then when it's time to sit down and communicate with a loved one, then we become the strong, silent type, and that's not good.
Story_ID: 63475
Speaker 1: Where would you like to see this church in 10 years?
Speaker 2: Well, in 10 years, it will be debt-free; that's where--we have a seven-year pay-off where we've already--we started a seven-year pay-off; one year has elapsed, and we are ahead of the game and comin' outta debt for the church, but then there's a $6.5 million high school going up, so that's why then it's stretched out to ten years when we'll be out of debt, and then real scholarships.  Last Saturday, we had Art Shell, the Hall of Famer--first black NFL coach, for the Raiders, in the history of the NFL; he was our speaker for a William--W.L. Sheals Scholarship--William L. Sheals Scholarship Banquet that we held.  We reward excellence, and we work with those who are not, and so then we're gonna do real scholarships again.  We're gonna raise some giants both--again, as I said before.  I'm gonna be redundant with this one because I believe in this; this is where we make a difference, both academically and spiritual giants--academic and spiritual giants--we're raising in our academy, and some of them--some parents need help.  My personal ministry preparing for the Mission Ministry monies from the books and speakin' engagements go to help parents to help keep their children in the academy--those who struggle.  Parents who have two children, those who have--a single parent who has one--the one parent I was telling you about--the couple who had to choose because the father became very ill; he's disabled and the mother, the wife, is keepin' the family afloat, and they have a son and a daughter in our academy, and she was bein' forced to choose which one would remain in the academy--which one.  They could not afford to go back to public school, and I got wind of it through Bible Institute one night; we have a Bible College on campus as well.  One Tuesday night, I heard her talkin' to someone and I says, "You cannot--how do you make that choice?  Are you gonna cut 'em in half?  Let's go to Solomon's Temple; are you gonna cut 'em--how can you make that choice?  You cannot, you cannot; either both go or both stay, one or the other."  Well, God has blessed them so that my ministry can take care of one of them each year while they're doin' the other until they get on their feet.  I told 'em, "I can't do this through their 12th grade graduation because I need to pass the blessin' on, I need to--there are other families that I need to do it to as well."  Well, in 10 years from now, then we'll be able to take on--we do have church scholarships that some parents, some widows--widowed (ph.) deacons who have children and grandchildren that the church is taking care of in the academy, and assisting in college.
Story_ID: 63476
Speaker 1: So, 10 years from now, again, really do an outreach because we'll be out of debt.  I said to the church 22 years ago come Easter Sunday of this year, 2002, that as long as I'm the pastor, we'll never be rich; we'll never boast of how much money you got in the bank because if we got a lotta money in the bank, then we're not fulfilling ministry.  We'll never be able to say we've got $2 Million here, a million dollars--we'll never be able to say it.  That doesn't mean we're gonna be building all this time because the last major facility on the church will be our Career Resource Development Center, hopefully starting on that late summer; that will be a center that will have--I've already partnership with a--New Horizon Computer Center will come in to teach introduction to computers through advance computers, and then we'll bring in a Gwinnett Tech [Gwinnett Technical College, Lawrenceville, Georgia] to do GED's [General Educational Development Test] to college prep courses, and we'll have a job training--job placement center downstairs--that's upstairs in the facility, and we already got the plans for them; I'm waiting to get the school underway and get monies--some money in place.  Downstairs will be a day care center that will be for those mothers coming off welfare or those people who are indigent.  You pay, though, according to income; none of this will be free, you pay according to income.  So if your income says you're workin' at McDonald's, you can only pay $5.00 a week to have your child cared for, while you are bein' trained.  We will not care for your child if you are not bein' trained to be gainfully employed, or to gain future employment.  You pay upstairs as well, according to income.  There'll be a ceiling both on the day care center and on the schooling upstairs in this career center.
Story_ID: 63477
Speaker 1: Now, I'd be remissed if I didn't ask you--hear the story about your beard.
Speaker 2: The beard--the beard I've had since 1968.  The day I walked out of the gates of a top-secret facility in the military, I began growing the beard.  Well, it has been off twice--when I was in show-biz; a couple of roles where I had to be clean-shaven, but as soon as that was over, then the beard came back.  In 1984, I went over to the Holy Land with a group of ministers--pastors, actually; that was my first time over, and we were over for a week, came back and I developed a spot of gray in the beard, which was unusual, unique, and the fact that it happened in a week's time, so--then when God gave the vision for this church, that it was gonna--I didn't see the junkyard yet--the vision of this rural Atlanta [Georgia] church being a large entity in this community, then I says, "Lord, I'll wait on you; I'll wait to hear from you, and I didn't--I didn't.  And I says, "I need some sign, I need some sign.  And then I covenant with God that, "I would not cut the beard off until I hear from you," and then--then I heard from him--that very evening, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 63478
Speaker 1: Now, I'll die it black on Holy Thursday; the Thursday before Good Friday, we reenact the Upper Room scene here on this 30 acres called The City of Hope; we turn this 30 acres into Old Jerusalem.  About 50 percent to 60 percent of the members who will come out--some 3,000 members will come out in biblical costumes.  Myself, the deacons, and ministers will be dressed in biblical costumes.  I portray the role of Crist, and each year--goin' back to that theatrical background, each year then, I get the juices out by doing this.  Now, we call it a reenactment because we do not rehearse for this; we come out--we'll come out on a Wednesday before the Thursday of the 2000 year-ago Upper Room event, and we'll read the Gospel accounts of the Lord's Supper and the crucifixion and resurrection, we'll have prayer, and then we'll leave.  And the reason we do it--I don't want it rehearsed because it's not a play, it's not a production, it's not even a passion play; it's a reenactment.  So then each year, I add a different scene.  Last year, I added the triumphant entry.  We start at the top of the hill of Faith Boulevard, and we brought in animals last year.  I got on top of a donkey and rode down amidst thousands of people lining Faith Boulevard with psalm branches shouting, "Hosanna to the highest," and they were dressed in biblical costumes.  The media came out, we were front page of the Gwinnett Extra and AJC [Atlanta Journal Constitution], and they said about 3,000 people--I think perhaps 20--2,000 to 2500 perhaps; I don't think it was 3,000, but anyway--right on into the church and the entire church is draped off in the front--two long tables--we serve the Lord's Supper to all of these people, thousands of people, and then we reenact the Upper Room scene.  Afterwards, then I come out with a cross down the middle of the isle, and the crucifixion takes place on (unclear).  As you're coming in to The City of Hope, to the right, you'll see a cave there, that's our Cavalry and that's etched out of the sign of granite rock, and then there's crosses; we actually do the crucifixion scene there.  I'm lifted up on the cross and we do the burial and the resurrection.  Last year, fifty-two children accepted Christ at the empty tomb, as I came out with a puff of smoke, and the strobe lighting, and the children came running, and we baptized sixty-eight that Sunday--yeah.
Story_ID: 63479
Speaker 1: Two more questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we're gonna get to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sure.
Speaker 1: Tell me the sights, smells and sounds that take you back to Lakeland [Florida] in the 1940s or '50's [1950s]--that bring you back to your childhood.
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds or smell.  The sights would be trees that have bearing fruit because there were--in our back yard, there were orange trees and grapefruit trees, and--so much so that when I moved back to Florida, then I bought acres of fruit trees myself, when I was a promoter and in radio.  Sounds would be whenever I go to a football game--high school football game to support some of our children, because from my home--we lived right across the street from--when I was a child--from the school, you could hear the sounds from the football stadium.  On Friday nights, you could hear the roaring of the crowd, and I said to myself, "One day, I'm gonna be playing ball, and I'll be on that field," and it did manifest.  The taste would be in our soul food restaurant, Fitzgerald's, in our Christianomics Mall--remembering how mother [Elma Sheals] would cook soul food and would stretch it and make it happen.  And just this past Sunday, had oxtails on the menu, and I haven't had oxtails in so many years, and they were so delicious, so that taste took me back--when my 85 year-old mother, who is in intensive care now, would cook them.
Story_ID: 63480
Speaker 1: And this final thing--
Speaker 2: --Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: I want you to look into the camera and, for all the young people who'll be watching this--and anyone who'll be watching this, one final statement to them that surmises your entire life.
Speaker 2: One final statement to you is that if you would trust in God, pray diligently and fervently, and make sure that you're not influenced by your surroundings, by your peers, by situations, by your posse, and that if you have given your life to Christ, if you have confessed with your mouth and believed in your heart that God is raised--confess through your mouth that Jesus Christ is Lord, and believe in your mouth--in your heart that God has raised him from the dead, according to Romans 10:09, then you shall be saved.  If you believe that, then you must trust that God has received you as his child, and the devil has one job--he's an unemployment angel--unemployed angel who has been stripped of his wings and his power and his authority.  One job to fight God--he can't fight God, he can't beat God, so then he fights his off-springs, and that's you.  Whatever he can do to side-track you and keep you from fulfilling your calling, then he'll do it.  God has a calling for your life; God has a purpose for your life.  You must live out the calling, live out that purpose.  Whether it's in the secular world or in Christiandom, it will be fulfilled if you trust God. Wait on him.  But they that wait upon the Lord--remember that.  Trust God.  The waiting means trust--wait patiently on him; it doesn't mean be lazy and do nothing; it means trust God's appointed time.
Story_ID: 63481
Speaker 1: So explain the challenges of the mega-church--that they present for you every day, as a pastor and with a congregation.
Speaker 2: There are challenges and there are advantages as well.  A challenge is to meet the needs of all of those persons who come on your campus because they see this large sanctuary--these many buildings and amenities that we have to offer to the community-at-large; so the challenge is to meet the needs of those persons who come.  Our benevolence is between 80 to $120,000 per year in rent aid, and utility aid, and not only to membership, but to persons who come.  So the challenge is to meet those needs because of the cut-back in aids and social aids by our government, then it's gone full circle and come back to the church, which is why I embrace faith-based initiative funding so that the people who got their hands on the pulse of the community and can make a difference and know where the hurt and the need is can make that difference, i.e., the Career Development Resource Center that I'm talkin' about will be open to the community; a church shouldn't have to build a center like that, where we are training and employing people, and providing--buildin' a tax base; that oughta be done through monies that are there in Washington, DC that are not utilized--monies that have been saved through the Welfare Reform.  So we're taking in those people and assisting them in getting--becoming productive and taking care of their children.  But then people look at the mega-church and expect us to do that.  But with the mega-church as--that's a challenge; with the mega-church, you got a lotta people and you got a lotta amenities to service as well.  The advantage is--just what I just mentioned; you have those things.  The advantage is you have the gym and the fitness center and the malls and the training centers and all those things, and the academies, and that's the advantage; so the entire person is served and the community is served.  It does offer an advantage because then your financial base and resources is increased to such a way that you; but the draw on the other end can become burdensome when--when it's there so the advan--the disadvantage and advantage both come together.
Story_ID: 63482
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera, Julieanna Richardson): And what is--what--do you believe that there is a black theology?  And if so, what is it?
Speaker 2: I don't believe that there's a black theology.  I believe--if there is, it shouldn't be.  There is Christ theology and there is Christian theology that ought to be prominent in every church, whether it is a black church or the white church, and regardless of the denomination.  If it is Christ-centered, God revered, and Holy Ghost driven, then the theology must directly come from the Bible.  That's, that's, that's been our survival as a people of old, and it will be in the 21st Century.
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera, Julieanna Richardson): You think there's a black-oriented Christianity?
Speaker 2: I think that there is a--I think that there is a social oriented--black social oriented, not necessarily Christianity, but a, a, a social development that is--that's been passed down through our forefathers, and it's been a positive force.  I know that we, today in 21st Century and modern days, a lotta pastors threw out the baby with the bath water but we certainly can't, i.e., the old hymns from old--are charged to keep--I have Amazing Grace, Let your Light Shine--yeah, we have the praise teams; we got a young church, and most churches today got a praise team.  I was at the Southern Baptist Convention a couple of weeks ago; they had praise teams that came up to--for the convention.  Praise teams look good, and they have their place, and because you can sing along with them, especially the young people today.  But in our devotional period, every Sunday morning, the old hymns have to go forth first because the words of the old hymns are in the old hymnals, but the spirit of those hymns and the melody and the--and the meter--the short meter and long meter, they're not written down; their words there are (unclear).  I have their words, but until they are sung in the tradition of old, when our parents--when we didn't have carpet on the floor and our only fan was a funeral home fan with advertisement on it, and when we struggled for rights and for, and for equality--those hymns certainly encouraged, but I believe they encouraged even before then when we were in the fields back home--Momma-n-'nem--back home in the fields of the south and Alabama and Georgia and Mississippi; they sang these hymns without instruments, and they sang 'em from the heart (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--sing a line (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Pardon?
Speaker 1: Would you sing a line from your favorite hymn for us?
Speaker 2: My favorite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--traditional hymns.
Speaker 2: I am not blessed with the ability to sing; I am not blessed with the ability to sing.  I know my calling and that's where I stay.
Story_ID: 63483
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera, Julieanna Richardson): Reverend Sheals, just one last question; what do you want as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Your legacy--what do you want as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I want as my legacy for The City of Hope to stand as a beacon--as a beacon of light and what can be accomplished when a person, a people, trust God and step out on nothin', and show that God can turn a junkyard into a church yard.  I want my legacy to be encompassed in that, in The City of Hope beacon; encompassed in that--that I tried to change generations to come by training, teaching and raisin' young academic and Christian giants so that we can start a generation of blessin's, break some curses, change some mindsets, change some attitudes, and lift up some self-confidence in young people that will pass it on.
Speaker 1: (Off-Camera, Julieanna Richardson): Okay, that's it; we're gonna do photos now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you can think of that we might have omitted?  Anything you'd like to say?
Speaker 2: I think--covered it all.  I didn't talk about the--I did talk about economic empowerment there with the mall; I didn't mention that.  These people who are store-owners have--they must train at least one person per year to become a store-owner, and that's their charge and that's, that's their reason for being--not just to make money and to offer amenities, but to pass the blessing on.  They pay below market rates for their space to our CDC, our Community Development Corporation, who actually manages the mall and the school and the gym and the fitness center.  The church builder facilities but--for the Separation of Church and State and to make sure that we are within the law.  We have a 501(c)(3) community development corporation that manages these activities for us.
Story_ID: 63484
Speaker 1: So if you could go ahead--what we do is have you describe--
Speaker 2: Oh, the pictures?  Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--who, when, where.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, and--okay.  The picture that you're looking at now is--was taken in 1997 when I took 43 members of my church to the Holy Land.  I'm actually standing out in the middle of the Jordan River, praying and preparing to baptize them; I had baptized 41 of the 43 that went to the Holy Land with us in 1997.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead and tell us (unclear); you said this was your mom, but spell the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's my mother, Elma, E-L-M-A Sheals, she is 85 years old; her birthday was January 15th--that's my birthday as well.  I was born on her birthday.  She lives in Lakeland, Florida.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Do that one--I'm interested in that one where I'm portraying Christ.  (Unclear) that one in the magazine.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, we can--there's the picture of it right over there.
Speaker 1: Oh, is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna bring that one up.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: The picture you're looking at now is a picture of myself portraying Christ.  It is a picture that was taken last year--year 2001 in our reenactment of the Upper Room Crucifixion and Resurrection scene where we turn our 30-acre campus into Old Jerusalem; 3,000 members come out dressed in biblical costumes, including myself, and we actually have the--we have the crucifixion and resurrection on campus.  We have a hillside we call Gogulfa (ph.) because it looks like the original Gogulfa Calvary in the Holy Land where Christ was crucified.
Speaker 1: Okay, next, please.  Okay, and the description for this?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of a ribbon-cutting ceremony, or the ribbon-cutting ceremony and worship service for our Christian Academy five years ago.  Now, five years later, it is fully accredited, over 250 students, and we are in the process of building a high school for our children that will house 500 students.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead and describe this one.
Speaker 1: This is the--a picture of the middle school high school that is bein' built as we speak--for 500 students, right outside my office door, on five acres of land.  We'll, again, house pre-K through 12th grade.  This one is where we will open the doors for the school in year 2000--school year 2003.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is preparation for our dedication of the sanctuary, the first building built on the 30 acres for The City of Hope; this was April--third Sunday in April, 1993, and I think that's a courtesy ministry putting a ribbon across the arch that you drive under on Faith Boulevard before we marched down--some 3,000 people--down that hill to the sanctuary on Dedication Sunday.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of the Dedication Sunday.  The first facility of 12 facilities built on the 30 acres was our sanctuary.  As you can see, it's prior to our steeple, and there are people gathering there to receive the crowd as we came down the hill to dedicate on April--third Sunday in April, 1993.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Boy, that light you got there got a really awesome hue on that picture--yeah.  This is Dedication Sunday, again, of The City of Hope, the first facility in the sanctuary.  We are now marching down the hill leading, again, some 3,000 people behind me going down Faith Boulevard on the third Sunday in April, 1993.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready to go on the left hand for the left one.  Do the left one, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The photo to the left is a photo of the governor of the State of Georgia, Governor Roy Bonds, in my office.  Actually, that's before worship service one Sunday morning when he and his family came to worship with us here at Hopewell.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then moving to the photo on the right.
Speaker 2: The photo that you're viewing now is a photo of Senator Max Cleland, Senator for the State of Georgia, who was visiting one Sunday as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a recent photo--2002?
Speaker 2: Two Thousand Two [2002] photo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: The photo that you are looking at now is a photo of Lecresia Campbell, a gospel singing artist who appeared for my anniversary as pastor in year 2000.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This photo is a photo of gospel singer, recording artist Vickie Winans, who was a guest soloist for an anniversary celebration here at the church in year 1999.
Speaker 1: This photo is a picture of myself, my minister of music to the far right, and to his right the special event coordinator; that's Minister Jackson and then the special event coordinator Ben Taylor, and then the person standing next to me, directly next to me, is Pebbles of the LaFace Record fame--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--and we will (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--who just married Otis Nixon.
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: Yeah, she just married Otis Nixon.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this photo?
Speaker 1: This photo is a photo of a Fox Five news anchor, Amanda Davis, a good friend of mine, who was visiting the church at the celebration of Pastor's Anniversary in 1999.
Speaker 2: And next, please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This photo is a picture of myself and Evangelist Billie Graham; this photo was done in 1996 at a community--a Metro-Atlanta Community Leadership Conference. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This photo is--was taken in Washington, DC at a conference with Reverend Jesse Jackson [HM] and Clay Evans [HM] in 1993 when I was attending the conference for the Rainbow Coalition.
Story_ID: 63485
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead with this one, please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of--year 2001, a picture of the groundbreakin' for our middle school high school that is bein' under--that is under construction as we speak, and this photo is of myself up front there; to my immediate right is the chairman of the Deacons' Ministry, and one of the board members to his left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this photo is--we are praying for--on the groundbreaking for the middle school high school.  Here, again, we have board members, the school administrator, and those who are present at the groundbreaking, year 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photo with the City Jerusalem, the old city, there in Jerusalem in the background and the foreground--again, 1997 group that--members of the church that I--that accompanied me over to the Holy Land.  To the right there, sitting on the camel, that's me; I was very nervous, but very excited to be on a camel for the first time--I was.
Speaker 1: I know; I felt the same way.  My camel almost galloped away (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) yeah. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead please.
Speaker 2: In this photo, there's a picture of Shaq--Shaquille O'Neal, standing in the front of Give Us Hope Youth Center, which is--houses our gym here on The City of Hope.  Shaquille O'Neal has--his godson attends our school here on campus, and periodically, he'll come through.
Speaker 1: When was this taken?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: That was just a year ago--year 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: A great one.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Man, that one has biblical significance.  You need to listen to this, Christian--to this one.  This picture here--this one has biblical significance to the end times.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I want you to listen to this here; I'm gonna narrate here in a moment.  This photo was taken in 1997, fall of 1997, in the Holy Land.  I'm actually standing in the front of the eastern gate of the Old Walls, the entrance into Jerusalem.  Behind this wall is a temple compound where Solomon's Temple was built; now, a Muslim mosque, called the Dome with a Rock, is occupying that space now, which is very sacred to the entire Jewish nation.  These walls, or this gate--these gates are sealed, and they were sealed many, many years ago, and I'm standing actually in the midst of a Muslim cemetery.  The Muslims had this gate sealed, they think, and placed these--their deceased here so that Jews would not walk on--in the cemetery to desecrate their deceased, nor enter this eastern gate to go into the temple compound, but biblically, in the scriptures, in the Old Testament, it states that the eastern gates of the Old City Jerusalem, paraphrasing, shall be sealed and not open again until the Prince returns and walks through those gates.  Now, the Lord's return is gonna be down through the Kidron Valley, which is down at the bottom of where I'm standing; the Mount of Olives and the Garden of Gethsemane is up on the other hillside that I'm facing.  The bible says that Jesus will come down through the Kidron Valley and go through--up this hillside through these gates so that the Muslims, who are bein' a pawn and keepin' this gate sealed, are actually fulfilling scriptures because the gates cannot be penetrated, will not be, until the Prince, Jesus himself, returns and go through these gates.  The other gates of the city have been opened--the Sheep Gate, the Damascus gates and the other gates of the old Jerusalem City have been opened except this one, and again, they think that they are keepin' it closed to--again, honor their dead and to keep Jews from crossing and going into the temple compound, but they are--again been used as pawns to fulfill scripture; same as the Roman government and the Pharisees when they lifted up Jesus Christ on the cross who said, "And I--if I be lifted up, I shall draw all men unto me."
Speaker 2: Thank you, Reverend Sheals.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Go ahead please.
Speaker 2: This photo is my initial sermon.  You may recognize the terminology, "trial sermon," the very first sermon after I was called into the ministry 25 years ago.  Day after Easter Sunday, fifteen young people accepted Jesus Crist as their personal savior at my very first sermon as a minister of the gospel.  I was licensed on that day.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year it was?  I know it was in Lake (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Lakeland, Flo--it was--New Mount--New Mount Zion Baptist Church, Lakeland, Florida, Fall 1977.
