Story_ID: 178860
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Samuels, S-A-M-U-E-L-S.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes but I don't use it.  I don't want anyone to know what it is (laugh).
Speaker 1: Okay, a nickname?
Speaker 2: I have a nickname, it's Bobbie, but I don't use that either, just straight out Barbara, no Barbie, no anything just Barbara.
Speaker 1: Okay now can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure. August 15, 1937, in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Alright and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a fashion editor for N'DIGO Magapaper and I teach fashion and photo styling at Columbia College in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 17, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at The HistoryMakers in a studio room, 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 178861
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chinese--no Japanese, I'm sorry, I messed that up, Japanese food is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, orange, rust, anything in the orange family.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer, late spring and early summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Okay finally do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know, amazing--isn't that amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I say that a lot.
Story_ID: 178862
Speaker 1: Alright. Well I want to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's side.  We're going to start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Blanche, B-L-A-N-C-H-E, Daniel, D as in David, A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is May 21, 1917--was May 21, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay and what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them first of all?
Speaker 2: I can only trace my mother's family back to my grandfather actually.  They were so old and we've lost track with a lot so I haven't done a lot of family history but my grandfather and my great aunts, they were from Monmouth, Illinois and that's really all I can remember.  My grandfather was a gentleman farmer in Monmouth and my two great aunts--his sisters were teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay so are there any stories from that side of the family that you can tell about how the family got to Illinois--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a clue because my mother just didn't get into all of that for some reason and I guess I wasn't inquiring--my mind wasn't inquiring enough, but I do remember the first time I saw my grandfather and I was small and I didn't realize how short he was until I got older.  I was in my teens and I was taller than he was when I was seventeen which was amazing.  I always thought he was so big and he really wasn't, in fact, very small but mighty.
Speaker 1: Okay. You say he was a gentleman farmer?
Speaker 2: Gentleman farmer, he had several acres of land, a huge house and he raised vegetables and there were horses.  My memory is a little vague about all of the things that happened.  We used to go there for summer and then there was another marriage.  My grandmother [Eugenia Metcalfe], my mother's mother got married again and I think that's why my--we lost track of that side and then my grandmother married a man [John McKinney] from Holly Springs, Mississippi and we were a lot more attached to him than we were to the other side for some reason.
Speaker 1: Okay so is there any-oh, I read there is a story about your name, right Samuels?
Speaker 2: Oh that's my husband-my ex-husband that's his side of the family, yes his grandfather was Jewish and a long line of Samuels in the family that's how we got that.
Story_ID: 178863
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, John Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay and what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: God I can't really--I think it's August 3 or something like that.  I really don't remember, I called my sister and she told me so I think I wrote it down on there, I don't know if it's in there or not.
Speaker 1: Okay born around the same time as your mother [Blanche Daniel], okay?  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: Here [Chicago, Illinois], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My family history is so sketchy, and people just didn't communicate in the family, so I remember growing up and being introduced to people as my aunt this and my uncle that and whatever, and they would come in and come out of our lives.  We were pretty closely knit with my brother who is deceased and my sister and my mom pretty much.
Speaker 1: Okay what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Again very little, very little.  He disappeared from my life and my mom's life and then she remarried and had two children.  But I have a picture of him with my brother but very little, just real weird with this family situation.  That's why I try to do better with my own children and talk to them and let them know.
Story_ID: 178864
Speaker 1: Does your family still have land in Monmouth [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No it was all sold off and my mother [Blanche Daniel] inherited everything and the sisters didn't want to keep the farm up and they were elderly and then when they died too they passed everything on to my mother and she had made her life in Chicago [Illinois] so.
Speaker 1: Where is Monmouth anyway?
Speaker 2: It's down--it's in southern Illinois and again that is so vague and so sketchy.
Speaker 1: Is that near Kentucky and the Ohio River?
Speaker 2: The only thing I really remember about it is that you have to pass--I know I remember passing through Cary, Illinois, I think.  I remember passing through Cary and there it was.  But I don't too much about Monmouth either because we stopped going when my grandparents were divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your mother.  What was your mother like, what kind of personality was she?
Speaker 2: She was absolutely incredible and I think that's what where I got my fashion sense and a love for fashion and I used to love her perfume and her nails were always done and her hair.  She was very glamorous and she always made sure that my sister [Sheila Saville] and I looked absolutely stunning every time we went out.  People would always say God those girls look so good and she let us choose our own clothes when we were twelve years old from that point on--from twelve on we selected our own clothes whether it was a mistake or whatever we had to live with it.  She was very, very fashionable and loved to go out, loved to dance, dressed beautifully and we used to watch her, my sister and I would just sit out in the floor and watch her get ready to go out and all and so that's where I developed my love for fashion.
Speaker 1: Okay now was your mother raised in Monmouth?
Speaker 2: She was raised--for some reason my mom was raised in Louisville [Kentucky] now that's really weird.  I don't know how she wound up in Louisville.  As I said before they just did not talk about family.  My sister and I and when my brother was alive, we knew very little about anyone other than our immediate family.  So I don't know if there were any burning secrets they wanted to keep away from us or whatever but we just didn't know.
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother [Eugenia Metcalfe] from Louisville?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was from Louisville, my grandmother was from Louisville, yeah.
Speaker 1: So your mother was raised in Louisville and then moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: And then they moved to Chicago, yeah but again my grandmother got married again too so as I said before and she wound up in Louisville and my mother came with her.
Speaker 1: Did your mother have a chance to go to college or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother went to college, she had three years.  Three years seems to be the stopping point in our family for some reason.  Every single one of us went through three years and then decided to do something else.  I think a lot of it was economics and at the time the need to make money was more important to--than finishing our education.  We thought at the time. But my brother and my sister and I were very successful without degrees.  In fact, I'm teaching in college right now.
Speaker 1: So in terms of your mother now where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to the University of Illinois [later University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois].  Was it Illinois, I think it was?
Speaker 1: In Champaign [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Champaign but she didn't stay down there too long, she came back up and then she started working.  She really wanted to go into show business, my mother did because she could sing very well and so she wanted--she took a job at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] when we were young so that we would have access to all the greats in music and I think she lived vicariously and we would go to the Regal after school and sit backstage with all the famous people who would appear there.  It was quite amazing. So we grew up with that and when she was in high school, she used to sing.  I believe she sang with Nat [King] Cole and then she used to sing in 'Hi-Jinks.'
Speaker 1: Did she go to Phillips [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: She went to Phillips.  So she really pushed us.  I think she was frustrated that none of her children went into show business so she could have a real good time but we didn't.  But we all managed to become successful in our own fields.
Story_ID: 178865
Speaker 1: So, just wanted to get some more information about your mother [Blanche Daniel] and I'm going to ask you about your childhood, and school.  You don't have to summarize yet about what you've already done because this is a long interview (laughter).
Speaker 2: Alright, (laughs) okay.
Speaker 1: So, what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was an accountant, and she had a love for numbers, and she could add, subtract, divide in her head, quicker than most people.  When she was alive, and of course in her generation, they used those huge calculators, great big things.  Her brain would work faster than the calculator, so unfortunately I did not inherit that side of her, I inherited the creative side, my sister [Sheila Saville] inherited the numerical side and so did my brother but it was amazing, she was amazing just to watch her. She also--when she passed away we found a big chest full of awards and she was one of the Illinois delegates for the Department of Aging.  So she spent lot of time in Springfield she was--did a lot of charity work, she was a club women and raised funds.  Very active raising funds for UNICEF [United Nations Children's Emergency Fund], and we found this huge trunk filled with awards, plaques, we had no idea she was doing all of that.  Amazing, she just did not talk, I don't know what happened with her, but she kept her mouth shut. I feel the loss because I think there is so much more about her that we could have learned. Of the three I'm more like her than the other two.
Speaker 1: And you're the oldest right?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: And you got a brother and a sister?
Speaker 2: I had a brother and I have a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178866
Speaker 1: What was growing up like?  What neighborhood did you grow up in?
Speaker 2: 51st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  And we lived in this big apartment on 51st and Michigan, and I fell from the third floor when I was eight years old playing blind man's bluff. And my mother [Blanche Daniel] was quite ill, she was a--she smoked incessantly.  We never saw her without a cigarette and she wound up with TB and she went to the Municipal Tuberculosis Sanatorium [Chicago, Illinois] but she wound up having to wait almost eight months before she could get in there, before they could perform a surgery or whatever, and I think that was because of the times.  And I fell from the third floor, and I remember my mother coming all the way downstairs, we lived on the third floor and there were two big apartments one in the back and one in the front in this building, and she also had a strong psychic sense, and my sister [Sheila Saville] went up to spend the night with a friend of hers in the front part of the building and my mom told me not to go, she said no you can't go.  I said what do you mean I can't go, I haven't even been bad today you know and she said you're here, you stay here; I don't want you to go.  Well after my parents went to sleep, I went out anyway, and that was the day I fell from the third floor. There was one huge porch with a divider and I thought, because I was blind folded, I thought I was flipping over the other porch when actually I stepped right over the front.  I had very long thick hair and we had a wrought iron fence that had spokes and this thing joints and thank God because my hair split and my head was laying right up against the fence and the traumatic thing of course was getting my hair cut they had to cut my hair to get me off this thing.
Speaker 1: Wow. So you didn't--you kind of hung by your hair?
Speaker 2: No, I just--you know these are the spokes and my hair went, whew, and my head was laying right up against the fence where I fell.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And we ran around from hospital to hospital.  I was eight years old and none of the hospitals would take me. So we ran around.  They sent a patrol car to pick us up and they took us from hospital to hospital and I finally wound up over at County [later John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  So that was a bit of a trauma, best part of that of course was that I did not have to go to school for a whole bunch of time. The ironic part of it is, it happened August 8, and years later that's the same day my brother died. So that was a bit ironic.
Speaker 1: Okay, gee that's a--did you have a long recovery time?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I think it's because I was young and strong. I was taking dancing lessons and all, so I was pretty well, pretty well-formed but the hospitals would not take us and then my father [John Wilson] threatened, I can't remember which hospital it was, but my father actually threatened one of the doctors he grabbed him and said we have to do something because I was more frightened than I was in pain and so the doctor did not put any gauze or Vaseline--he just wrapped me up, told me to take a deep breath and wrapped me up with this tape.
Speaker 1: What was wrong with you--I mean what was--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well they weren't sure because somebody picked me up and carried me upstairs and that's why I remember my mother coming downstairs in her nightgown. Because some guy picked me up after they cut my hair to free me and we're going upstairs and I was completely limp and my mom fainted because she thought I had died. And so I'll never forget her coming down those stairs in this white nightgown she looked almost ghostly you know, and so they drove us around and drove us around in this paddy wagon and no ambulances--no ambulances would come.
Speaker 1: Seems like they would have taken you to Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], or something you know, Provident is right there.
Speaker 2: For some reason they did not.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was right there, yeah.
Speaker 2: For some reason they did not.
Speaker 1: Near you, like 51st--
Speaker 2: We wound up at County all the way over on the other side of town from 51st and Michigan.  And the doctors were stunned to realize they had not put anything under this tape, and so they had to use a scalpel and slit it down the crevice in your back and then they rolled me over and split it down the front and they told me to take a deep breath and that was the only relief I had because I was like this the whole time and they flipped me over twice and ripped all the tape off.
Speaker 1: This is when they took the bandages off?
Speaker 2: When they took the bandages off. And then I wound up in the hospital and I was happy because I made the [Chicago] Defender, you know that was the only paper that covered us but I survived the fall so that was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So you didn't have anything broken or anything?
Speaker 2: No, isn't that wild, but I've had problems with my back as a result of that, because the discs, something happened with the discs.  And then there is a little bit of misalignment that I'm very conscious of and I have to straighten up every now and then when that happens too, but that's all that happened.
Speaker 1: Well I hope that--this is the biggest tragedy as a child.
Speaker 2: That is the worst thing that's ever happened to me, you know.
Story_ID: 178867
Speaker 1: But what were some of the sights and sounds and smells growing up, what kind of things did you see?
Speaker 2: Going down to Mississippi with my--to see my step-grandfather's [John McKinney] people. These were two huge, humongous people.  I have never seen such big people in my whole life.  And they had a big farm down there and I learned how to cook when I was nine years old. We went--I went until I was about thirteen.  Then I did not have to go anymore, because by that time it became a chore because they just worked the daylights out of us.  We picked cotton; we cooked, chased chickens and learned how to grab them around the neck that was fun.  Because we had to learn how to collect eggs and there was one hen that kept pecking me every time I would take the eggs and so my grandmother, who literally was my grandmother down there and she said what do you want for your birthday and I said I want to eat that chicken.  And she said okay and she went out in the yard and that was the first time I had seen someone grab a chicken by the neck and ring it around until the neck broke and then let it go.  I was horrified but I still ate it out of revenge, but I'll never forget that, I will never forget that. My childhood, I think my childhood was great, I really do.  I had a lot of friends, they were always welcome to come in, my mom [Blanche Daniel]--they loved my mom they thought she was so cool because she was so--very liberal, very open. Later on when I was in high school I had--that was the first trauma really I had, other than that accident, and that was when I was really slapped right in the face with racism, because I had gone to a high school [Lucy Flower Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] that just did not like black students and especially a black student who would excel.
Story_ID: 178868
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now, we got you in high school--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well you want to go back to grammar school?
Speaker 1: Yes, where did you go to grammar school?
Speaker 2: Grammar school was great, that's when I realized I had artistic ability too. I use to--mostly it was coloring books but I realized I could actually draw without a coloring book.  At Burke School [Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I went to Burke School on King Drive and one of my teachers said you should be in the art club and I joined the art club and that was like a--that was such a grand awakening for me as far as art was concerned.  I have always been a voracious reader.  I would get in bed with a flashlight after all the lights were out and then I would read under the covers until my mom [Blanche Daniel] caught me or if I fell asleep or something like that.  But then with the reading and the art, and--
Speaker 1: Your mother had you in dance classes too?
Speaker 2: And in dance classes, yeah and then the dance classes were accelerated because of the accident because she really wanted me to build up some strength and some muscle, so there wouldn't be a bad aftermath from the accident.  So that helped a lot.  My sister [Sheila Saville] and I, we fought every day of our lives when we were young, every day in grammar school.
Speaker 1: How much younger is your sister?
Speaker 2: About a year and a half.  A year and a half and we were so different even as children, and so she caused some misery, but we're best friends now.  But grammar school was great, we formed a club, and those girls in grammar school, we're friends now all these years later, and we used to go to the movies and do everything fun together.  All of us were closely watched, we didn't go to any of the basement parties or anything because we were too young.  The thing I would do as long as I can remember, on the way to school, I used to wear--they used to have these two huge braids and then another one here and I hated my hair like that.  So the moment I got out of the house, I would undo everything and fluff it up and even though it was sticking out everywhere, at least it was down and I would open up my clothes and do all kinds of things so that I wouldn't look as regimented in school as I did when I was at home.  Then I would forget, I would forget and come home and like braids would be all askew because I would have to braid it up real fast because I didn't want my mother to know I had changed, so that was really funny.  But grammar school was great, that's when I really realized that I had a lot of creative ability.
Speaker 1: Who was your dance instructor?
Speaker 2: Sadie Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I've heard her name before, Sadie Bruce.
Speaker 2: And the funny part is, I was taking ballet and learned how to tap dance.  That was really weird because the tap class was right before the ballet class and I would always get there early and I learned how to tap and I was never that graceful as a ballerina but I loved tap dancing which was great so that worked out real well, that really worked out real well too.  I remember once I was late for school and I asked my daddy, he was leaving and I said drive me to school, you need to drive me to school, and in those days you just didn't do that and he picked up a stick and I said what's that for and he said I want to drive you to school (laughs).  So that's a memory I had that's just great.
Speaker 1: So your stepfather basically served--he basically raised you as a father?
Speaker 2: Yeah pretty much.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name--oh God, I'm just thinking about him, Jerry McLemore.  But he was good but he was kind of weird too, my mother wound up divorcing him too.
Speaker 1: How long was he in the family?
Speaker 2: About four years.
Speaker 1: Oh about four.
Speaker 2: Yeah about four years and then my mother didn't get married again until about thirty years later--thirty or forty years later then she got married again, so.
Story_ID: 178869
Speaker 1: Now, you went to Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No I went to Lucy Flower [Lucy Flower Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Lucy Flower, okay.
Speaker 2: My mom [Blanche Daniel] went to Phillips.  I went to Lucy Flower.
Speaker 1: Flower is a vocational high school.
Speaker 2: It's a vocational high school and that's where I learned to sew because I loved clothes so much and we didn't have a lot of money.  And that's where I learned to sew and make my own clothes.
Speaker 1: Now Lucy Flower is on the West Side.
Speaker 2: It's on the West Side and I had to take two Ls and a bus to get there and I asked my mother, I said, why do you want me to go to Lucy Flower.  We were right near DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and so many horrible things were happening at DuSable at the time as far as some of the girls who were going there and my mother had read a harrowing account of a girl who had given birth in the girls' washroom.  She said that's it, you are not going to DuSable.  So she sent me to Lucy Flower and the thing is that's also when I realized that I was pretty much the leader of my group, I hadn't realized that because when I informed them that I was going to Lucy Flower, they all came with me.  Yeah they all decided, okay we'll just go to Flower, and that was an experience.  I mean that was as I said before the first time I had been faced with racism because they didn't-they were not real friendly with the black girls, it was all girls and they were not real nice to us.
Speaker 1: How many black students were at Lucy Flower?
Speaker 2: At the time I would venture to say about 20 percent of the population when I was there in the '50s [1950s] were black and we excelled in athletics, we excelled in everything and that's what--in fact, in high school was where I won the scholarship to go to the School of the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 178870
Speaker 1: At what point in your life was your mother [Blanche Daniel] working for the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: When we were in grammar school [Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay and who were some of the personalities that you met, met there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met James Brown, Al Green, Leslie Uggams, anyone who appeared there actually.  There were some, you know, kind of weird folks my mother didn't want us around--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, for obvious reasons, and so we had to stay back in the office.  But one of the, one of the--my mother was a real good friend of Nat [King] Cole's, you know, so that was great.  But we used to wait--in high school we used to wait outside the Chicago Theater when they had live, live shows, and that was a highlight, and get autographs. That's what we did.  I must have gone through four or five autograph books and of course, some of the stars that we thought were absolutely incredible turned out to be the nastiest and the ones that we didn't really care that much about turned out to be really nice, nice people.  One of the highlights from waiting around for autographs was when Zachary Scott and Joan, Joan Bennett's sister, I can't--Constance Bennett, they were in town with a play called 'Bell, Book and Candle' and all five of us-there were five girls who hung together and we went over to the theater to wait for autographs and this very tall, black guy came out with these dogs, walking these dogs and he saw us and he said, "Well hi, who are you girls," and we said, "We're waiting to see Mr. Scott or Ms. Bennett to get autographs," and he said, "Well I'm Mr. Scott's personal assistant." And he said, "Have you seen the play," and we said no.  In fact, we had never seen a play.  We had seen stage productions but we had never seen a play per se.  And so he said, "Well how would you like to come and see the play?"  And we said, "What," and we were only fifteen years old at the time and he said, "Why don't you come and see it." He said, "I'll make sure you can see it."  And I said, "Well we have to discuss this with our parents first, okay," and he said, "Fine," so he gave us cards and we all went home, talked to our parents.  They said, "Well, okay as long as everyone's going," and they were going to pick us up.  And we were--oh, did we ever have a big conference about what we were going to wear, oh it was incredible.  We decided at the time pique, cotton pique jackets, flyaway jackets those were the big things so we each went out and our parents bought each one of us a different color jacket and we all wore these pique jackets over our dresses and skirts, and when we got to the theater, they took us--we went inside and most of the people were seated already and these five little black girls, teenagers came walking down the aisle. We had our heads up, we were so proud and everyone was whispering, "Who are they? What's this?"  And they sat us right down in front, and then William Windom the actor was right--he was there too and he took us to see Johnny Hartman.
Story_ID: 177029
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Randolph Scott?
Speaker 2: Not Randolph, what was his name--Zachary.
Speaker 1: Oh, Zachary.
Speaker 2: Did I say Randolph? I meant Zachary Scott.
Speaker 1: Zachary Scott.
Speaker 2: Did I say Randolph?
Speaker 1: Yeah I think now Zachary Scott was a gentleman.
Speaker 2: The guy with the mustache, dark hair that was slicked back, kind of pointed features.  Yeah he was in a lot of those movies with Gene Tierney and a lot of those stars.
Speaker 1: Okay Zachary Scott and William Windom you said was there.
Speaker 2: William Windom, yes, he was in the play and Lurlean Hunter was a real good friend of his, and he said, "I'm going to take you to Lurlean's," because she had that club, and he said "I'm going to take you to Lurlean's," and have you ever heard of Johnny Hartman, and I said yes, because my mom [Blanche Daniel] played music all the time.  He said, okay well he's appearing.  So we decided, okay, should we tell our parents we're going to a nightclub, or should we just go. We decided to just go, because we knew what the answer would be.  So we all piled into the limo in our little pique jackets in different colors and went to see Lurlean Hunter and Johnny Hartman.  That was the first time any of us had ever been to a real nightclub.
Speaker 1: Where was it at?
Speaker 2: I think it was near--God that so long ago--I don't know--it was somewhere--it seemed to be downtown to us but it was across-way across State Street and I think it was--it wasn't at Washington or Randolph but it was like one of the Near West Side places like they have on Randolph Street now and all that.  And so we drank cokes-Coca-Cola and they brought us sandwiches and we sat there and watched the show and it was great.  I think that was the highlight of all my years in high school.
Story_ID: 177030
Speaker 1: Okay did you have any teachers at Lucy Flower [Lucy Flower Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] that really were helpful or encouraging?
Speaker 2: We had a couple, but for the most part we had--one teacher, Ms. Murphy [ph.] who was an ex-nun who wore these--she looked like the church lady on Saturday Night Live and she gave us all hatpins to stick men if they bothered us on the bus or on the L on the way to school, "Just give them a good jam," she used to say that.  We never heard of anything like that.  But every now and then a teacher would stand out but rarely.  Ms. Topps [ph.] for one, she was very good, Ms. Lutikoontz [ph.] was very good.  Math has just never been a strong suit for me and she told me not to bother with taking the final because I had already flunked the course and she said it would just be a waste of time for me to sit and fool with your paper.  And then we had Ms. Osmond [ph.], who was the placement counselor who would find part-time jobs for all of the students.  And all of the white and Asian girls, because we didn't have--I don't think we had any Latin students at that time, and all the white girls and Asian girls she was getting them jobs in offices and banks and everything and I went into her office because I wanted a job--I just wanted a spectacular prom dress, and she said oh I have a job for you.  She went through this box and she called this woman and she said, "I have a girl for you who I think would be wonderful," and she said yes, yes and then said can you cook--do you cook, did you have any of the cooking courses, and I said, "Well, yeah but what's this about," and oh yeah she can cook, and I said, "Wait a minute, what kind of job is this?" and she said, "Okay I'll call you back."  She said, "Don't you interrupt me when I'm talking to someone," and she said, "I found you a good job taking care of this woman's kids on weekends," and I said, "What?"  "You just have to keep the kid's room clean and prepare their meals" and I said, "Wait a minute I don't keep my own room clean at home and I don't prepare my own meals so I'm not going to do it for somebody else."  And she said, "Well what do you want?" and I said, "I want a job in a bank."  She said, "Please, you're colored, they're not going to give you a--they're not going to trust you with any money.  Who do you think you are?"  I got up and went straight to the principal's office and reported her.  So I was speaking at one of the West Side high schools later on in life and I'm talking about staying in school and how important it is and all of a sudden this woman got up from the audience an elderly woman and she looked at me like this and she was stunned.  She walked down the aisle, and I looked at her, and I said, oh, Ms. Osmond, and I said, yeah it's me.  And I told the students--the whole assembly I said, "I have this woman to thank for my being what I am today, because she told me I would never amount to anything."  And I said, "Every time I had another victory, I dedicated it to her because she was so horrible to me."  And everyone started applauding and one of the teachers came over and said, "You know I'm so glad you did that because we have had complaints about this woman," and she said, "And they don't want to do anything, now I think they're going to do something."  Because she was still, all those years later telling minority students they weren't going to make anything of themselves.  So that was another high point in my life showing her that yes indeed, I did succeed and thank you very much because you were just the push I needed in order to excel.
Story_ID: 177031
Speaker 1: So you wanted a job in a bank?
Speaker 2: I wanted a job at any bank because three of the girls in my division in high school, none of whom were black, had gotten jobs at banks when it was First National and a couple of other banks.  They weren't hiring blacks at the time and the school just wasn't placing blacks in those nice jobs.  The best job I could get at that time in my life was as a tray girl putting food on the trays at Billings Hospital [Albert Merritt Billings Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and I kept that job until I graduated from high school [Lucy Flower Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So high school was not that great, I'm glad I had all my friends with me and I made new friends but virtually everything and every accomplishment that someone black made in that place, they tried to tear it down or--they would actually reduce your grades to make sure your G.P.A. [grade point average] wasn't as high as it should be and all that.  But that's the way it was during that time.  We had friends at other schools that were mixed and they were going through the same things and one of the best friends I had in high school, I thought, was a girl from Virginia named Virginia Baker, and we had a field trip to the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], and her mom was one of the chaperones, and when we walked in I saw her, and I said hey Virginia, and she turned around and walked away from me.  I couldn't understand what happened and then she came back to school that Monday, and she said, "I couldn't speak to you in front of my mother.  She knows about you but she doesn't know you're colored and I couldn't tell her."  So that was absolutely amazing and that's when I really learned that all things are not created equal.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you get the chance to go to that prom?
Speaker 2: Oh, did I ever and I cut the sleeves--I went shopping for my dress, my date had a blue cumberbund and you know how everyone tried to match up and my skirt had ruffles and it was strapless.  Even though I was really skinny, I was pretty busty so my mother [Blanche Daniel] said, "You're not wearing that thing."  I said, "Well why not, the dress is gorgeous and Harry's going to have on blue."  So she took the under part of the lower level of ruffles and made sleeves (laughs).  I said to myself there is no way I am going to my prom with these big sleeves on.  And so I took scissors and thread with me and my girlfriends--it was three of us were in--two couples in the same car and we took the sleeves off the dress and I had the greatest time at the prom.  We posed for pictures, I wasn't thinking, came home and my mom said, oh, your prom pictures came today, and I said, oh, let me see and all of a sudden it hit me, oh no the sleeves aren't on the photo.  The sleeves are not on the photo and I knew and she looked at me and grounded me.  It's funny now but it was not funny at the time.  I was having so much fun I forgot to put the sleeves on for the picture.  But I'm glad because I'm glad I didn't have those big sleeves on.  But she used to tell me all the time I always knew you were different and I always knew you were going to excel and do phenomenal things.
Story_ID: 177032
Speaker 1: Okay so after--you graduated in--?
Speaker 2: In June '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five, [1955] okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to the School of the Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois] and that was another-they just weren't nice to black kids who were smarter, who were talented in those days.
Speaker 1: How many black students were at The School of the Art Institute?
Speaker 2: At the time when I went in my class there were three of us, there were three of us in the same curriculum.  But there were others in the school, but a lot of them were going through the same thing too.  And I think that's one of the reasons why I really lost the desire too, to keep going in the school, because I said what's going to happen when I get out of college, and I go and look for a job, am I going to get hit with the same kinds of things.  So that's-which is exactly what happened later on.  So it was a great creative experience but it was just going to school.  Nothing stood out, I can't say it was one of the best things that happened to me, can't say it was one of the worst things.  High school was far more traumatic because it was a time of discovery about the differences between blacks and whites.  So that was really different.  I mean I was kind of used to it after four years at Flower [Lucy Flower Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] but then, when I got there, I started out taking Saturday classes from high school and then that developed into a scholarship.  But again I can't think of any phenomenal thing that happened there.  And I guess high school had desensitized me to a great degree.
Story_ID: 177033
Speaker 1: Now at this point, 1955, '56 [1956], the Civil Rights Movement is starting to kick up a little bit.
Speaker 2: And I wanted go out and ride in the cars and do all this stuff and carry signs and my mother said, no you are not going to do that.  So what I did do, when I left school, I went to work for the [Chicago] Urban League, and that was incredible.
Speaker 1: What were some of the projects the Urban League was working on?
Speaker 2: There were--well Bill Berry first of all was the president of the Urban League, and he was in strong contention with Whitney Young for national president.  But he ran a tight ship, and that's where I learned all of my corporate skills and all that.  At the time it was very strongly considered as the educational arm of the Civil Rights Movement and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] those guys were the fighters and taking people to court and doing all kinds of stuff.  Whereas the Urban League at the time was providing the movement with all of the research materials, background and everything they needed in order to conduct the fight.  And because--they used to call it Red Feather at the time, they changed the name of that charity but it's huge, United Fund now.  They supplied a lot of the budgets so consequently they could not at the Urban League get involved in any political things where they would have to take a stand.  So they were the educational arm of the movement, and a phenomenal arm, at that because that's where I met tons of celebrities because they were always coming in.  Sammy Davis, Frank Sinatra, the whole Rat Pack.  [HM] Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, everyone would come through those doors at one time or another.  So, and now my life is pretty much filled with meeting celebrities and interacting with them and I think that was the training ground.  Because when we were at the Regal Theater, we did our homework.  Anyway getting into the Urban League was incredible, just an incredible experience.
Speaker 1: That was right there in the neighborhood too.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, oh that's true.
Speaker 1: 47th and Michigan.
Speaker 2: 47th and Michigan, and it was just amazing.  At 24th, I think they were--they shared the building with, I think they shared the building with the [Chicago] Defender and then they moved.
Speaker 1: Then they moved to 47th.
Speaker 2: And then they moved but I remember I was typing up a long list of figures from donors and someone came in, and said do you have a pencil and I reached over and said here, because those numbers were getting me and he said can I have one with an eraser, and I turned around to say something really nasty, and it was Sammy Davis, Jr.  I said, oh of course you can, you can have anything you want and he laughed.  So that was--but you were always seeing somebody and we would all meet in the conference room whenever they came in.  So that was great, lot of great things happened there.
Speaker 1: What were the celebrities interested in?
Speaker 2: Actually we were more interested in them.  The celebrities as far as--they were doing their part.  Belafonte was extremely active in the Civil Rights Movement and he pulled all of his celebrity friends in.  So consequently they were always coming through but I would venture to say Harry Belafonte was one of the leaders in getting other people involved with the Urban League and what it did.  He was already deeply involved with the NAACP and all the other organizations and Floyd Patterson the boxer--it was not unusual to look up and just see anyone walking through there and it was more racially integrated, I think.  On an intellectual level, I think there were more intellectuals involved because of the educational aspect as opposed to let's go to court and get these guys kind of thing that the NAACP was doing.
Story_ID: 177034
Speaker 1: So how long were you at the [Chicago] Urban League?
Speaker 2: I was at the Urban League, I think three years and then I decided to leave because I was just not good at numbers and I said I just can't do this and I left and went with Formfit-Rogers, which was a designer lingerie company, and I was their advertising department.  But this is only after having pounded the pavement like crazy trying to find a job and people were interested in my sketches and all that but they weren't interested in hiring me.  So a friend of mine was working at Formfit-Rogers, and she told me to come over and apply for a job which I did.  I went to the Urban League looking for a job, and they hired me to work there, and then I went to Formfit-Rogers and it was great because I had a good chance to use my art abilities and my copywriting skills which I formulated at Formfit-Rogers.  I had never sat down and really tried to write anything other than school essays or something like that.  But I had to write advertising copy and realized that I liked it and so they moved to New York [New York] and asked me if I could go with them and I couldn't.
Speaker 1: Why couldn't you go?
Speaker 2: Oh, I skipped an entire aspect of my marriage-of my life.  I got married, and I had a child, and I didn't want to just pull up stakes and just move, because at that time women didn't transfer and then pull their husbands along with them, it was the reverse.  When the husband would get a transfer and then--he'd pull the family along with him and that's what happened.  So I had a child, Michael was very young at that time and I went to--left Formfit because I couldn't go to New York, because of the marital situation, and I was the first African American female executive hired by Sears Roebuck [& Co.].  I called an agency and a woman said well you know--I brought my stuff in to see her, an employment agency and she said you know, I want to try and get you into Sears.  I've never been able to get anyone--we were still colored at the time--to get into Sears and she said it's going to be rough.  Sure enough that's where I wound up as a copywriter.
Speaker 1: Okay now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were the first woman hired at Sears--black woman hired by the Sears Roebuck headquarters?
Speaker 2: The whole thing.
Speaker 1: Okay the whole thing; they didn't even have a saleswoman or anything.
Speaker 2: Well this was a corporate level now, not at store level but at corporate level.  There was a black man who worked there, [HM] Chuck Harrison who was an industrial designer, one of the best, in fact he'd be a great HistoryMaker.
Speaker 1: He is, we interviewed him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so you know Chuck.  He and I got to be really good friends because about three weeks after I started as a copywriter, another black guy was hired from--he graduated from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], Hosea Martin, and he came in.  So they had one black male and one black female and that was enough for them at the time in the copywriter ranks.  So they had a six week training course, but Chuck was working out of his home, because people didn't know how to take him or what to do with him.  So they put me in the, what we called the training pen where they taught you all the procedures for writing and this and that.   They were reluctant at first because I didn't have a degree and--but they wound up hiring me they said you are extremely talented and so why don't we do this.  After that training was suppose to take five weeks and I went through it in like two and a half or three.  Every time I would walk through the cafeteria or go through the campus people would stop whatever they were doing just to stare.
Story_ID: 177035
Speaker 1: And then finally they put me--there was an opening in the furniture department and I went over there and the manager said, well you know most of our products is out of the South, most of our--a lot of our buyers are out of the South, a lot of them have come and said they don't want to work with you, this was the catalog sales manager.  And I said you know I will write about a dog blanket, I don't care, but I think you need to know that my first job after I left school with the Chicago Urban League and I have ties to SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] so if they want to see some real action here let them start something.  He looked at me, and said okay.  But people were coming from all over the campus to look in my office, and we had these little cubbies, you could just look right over if you were tall enough.  And they would say I don't believe it, I just simply do not believe it that Sears [Roebuck, & Co.] had hired someone on a semi-executive middle management basis, and I started receiving all kinds of anonymous letters.  Someone had sent a piece of used toilet paper through interoffice mail to me.  Not to mention the phone calls and if I would stop to get a drink from the fountain someone would say well that one's dead.  Nobody wanted to go into the bathroom after me and my best friend, who was on a different level, she still is my best friend after forty-some years, I met her at Sears, she was there.  They had blacks in clerical positions and a level just below that of mid management--middle management and she had been there for about a year or so before I came and if you were hired by them, you had to be exceptional.  You had to be good looking, you had to be smart, you had to dress well--everything--there was just a different set of standards for us than there were for other people who worked there.  And clericals who worked for buyers would put red slashes on my copy and to change things and I said no this will not do, this will not do.  But we did finally get all that straightened out because one of the buyers grabbed me from the back when I was working on a layout with two other people and had I not had witnesses, I would have been fired on the spot.  And I thought something-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He grabbed you?
Speaker 1: He grabbed my behind, yeah and I put my hand back there and went wait a minute because I thought my slip was crawling up or something, and this was one of guys who had decided they didn't want to work with me.  But I started cranking out million dollar pages and then everyone was clamoring to get me to write for them.  So I turned around and he was standing there smiling and his two cohorts were standing outside of my office elbowing each other, and I turned around, and I beat the hell out of him, because I had witnesses and I was absolutely furious that he would touch me.  He was away from work for about two weeks, and he came back and he still had scars where I had scratched his face all up.  And I just took all the frustration, I guess, of being faced at this point in my life with all this prejudice.  I just took it all out on this guy and he told--his assistant came in and she said do you know what that guy told his wife what had happened to him and I said what, that three black guys jumped him in the parking lot and took his wallet.  I said I don't believe it.  So I was sitting in my office and all of a sudden the whole office got quiet, and sometimes we are animalistic and we notice a change in the atmosphere, and I looked up and this guy was standing in my doorway and everyone was waiting to see what was going to happen.  He said I just want to apologize for grabbing you like that, I really had no business doing it and I said I just want to ask you a question, what made you think you could put your hands on me because if my husband touched your wife or even looked at your wife in the wrong way, you and your little gang would have been after him with a rope, a knife and a gun.  He said I don't know what to say, and I said why don't you just get out of my doorway and never speak to me again, that would be fine.  He walked away, and we just kind of avoided each other.  He tried to make amends, and tried to be friends and everything but I just wasn't having it.  I found out ten years later he did the same thing to a young lady-young black lady.
Speaker 2: Ten years later?
Speaker 1: Ten years later that guy did--I guess--I said I guess I didn't beat him enough.  And she called me because it had happened and she said someone in her department--because it went all over the company and she said he's giving me a lot of trouble, making obscene calls.  This was a young girl from the South whose husband had deserted her, and she had two kids and needed the job.  So they trapped him, they got him.  He wasn't fired for that, he was fired for bigger transgressions, but the fact that ten years later he had--what he had done to this girl, they didn't fire him for that.
Story_ID: 177036
Speaker 1: About what year did this happen to you?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I started in '63 [1963] perhaps 1965--in '65 [1965].  So things were still rough, people were still trying to get over the Kennedy assassination and all of the other horrible things that had happened.
Speaker 1: The March on Washington in '63 [1963], did you go?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go.
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s] fashion was really changing, it went through a radical change--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Fashion was changing like crazy.  You had--you know because things were in such an uproar so you have the rebels, the hippies who were dressing and wearing anything they wanted to.
Speaker 1: Even before that from the '50s [1950s] the suits and outfits were a little bit different from the Continental suits came out in the '60s [1960s], the skinny ties, even the president is wearing a different kind of a suit than people wore before.  The latter '60s [1960s] as you say the hippies--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah but what had happened, I think a lot and I wasn't as attuned to all that at the time, especially in the black community, because as far as fashion went, my entire world was white.  Everyone I came in contact with, everyone I networked with, they were white and a lot of it was because of the circumstances where I was, who I worked with, and where I went for research and all that and it was like a completely white thing.  Nothing south of Roosevelt Road and I became attuned to that later on and got very involved with it.  I don't know--the two groups that are copied more than any other group as far as trends, the black community and the gay community, those are the two big ones as far as people copying what they do.  And then the moment everyone else has caught up with them, then they've moved on to the next thing, even though there might not be any correlation--much of a correlation between the gay fashion people and designs and the black.  Right now we're very much into hip hop and all that--we'll get to that.  But in the '50s [1950s] you did have the Continental suits and you had the thin legged pants, everything was very narrow to the body and a lot of that is because a lot of people were a lot thinner.  You don't have the kind of fat--you didn't have the kind of fat you have running around today running around then.  Plus they were young and they could wear it but that was not a time--because of the times that other groups emulated the black community.
Story_ID: 177037
Speaker 1: We were talking about the fashion changes in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we were talking about that, and we certainly didn't have any black role models as far as fashion was concerned at Sears [Roebuck & Co.] because the overwhelming majority of blacks worked in the mail order plant.  We had a couple of guys who came in within five or six years after I was there and I think by that time they had moved [HM] Chuck Harrison back into headquarters and he was working in the design lab at the time.  But they were all trying to be some conservative and not make any noise.  They were dressing like the white guys which were totally different from what they were used to prior to coming to Sears.  They were very corporate, very corporate and we all were.  We weren't allowed to wear trousers to work, we had to wear skirts and they transferred--well I'm skipping ahead a little bit.  Then they transferred me to the footwear department, transferred me to footwear and I was a copywriter there, again, cranking out million dollar pages and it came to the national manager's attention and so he wanted me to join the department as an associate buyer.  So I was the first black female to become an associate buyer at corporate headquarters.  And I worked--that was when I had a real good taste of fashion because we worked very closely with the fashion people and we dressed the U.S. Olympics team at the time, and the line I was working on, we had to provide the footwear.  And I looked at those shoe sizes and I went into my buyer and I said you know what, I think we have the men's list instead of the women's, because they were size twelve.  At that time that was like having size fifteen feet.  The wides.  And he said no those are the women.
Speaker 1: That are in the [1968 Summer] Olympic Games [Mexico City, Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Those are the women, those aren't the men and I said you are kidding.  He said you ought to see the men's shoe sizes and the widths and I said, "And they came to Sears to get their shoes?" But all of the pumps were made of real soft leather and not high heels, so they could walk and everything.  And we made shoes for Evonne Goolagong, anyone who was endorsed with a product and if Sears sold that product then Sears had access to them.  And so, but I could not believe runners--the women runners wearing size eleven and twelve and twelve and a half and each shoe had to be custom made.  They made a mold of everyone's feet because can you imagine wearing ill fitting shoes, and you're running track, or doing any of the sporting events.  If you got blisters on your feet or anything like that, you would be ruined.
Speaker 1: What Olympics was that, was that '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, it was in the--it had to be later than '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: I would say either '67 [1967] or '68 [1968] yeah it had to have been.
Speaker 1: The '68 [1968] Olympics, they are every four years.
Speaker 2: '68 [1968], yeah, it was '68 [1968] and the following year--following Olympics then J.C. Penney dressed everybody.  So what they were trying to do, I think because it was the U.S. team was to go to U.S. organizations to get all their clothes done.  So that was really funny.  I had never seen shoe sizes that big for women in my whole life; double E, triple E.
Story_ID: 177038
Speaker 1: So at Sears [Roebuck & Co.]--now by 1968, well, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968].  Sears is on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], what was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh, was there ever. They cleared out one of the parking lots to make a communications center and they had tanks parked in there, all kinds of artillery things.  They had--they put up all kinds--it was like what you see on TV now in wartime, and we looked out of the window and all we could see were flames.  And the weird part about it was it was surrounding--we could see Roosevelt Road but they didn't come near Sears and I said why is this.  It was because Sears took such good care of the neighborhood first of all for them.  They put up a YMCA [Y, or Young Men's Christian Association]; they did everything to keep the people happy.  Gave them access to Sears Bank, they constituted something like 30 percent of the assets but almost 80 percent of the transactions but people were putting in their twenty dollars a week and fifty dollars a week.  So when we were going to look out of the window, all we could see were flames.  It was the most terrifying--and smoke, it was so horrible and someone said had this been another retailer--big retailer who did absolutely nothing to maintain their area which was further north, they would have burned the place down.  But they had clothing drives.  I used to organize fashion shows for them through the Sears Y but people they would warn us not to go out, don't go outside and this one vendor from New York said, "Oh, this is nothing, and I'm not worried about any of this, they're not going to bother me."  They brought him back in shaking his head with blood running all down his face.  So it was really bad and one of my best friends who is no longer with us was black but she looked white.  So--there was no way anyone could look at her and see that she was black until she opened her mouth, okay.  She came to pick me up, I said, "Oh my God, what is going to happen when we go down Homan and they're going to see us in the car together," and she said, well, because they were throwing big slabs of concrete in the cars if they were people who were not black in the car, they were throwing stuff over the expressway fence--the railing.  It was a mess, it was one of the scariest things I think I've ever been through.  Then it calmed down but it was a harrowing experience.
Story_ID: 177039
Speaker 1: By '68 [1968] were there many black employees in the--at the corporate level (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But again--but everyone was at an assistant level.  There were very few blacks at full title, very few blacks at full title.  And those of us who were, were constantly being questioned about our abilities and double checked, checked and double checked and just all kinds of stuff.  I worked for a buyer who was extremely difficult and really anal.  He was somewhat embarrassed because I was his assistant, and one of the secretaries who had a high school education went over to personnel and she said, "I want to be a copywriter," and they said, "Well you can't write or anything, you haven't been to college," and she said, "Well if she can do it, I know I can."  And this woman could barely type a letter properly, you know?  Lots of, lots of jealousy and you build up defenses and so--a thick skin, that's probably better, a thick skin for all of that.  So it was, it was quite rough. It was quite rough.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to write about fashion at some point?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, because I was in a fashion department with footwear, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So what happened was the buyers, when I was a copywriter, they were coming to me because of the way I dressed and I don't know where--I just started picking up this fashion know how by reading.  I started subscribing to all the magazines and reading and everything.  So they would come to me about colors, silhouettes, everything, who is this going to appeal to, what do you think, and their sales were going up just by listening to me.  So the national merchandise manager, a very powerful position, he said, "I want you to come to my department as an associate buyer and forget this copywriting thing."  And I said okay, and he said, "Because you're a rebel and that's what I want" because I used to wait for buses for ever just to get over to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and then the "L" [elevated train] and then walk.  When we had moved downtown and it was still cold, it was even worse because you had the wind from the lake blowing.  So I decided I am not going to continue wearing skirts and freezing my tail off in the winter.  So I wore pants to work one day and it went all over, all over the place and they called over to the We- the office manager called over to the West Side and said, "This woman is wearing trousers to work, she's wearing pants and that's not the law. I'm going to make her go home," but I didn't work for her so she couldn't do it.  I worked for the advertising department so the merchandise manager came into my office and I was sitting there and one of the other girls who was a copywriter, very political, she was white and wasn't going to make any waves because she wanted to be promoted to something else.  Well she wore pants too, we were going to do this and she chickened out and put a skirt on over them so that she could remove them in case there was too much heat.  So Bill Grant walked into the office and he said, "Stand up," and I stood up. He says, "Turn around." Well see now today, he'd be in all kinds of trouble.  But he said, "Stand up, turn around. Okay you look great. Sit down. You don't have to go home."  And after that women started wearing pants to work in droves and so they changed the dress code because I had guts enough to do that.
Speaker 1: Now was Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] ahead of or behind the rest of the corporate world in terms of women wearing pants to work?  'Cause it wasn't that long ago, I guess, well long ago now but there was a time when women couldn't wear pants publicly (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think Sears was ahead of the time, because in most of the big corporations even when that happened women were not wearing pants to work and that was in--it had to be around '68 [1968], '69 [1969], something like that.  So I was getting phone calls from everybody, "Aw, thank you so much. God it's great that we can wear pants to work," you know, and then guys would call me up and say, "Hey, do you know what you've started? What would happen if we started wearing skirts to work?"  You know silly stuff like that.  So that was--that was, that was good. That was good.
Speaker 1: This is about nineteen sixty (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah about '68 [1968]--
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 2: --sixty-nine [1969], yeah somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And you know I mean really it was Sears was not a law office. I could understand the legal department if that was what they wanted to do but with all the running around and everything we had to do, it was stupid for us to not be able to wear them.  My mother [Blanche Daniel] was very proud of me; she thought that was just great that I had done that because that's the same kind of thing she would have done.
Story_ID: 177040
Speaker 1: But I had--after I was promoted to associate buyer in footwear [at Sears, Roebuck & Co.] then I had a series of other jobs there and wound up back in the department I started writing copy as national buyer for women's casual footwear and that's where I won the Buyer of the Year.  Where you beat out well over three hundred other people--three hundred other buyers and that makes you the global buyer of the year.
Speaker 2: Okay what year was that?
Speaker 1: That was in 1988, and I'm telling you the phones were buzzing.  Is she really that good?  People were calling people they didn't even know in the department and it's a three-stage process.  First you have to beat out every buyer in your department, and we were broken down into categories, men's wear, women's wear, children's this and that and that, hard lines, and then you had to beat out every other buyer in your category which my category was women's, and then once you do that and then you have to go up against all of the best buyers of each category.  And there are approximately five or six from each category.  You start out with something like three hundred and fifty and you'd break it down to the final six and I was part of that.  But every time I made another step up, people would call and say, is this affirmative action, or is she really that good?  I had buyers who had come in and talked to me say, well, if weren't for affirmative action you wouldn't be here.  I said well at least for affirmative action gave you guys an excuse for being losers.  Now you can call your wives and tell them you didn't make it because of affirmative action whereas before you had no excuse.  So you should really fall on your knees and thank God for giving you a reason for not making it.  That was just a long, long, long kind of a thing and by that time I gotten involved with a lot of fashion organizations and activities going to shows, being seen.  I was regional director--first black regional director for Fashion Group International in Chicago [Illinois], which is the most prestigious fashion organization in the world.  And Sears was behind me 100 percent.  So we had all kinds of programs and everything there and a lot of people got to know who I was because of that and then of course, the press behind Buyer of the Year and all of that, 'Women's Wear Daily', 'Footwear News' and publications out of New York [New York], because this was a big deal.  So I started making myself known.  I tackled the white side of fashion and then I tackled the black side of fashion, and got involved with a lot of black designers and got them involved in the organizations.  I started working with them on their lines, building up their self-esteem when they were being knocked down left, right and sideways, when there were white designers who might not have been as talented.  Now there was plenty of talent out there on both sides of the fence but what I have noticed now because of evolution, designers who are Asian, black, white, Hispanic, now there are tons of them out there whereas before, you could count the other groups on the palm of one hand.  And I feel I've done a lot to help a lot of those people, and help them formulate their lines, teach them business practices.  Sears was a phenomenal learning experience, and I left, I just decided I can't take this anymore, and I want to do something else with my life.
Story_ID: 177041
Speaker 1: Now this is in 1993?
Speaker 2: And this is 1993 and in-I think it was 1994, the Wall Street Journal called up because they realized that out of all of the corporations as far as layoffs were concerned according to government figures, Sears [Roebuck & Co.] had the highest record of layoffs against the lowest record of--for their size of minority employees.  So if you only have, let's just say, 18 percent black employees, why are 56 percent being laid off in the total of people who are being laid off?  So the numbers just didn't match up.  So they called several people and everyone--the writer said everyone she talked to about this said you need to call Barbara Samuels.  So they got my number from somewhere and she said well, why did you leave Sears, you were the Buyer of the Year.  And I said, I left for my mental and physical health.  Just could not take it anymore, because in huge corporations for a lot of minorities like that, every attribute you have is a disadvantage, sad, but true if you're dealing with the wrong people.  So I really became active and I knew at some point I wanted to leave and establish my own business and get more involved in the community and I figured the best way to help minorities in fashion was to learn everything conceivable thing I could about the white fashion community, because I needed some guidelines.  So that's exactly what I did, I spent a great deal of time researching--learning all about it but still maintaining my ethnicity.  How can I pass for anything other than what I am?  And because my abilities and all, the white industry kept elevating me and that only helped me join boards.  I was vice president of several boards and board members and all, a regional director for Chicago [Illinois] for the fashion group and I used all of that.  That was my whole plan to really get the people south of Roosevelt Road involved in this industry on a higher level.
Speaker 1: Now you were at Sears for thirty years?
Speaker 2: Thirty years and--
Speaker 1: So were you able to retire or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I took early retirement, because I was so eager to get started on what I considered my mission.
Story_ID: 177042
Speaker 1: Who are some of the black fashion designers that you worked with and tried to develop?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately, several of them have died from AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome], but I worked with some designers who were established already, and several had approached me like [HM] Barbara Bates, you know Barbara.  Barbara wanted me to do something with her.  [HM] Jermikko [Shoshannah Johnson], JJ Hobeau was also--they're both HistoryMakers.  I worked with her and I worked with Jermikko very closely.  These are two very talented women and I would think two of the most visible black designers in the city.  But I've worked with Herbert Van Stephens, he's pretty important.  Fledgling designers--students who were out of school who were extremely talented like Tonette Navarro, and all.  I didn't--someone white came to me for advice, I didn't say, hey, go stand over--I helped them too.  There was a woman from Africa who felt she was being taken for a ride and I--the same principles I teach my students, I sat down with her and got her straightened out too.  So really there are so many, it's unbelievable some of whom have moved on to New York [New York] and some whom who have given up and they've come right back.  But it's been something.  And let's see, who else did I work with.  And I started--when I left Sears [Roebuck & Co.], I really jumped into my own company with both feet.  I was a wardrobe consultant and I helped people develop their lines and do all kinds of things, special events, I did that.  I worked with several charities and all and I didn't have time to do this while I was at Sears, I knew I would not have time and so that's one reason why I took early retirement so that I could devote time and then I took the year and a half off to work with [HM] Carol Moseley Braun as her image and wardrobe consultant.  So that's where that went.
Speaker 1: Okay now you founded a company called The Lion's Share?
Speaker 2: The Lion's Share, because I'm a Leo, and I just wanted something that had Leo or lion or something in it, and The Lion's Share--the fashion editor for the Sun-Times at the time--Lisbeth Levine came up with that, and so that's what I did.  But it was fun, it wasn't real fun getting started and it was a one woman operation for a long, long time.  But whenever I needed help, I knew who to call to help me produce the fashion shows, to help me to get someone's wardrobe together.  You build up confidence with the stores whenever I'd give a fashion show, you build up that confidence so that you can go in and pull up forty or fifty thousand dollars worth of clothes or more, just on who you are.  And they know they are going to get the clothes back and they're going to be in good shape but it's because I've worked with so many of these people, and then, after I was regional director in Chicago [Illinois], I sat on the--I was elected by the Fashion Group body--the international body with regional directors from all over the world who convened in New York [New York] and they appointed me to the New York board of directors.
Speaker 1: The board of directors of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Of Fashion Group International, yeah.  So I would go into New York for board meetings and basically what I did was constantly remind them that two thirds of their population was outside of New York because the New Yorkers well we weren't--well we did that in Chicago, or well you know the Cleveland [Ohio] group did that.  So that basically was what we were there for.  There were two people who were elected each term--four-year term.  So that was fun, because that's where I met the real movers and shakers in this business, and that really helped because with my work as a fashion editor, I can call a lot of these people and get them and talk to them, because I sat on the board with them and as a board member I had access to them and that was wonderful, a lot of people that you read about.
Story_ID: 177043
Speaker 1: When did you start writing for N'DIGO?
Speaker 2: Five years ago.  Five years ago, I received a phone call from Kai El' Zabar, and she said, "Listen we really need--I want to build up fashion."  She was one of the senior editors there at the time and she said, "We really need to build up our fashion image here and we want to build this up.  Would you like to write fashion for us?"  And I said, well sure.  I wasn't interested in the money or anything, I just want the opportunity and that's one thing about the fashion business, you really have to have a passion for it because if you don't, you're just not going make it because the money is not always there and I tell my students, you're not going to hold your diploma up and walk into Donna Karan, for instance and say I want my office over there, it's not going to happen.  You really have to pick up pins, run for sandwiches, get screamed at because you put mustard instead of mayonnaise on something, sweep up the floors, before they will even trust you enough to do something big.  So I spent four years on that board meeting and sitting with editors from magazines like Vanity Fair and--well, not Vanity Fair, Town and Country and other big publications, women are big in the cosmetics field, so it was just great, and that's why I know all these people.  One example of good networking, I chaperone students on a New York [New York] trip every year and we're getting into Tiffany--backstage of Tiffany.
Speaker 1: So you've got a trip you take students on every year to New York?
Speaker 2: Every year to New York, where we visit the shows of the designers, we go to fashion shows, we do all that and these are fashion students, the music students go too but they go to places like MTV and for their business and then we--there are three of who take the students on the fashion thing to let them know what it's really like to be in the fashion industry.  But Tiffany is going to let our students backstage at Tiffany for the first time to watch them string pearls and put jewelry together and do all that.  That is phenomenal, because that's a high security situation.  I've been friends with Kenneth Cole for twenty years, personal friends because I used to buy shoes from his father and that's how I met Kenneth, and now he and I have been very good friends.  In fact, he sent me his book and he inscribed it, "Thanks for all the inspiration and friendship over the years."  I've interviewed Karl Lagerfeld, Star Jones, some of the biggest people in the industry; Usher, Lil' Kim a lot of hip hop people, big time fashion.  Karl Lagerfeld, of course, because he's the king with the lines he designs for Chanel and a lot of the others, and I asked him what--and I had written down in my notebook Josephine Baker I said, comma, I'll bet, and I asked him, "What woman, living or dead, would you have given your right arm to design clothes for?"  He said, "Oh, Josephine Baker, of course," and he went into a thing about Josephine Baker that was phenomenal and really respected her.  So when you get that kind of feedback, it's wonderful.
Story_ID: 177044
Speaker 1: Okay, now looking at fashion, I guess, over the past forty years or so, what have been the most exciting trends in fashion?
Speaker 2: I think some of the most--actually more so than trends, I think the technology of fashion because fashion runs in circles and as soon as they crash into the '90s [1990s], then they started going back to the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], which is where we are right now.  But I think some of the most phenomenal events in fashion have all been surrounded by technology, and most of the technology comes out of Japan, with the treatment of fabrics.  The designer I have more respect for than anyone is Issey Miyake, out of Japan, because he was doing things twenty, thirty years ago, his clothes are virtual impossible to copy because of the technology.  He can make a dress this big (indicates relatively small width), and when you pull it out and open it there's ten yards of fabric there and that's what I always dress Julie [Julieanna Richardson] in Issey Miyake because it is heavy drama for The HistoryMakers telecast because--and she loves Issey Miyake.  So I think I turned her on to something she's going to regret later on if she starts buying his clothes because it's impossible to get something for less than eight hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: By technology, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: The treatment of the fabrics, the treatment of fabrics so that they don't wrinkle; the infusion of synthetics so that the colors stay in.  The natural fibers, with constant cleaning and/or washing, the colors start to fade, cotton, linen things like that.  Now if you infuse cotton, linen and wool with polyester it's going to hang an entirely different way, the color is going to be maintained and it will last a lot longer.
Story_ID: 177045
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about fashion and you were saying the Japanese--
Speaker 2: The Japanese, I think, have done more for technology than any other group and again when you use natural fibers like cotton, linen, flax, silk when they infuse that, especially wool too, mainly wool and cotton, when they infuse that with polyester, the color--and polyester used to be oh please terrible, horrible stretch pants this and that well that's over because now big name designers are blending their natural fibers with polyester for longevity.  You can get something cleaned or washed repeatedly and the polyester will snap that fiber right back.  Giorgio Armani puts polyester in his clothes, and that's about as top as you can get.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the '80s [1980s] people started to frown on polyester.
Speaker 2: Oh, the pink and blue and yellow stretch pants and all that with the stirrups.
Speaker 1: The '70s [1970s] was the age of all the polyester suits made out of foam--
Speaker 2: And the leisure suits and what has happened as far as the leisure suit which used to be really big has come back in the form of the safari suit or cargo suit now and they call the pockets that were one time called safari pockets or leisure pockets are now cargo pockets.  So a lot of times they just change the terminology to update so that it doesn't seem like it's really the same old stuff.  And what I tell people in my column and what I tell my students, especially people who read the column, if you were old enough to wear it the first time it came around, you don't need it on now.  Because in '60s [1960s] when the bell bottom pants were there and the big belts and all that stuff, because your body had changed in forty years.  You may still be a size eight but it's way different--a forty-five or fifty year old's size eight--her body is way different from an eighteen or nineteen year old's size eight.  And most of us went through the phase with hip huggers hanging as low as they could get, the big wide bell bottoms.  A lot of the trends there are very strong now, if you wore them the first time they were designed and came out please do not put them on again in life.  You're not going to look the same, alright.  You're not going to look the same.
Story_ID: 177046
Speaker 1: Let me ask you some questions about black people in fashion.  These are just observations, popular culture observations.  First one is that black men have traditionally dressed way different from white men.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And--but the fact remains that there aren't any, at least there haven't been that many black people designing the clothes to make them different, it's been that they actually dressed different, buying clothes from other places.  For instance, in the '60s [1960s], black men were wearing Italian clothes basically sold them usually by Jewish merchants on their side of town in clothing stores.  Black men wore high collar shirts, wider ties.  They wore louder colors, they're wearing flannel pants and different louder shades.  Their pants were shorter, they're wider, shoes were Stetson shoes, Stacy Adams shoes, that sort of thing.  White men at the same time were wearing penny loafers and jeans, and you know, sweaters, khakis and that kind of thing.  So it was like a real dichotomy, real difference.  Black men and white men at certain junctures in their neighborhood looked completely different from each other.  Italian knit shirts were popular in the black community.  They were expensive too, very expensive. The expensive shirts in the white community would be IZOD shirts or something--shirts that--
Speaker 2: That's right, little polo shirts and whatever.
Speaker 1: So that's a--what do you make of that?
Speaker 2: I think first of all it's a lot closer together now.  Now we see a lot of black men, especially men in corporate America, trying to dress more like their white counterparts.  Now on weekends, it's an entirely different situation and they come back to the hood because they are there psychologically for two days, and they're immersed in their own communities.  Now, you find more white men trying to dress like black men whereas before, during the times we were discussing, there was a complete separation where white men did not want to look black, as they called it.  And a lot of it was based on a lack of confidence, a lack of confidence.  They have European beginnings, a lot more conservative even today when you go to Europe you still see that conservatism, it's there somewhere.  The tourists are the ones who are out in all the shoes and--you would go to Europe at one time and you would never see any of the Europeans wearing sneakers because they thought it was low class and American--jeans and sneakers all over the place now.  I was there last year and that was one way you could tell the Americans from everyone else, because of the sneakers and the jeans and the logos and this and that.  And now you find, especially with the younger people, moving into this thing where fashion does come together.  I think the black man has always been a peacock, always been a peacock even when he didn't have the money, he was going to show everybody that he could look good and he did look good.  Even if he had to get something out of layaway, whatever, it was going to happen.  Layaway was huge in the '50s [1950s] and in the '60s [1960s].  So--but other people would look and see that, and say, God that guy's got on a red shirt or a red tie, and ooh, I'd like to do that.
Story_ID: 177047
Speaker 1: There was a time in corporate America and that's when things really started changing a little bit.  When they came out with what they call power shirts and power ties.  And these were shirts that were maybe a blue with a white collar or something like that, white cuffs, and then you would wear a bright tie to go with it.  But when you were going to meet a client, you wouldn't dress like that, you'd have on a white shirt and a conservative tie, but every other time--
Speaker 2: Red and blue stripe ties.
Speaker 1: The rep.  But then remember all the bright yellow ties that came out?  They tried to pass pink ties but that was more of a fad than a trend.  A fad is something that's in and out just like that.  A trend has some longevity.  Pink ties did not really go over that well.  There was some yellow but I think with the manufacturers did, they started watching the tonalities to get some of these bright colors so that they weren't blinding to the eye but they were still attractive.  You have designers now, like [Salvatore] Ferragamo, [Ermenegildo] Zegna, Hugo Boss a lot of these guys now are a lot trendier, the suits are a lot easier.  [Giorgio] Armani is the one who started that.  Okay, so you have to wear a suit, it should be comfortable.  The jacket should be cut so that you don't mind keeping it on all day, and he is the one who really loosened up apparel for men.
Speaker 2: Now the '70s [1970s] suits were tight.
Speaker 1: Oh very tight, very tight this is the same as the hip huggers with women.  If you wore that in the '70s [1970s] you sure don't need it on in the--during the millennium, same thing happens.  You had a situation where men would wear belts and suspenders.  Now nobody has that much to hold up, it's either or.  Heavier guys with a gut ought to wear suspenders as opposed to belts because it makes the pants hang much better.  So there are a lot of things--a lot of people think that double breasted suits makes them look slimmer.  No it doesn't, a double breasted suit does not.  You've got a layer of fabric underneath that's buttoned and they you put another layer of fabric over that.  How is that going to make you look slimmer?  Stripes don't make you look any taller.  A 5'5" guy can put on a pinstripe suit, he's still going to look 5'6".  So what happens, I think some of the biggest innovations have been more in footwear, and in knits for men than anything else.  The toes are broader for sports, the toes are a lot broader now, they are a lot higher.  You've got more toe room, the soles are easier to walk in so men are not having as much trouble with their feet as they used to because the shoes accommodate the real shape of the foot.
Story_ID: 177048
Speaker 1: That's something amongst young black men that came about during the hip hop insurgence that has been beneficial: shoes that actually fit your feet.  People don't seem to care about how big your feet are anymore.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Big soles, big round bump toes, the athletic shoe, which is now no longer used for athletic activities, they are shoes for everything now.  I have gone to black tie events where men have had on tuxedos with sneakers.  So everything changes, the women's footwear industry to me is way behind the men's footwear industry.  The women's sportswear industry is behind the men's sportswear industry because most of the trends for women in sportswear come from men.  The blazers, the pants, the shirts those all started with men's wear, not women's wear.  The knits, the big sweaters all things like that they were dressing more like the men in their lives than ever before.  The men are not borrowing from the women, the women are borrowing from the men and when you look at women's footwear now, a high trend, stiletto heels-four-inch stiletto heels, pointed needle toe shoes that you can only walk in every--when you walk in the door and then most women wind up sitting down because their feet hurt so badly.  The bad part is these shoes are designed by men and they're convincing women their legs look better in a real high heel, pointed toe shoe.  And the women believe it, that's what's so incredible.  But I think the men's wear industry is a lot more secure.  Men's fashions don't change as radically as women's.  Women--you have to come out with something new even if it's old, from decades back, for women, every single season.  With men's wear it's not always like that.
Speaker 1: That's a good point about--even in hip hop fashion, and men's fashions are more comfortable.  They have gone for more comfort, loose-fitted--everything fits, it has a utility to it on some level except for the pants hanging down.  But the women if you look at someone like Lil' Kim or somebody like that, it's the most uncomfortable looking stuff I've ever seen.
Speaker 2: Absolutely tight, they're still wearing corsets under their clothes.  Madonna made it okay to wear your bra on the outside as opposed to the inside.  She started that whole big lingerie as outerwear, and it's really funny because most black women try to dress like black stars, they don't try to emulate the white stars but Madonna was the clear exception.  She brought out--she's the reason all the club clothes and everything look the way that they do.  But the men always go for comfort no matter what, no matter what, even if it's a T-shirt.  Women adopted T-shirts because men were wearing them all the time.  I know a lot of women who sleep in T-shirts because they are so comfortable.
Speaker 1: They sleep in big ones.
Speaker 2: In big ones, big oversized T-shirts.
Speaker 1: But they wear the tight ones.
Speaker 2: Yeah well again that depends on the age factor too, but for the most part, yeah they do.  Unfortunately the market now is gauged toward people who are eighteen to thirty-five.  So you're not born before you're eighteen and you die before you're thirty-six because that is what--that's everybody's target customer in every facet of retail.  Now the person--the designer I have most respect for in the industry is P. Diddy [or Sean Combs].  He is proving himself to be more and more all the time, with the marathon and all these things he's doing with his money.  But I have more respect for P. Diddy than virtually any of the other hip hop designers out there, because he jumped from another world entirely into fashion, and the first year he went into business everybody was laughing and this guy is not going to make it and he wound up with over 200 million dollars in sales because the clothes were right.  And what he is doing is bringing the clothes back into the body a little bit.  Very easy fit, but at least the pants are not hanging in the front and the back and dragging on the ground.  So he's bringing clothing a little closer to the body.  He has some things for that hip hop audience.
Story_ID: 177049
Speaker 1: His [P. Diddy, or Sean Combs] last show cost a million dollars to produce, a million dollars and that in itself-- because a lot of the designers are owned by somebody else, by these huge European conglomerates, and they say you're not going to spend five hundred thousand dollars on a fashion show that's only going to last twenty minutes, because that's the average life for a high style fashion show, twenty minutes, and the clothes come and go, they come out like racehorses.  In the old days that was so that other people who were in the audience couldn't copy.  Well now you can get a video right after the show or you can go to one of the web sites and sit there and sketch and that's what a lot of people do.  So there's still a lot of copying in the industry.  Now in Europe if you try to copy something, you go to jail, or pay a fine or whatever.  But we don't have that because that interrupts free enterprise here.  So you have manufacturers and other designers who copy apparel left, right and sideways, otherwise they'd go out of business.  Because one, at the courtier level who can really afford that?  It's a very small percentage of the entire industry.  How many women can afford a ten thousand dollar or a twenty thousand, thirty thousand dollar dress?  So you knock it off and depending on who got the copies of the dress so that it gets down to people who can afford it.  The overwhelming majority of dollars as far as apparel is concerned is spent right here in the middle of the country, not Los Angeles [California], not New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Why is that?
Speaker 1: Because the population, number one, you have more people in the center of the country than you do have on either coast.  They're a lot more conservative, you have a lot of farm people, you have a lot of factory workers, you don't have enough factory workers because most of our production is going overseas.  But again, you have people who graduate from grammar school, whose father worked in the factory, whose mother worked in the same factory and now they're working in the same factory, and so consequently they're very careful with their money.  They don't go out and spend on luxury items or anything like that.  I remember when the automobile strike was in Detroit [Michigan] a few years back and Sears gave everybody gift certificates--the workers because they thought they would buy toys and everything for their kids for Christmas.  Well guess what they bought?  They bought coats, hats, gloves, boots, they bought things with those gift certificates that they needed as opposed to toys, and that taught a lot of people a lesson because you're going to take care of the necessities before you do the luxuries.  And this is what's happening now with all these people being laid off, and four thousand here, two thousand there.  I have students now who are in terrible financial situations because their fathers have lost their jobs and they don't know how they are going to stay in school.  So are they going to go out and buy toys, I don't think so.  They're going to buy what they need, that's going to carry them over.  So I think the times dictate the luxury market.  They like to say it's booming and all that but I don't think it is, I don't think it is, because who has that money?
Story_ID: 177050
Speaker 1: Now with all the talk in the black community about blinging and stuff, I guess people are still talking about that.  Do our clothes or--what do our clothes actually say about us?
Speaker 2: Everything just about, everything just about.  You can tell pretty much what somebody's attitude about life is by the way they dress.  If they are uptight and they are wearing a nine-piece suit with a tie and this and that and you know that person can be pretty anal.  And straight down the center, someone who's very relaxed, well for instance, I'm looking at what you're wearing; this is very relaxed and very in.  Corduroy is one of the biggest fabrics for fall, 2003.  Do you know why?  Because it's very comfortable.  It brings back the old day when you were a kid and your mom made you wear corduroy pants and--when I say comfort factor, yeah, as far as fit, but also it brings back the good old days, the good old days and people need that now in these times of trouble.  So you see a lot of the old fabrications coming back because they're comfortable and they bring back the good old days.
Speaker 1: You know you're right; you're almost a psychic here.  I even want to warm off the iron; I want to put them on in the morning.
Speaker 2: I mean it's great.  So it's wonderful to see younger generations pick up these older fabrics.  Flannel, big resurgence in flannel and flannel robes because everybody as a kid had some type of flannel robe or corduroy robe or something that they wrapped around them and it was comfortable.  So you find that a lot, you find in the spring more people buy floral patterns because they love flowers.  You'll see some flowers when it's really cold and what they call the resort collection even if you don't go on a resort.  All that is, is spring clothes coming in early because they figure people are really getting depressed and they really want to wear something great in February.  January and February you see bathing suits in windows--in store windows.  Well now who is--what does it make you think about when you see a bathing suit and the snow is up to your knees, and it's cold, and you see the bathing suits and the wonderful beach background and everything.  You say, wow, summer is going to come, and it makes you feel good for a while.  So there is a lot of psychology behind what you select.  You can't always tell what someone's house looks like when you see them dressed because some of the biggest slobs--I mean all they are interesting in is keeping up their closets and the rest of the house can look like craziness.  But that's where they live and they are comfortable there so that's that.  And some of the people who are laid back have the neatest houses I've ever seen.  When I used to do wardrobe consulting, I would go in, and what we do is take every single thing out of the closet and lay it down on the bed, and then say okay, and I don't believe in getting rid of things because I know how stuff comes back, so what we do is work with what they have and then enhance that.  Because clothes are not cheap.  But what is happening now, discounters like Marshalls and TJ Maxx, Filene's, those stores are jam-packed at all times and you can go into the Neiman Marcuses and the Saks Fifth Avenues and you could set up an entire bowling alley in there--in those stores because people want bargains.  They love bragging about bargains, "God, I got this Gianfranco Ferre sweater that was originally nine hundred bucks for forty-nine dollars."  Well, they love talking about it.
Speaker 1: Tell me what are the--what do you see for the future of fashion?  If you had your druthers, what would you like to see happen in terms of fashion?
Speaker 2: I would like to see in our community--I would like to see less copying because a lot of the people that our young people especially are emulating are not the kind of people they need to emulate.  I would say less copying, less hanging on to--well today to the hip hop culture as far as apparel is concerned.  And I would like to see lower prices, I would like to see more affordable clothing, and I would like to see people not be threatened because they're wearing a pair of one hundred and fifty dollar sneakers that somebody might just take off of them when they go around the corner.
Story_ID: 177051
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a trend now too in the last, I guess in the last twenty years.  You see more African fabrics and more African inspired clothing in the black community and even spilling over somewhat to the white community.
Speaker 2: I saw a white lady who had to be eighty some years old, she was wearing a kente cloth pattern, rain hat and umbrella--she was carrying an umbrella and she was this little bitty lady, big blue eyes, snow white hair, and she was so proud and I said, "I love your kente" and she said, "Isn't this the most incredible thing?"  She was so cute and you see that.  I think what is happening now as far as crossover is concerned with people moving in just like Japanese food is my favorite, I'm not Japanese.  A lot of people who are not Italian like Italian food.  Crossover really starts around the dinner table more than anything else and I think once you start with food--which has a lot of similarities to fashion incidentally.  A lot of the same issues are in food and fashion.  There's texture, there's variety, there's color, there's arrangement.  Your food is not stacked up on top of each other like that.  It's arranged on a plate just like you would arrange your apparel.  There's lots of color, your vegetables are green or yellow or orange, there's that brightness.  You have the brown or off white meat.  You have white potatoes and so the plate looks pretty; it's appetizing, same thing happens with apparel.  So there is a close correlation between food and fashion, and depending on which portion of your plate you eat, you're going to get different textures each time and each one is going to give you a different kind of feeling and its comfort.  Now you see people--I just received a letter from a reader--an email from a reader, who just really blasted me because she thinks all I do is talk badly about heavy women, about overweight heavy women and I'm an equal opportunity critic, I criticize anybody who does the wrong thing, and she doesn't read carefully enough to see this.  I don't pick on big women; I tell them, no, you don't need to wear hot pants.  No you don't need to wear midriff tops, she's going to get upset about that and this was a twenty-year-old woman.  So you have other people's perceptions and part of that is because black women don't have the same thoughts about their bodies that white women do.  Asian women pretty much genetically are pretty small but blacks and Hispanics do not have that same thing about their bodies.  You don't see that many black or Asian--I mean black or Latin anorexics or people with bulimia, you really don't because our men think we're fine either way, you see what I mean.  We were raised pretty much like that.  A lot of people have mothers who are heavy, they loved their mothers so they're not against someone who's got a couple of extra pounds or whatever, and they haven't.  There was a time, and I think a lot of that goes into play about the confidence, now I think Latin and black women have more confidence in what they do.  Now we're colorful but the Latins are even more colorful, even more colorful as far as what they wear.  They don't care if the patterns don't even mix as long as they've got that color.  And what's happening now in fashion for fall 2004, you see a lot of these bright colors, all of these flamenco dresses and all the designers both in the United States and Europe are both putting out.  You see an advent of Hispanic or Latin designers, the models--most of the top models are from Brazil.  Now you see very few black models on the runways of Europe and in the United States and they have eight thousand rubber stamp reasons why they do this.  Ranging from well white women don't want to wear the clothes that they see black models in because they don't look the same; just stupid reasons for not using them.  So you'll see forty models, you may see two blacks, you will see a bunch of Latin models maybe one Asian model and everybody else normally has blond hair and blue eyes.
Story_ID: 177052
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: In what respect, fashion--as far as fashion goes or just living?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I get depressed.  A lot of it is not because the brains are not there but the opportunities are not there, and I would love to see our community get the breaks we deserve, corporately, educationally.  With so many of our young men in jail and out on the streets and all that somehow, someway, we have to do something about it, because the people who are supplying them with the guns and the drugs and all that are not of our community and they are bringing it down.  Every now and then, I do think there is a grand conspiracy, and especially against black men as opposed to black women.  I know a lot of black women get into trouble because they are with the wrong man, but I would like to see the family come together more.  We've been spread out so much even in my own history there is so much about my family--my blood that I don't know and every now and then it really gets me and I talk to people today--young people, they don't know either because their parents sit and watch TV.  They don't even get called by their real names; they get called by nicknames all the time, or by nothing.  A friend of mine who teaches grammar school said she has four or five kids in her kindergarten class who don't know what their names are, because the parents always say, hey come here or you get over there and they don't know what their names are.  So they have these nicknames and that's what they go by.
Speaker 1: I've heard that too.  I mean, I guess to interject on the interview maybe I shouldn't do it but I've heard this a few times that kids go to school and don't know what their name is.
Speaker 2: I would like to see--in this day with 60 percent of the people or more getting divorces.  I would like to see a family unit.  Even if the family is not together, the mother and father can at least come to terms as far as their children are concerned and take a better look at the quality of education that they are getting and to really help them move up, you don't get enough of that.  I teach a lot of first-generation grads and in virtually every case, and in every case they are either black or Hispanic, first generation grads.  What the black kids are telling me is that a lot of times their brothers, their sisters, their neighbors are jealous, and try to do everything they can to keep them from getting an education because they don't want them to grow up, and go away from the family, and pretend they are better than the rest.  With the Hispanics I see the whole family will put money in to make sure this kid stays in school, even if they don't live together, they will put money in to make sure those kids stay in school--first-generation, they're very proud.  We don't have that pride for some reason as a whole.
Speaker 1: We don't have that family either.
Speaker 2: We don't have the family, that's right.  It all starts with the family.  Teachers can't raise your children for you.  A lot of parents don't seem to understand that.
Story_ID: 177053
Speaker 1: When you look back at the things you've done so far, what would you consider your legacy?
Speaker 2: Helping other people move ahead in my industry--deserving minority people move ahead in our industry.
Speaker 1: When you look back at what you've done, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I would have started out a lot earlier, because I love it so much and I love it when things come through, when they have their successes and how they will call me.  They have my phone number and they will call me if they're overseas at three o'clock in the morning, because something wonderful has happened for them.  Or when a student sends me a note and says I'm so glad you told me about this and that and that because it has really helped me--long after they've graduated.
Story_ID: 177054
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: On the outside, as being a fabulously beautiful woman with the same qualities inside, that's how I'd like to be remembered because I've been told this by students, you're just as beautiful on the inside as you are on the outside, and you have a big heart.  I've made sacrifices in order to help people.  But that's what I have to do; I just feel that it's what I have to do.  If I won the lottery right now, I would set up a big scholarship program, it would be the first thing I would do.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 177055
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me with [HM] Isaac Hayes at The HistoryMakers dinner prior to the gala.
Speaker 2: That's what year?
Speaker 1: This year, 2003.  Okay that's my dear mom [Blanche Daniel] who I took all of my--inherited all of my fashion sense from.  There's another too that's almost identical of her too with a friend.  But she had phenomenal fashion sense, she looked wonderful all the time and there she is again in another pose.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This was--what is seven years ago?  '96 [1996] and the other one is from 1997.
Speaker 2: That's from '97 [1997]?
Speaker 1: This is '96 [1996], this is '97 [1997], yes.  She loved to go out and dance and get dressed up and perfumed and powdered up and we used to watch her all the time.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: Okay that is my brother and my father [John Wilson].
Speaker 2: Who, when and where?
Speaker 1: Okay my brother and my father and that is from 1983, '84 [1984].  Oh that's me with [HM] Mellody Hobson--Melody Spann Hobson, [HM] Pervis Spann's daughter.  We had a WVON at the N'DIGO gala.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: 2002--2003 I'm sorry.  I'm surrounded by my students--some of my students and that was 2002.  There I am with Usher, the hip hop star.
Speaker 2: He's from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: I don't think so, he's from Saint Louis [Missouri] or something like that, he's close.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: 2002, there I am with my two best friends and life support systems children's godmothers.  That's Gloria on the left and Joanie on the right.  I would not have been able to make it through life without them.  They took care of my kids when I was overseas and all kinds of stuff.  This is when I was working with The Women Work! Organization.  The four women in the front are women who were abused, battered, ex drug addicts who are entering the workforce after intensive training on computers and rehab and whatever.  The four of us in the back were all fashion editors from leading newspapers in Chicago.  And there I am consulting with one of the buyers from Marshall Field's on one of the product lines, that was 2003.  That's my son [Greg Samuels] with the worst hairdo he's ever had in his entire life, and that's the year 2000 and that's when he was wearing long dreads and stuff, he came back from New York and now he's almost bald.  And there I am with Liza Cruzat, who was the host of '190 North' on TV, at the Usher event, and that again was 2002.  And Barbara with [HM] Russell Simmons, 2003.  Yes, for the Urban Gateways benefit.  And there I am with [HM] Hermene Hartman on the left and Donna Hodge in the middle at Black Creativity.  Hermene is of course, the publisher and founder of N'DIGO, and Donna was her administrative assistant at the time.  That was last year, 2002.  And there I am with Kenneth Cole, who came into Chicago for a special appearance at the launch of his new fragrance.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: 2003. And, N'DIGO fashion cover, from last year where the entire magazine is devoted to fashion.  I do two of those a year.  That's from 2001.  I brought that because of the color, I thought that was great.  This is the current fashion issue from 2003.  That's Michael Bozic, B-O-Z-I-K [sic. B-O-Z-I-C] who is chairman of the board of Sears [Roebuck & Co.] who was giving me the buyer's cup for global buyer of the year, 1988.  This is the issue at Sears Roebuck, the newsletter where they announced who the top six buyers who were in contention for the buyer's cup and that was the photo that I had, 1988.  You see who I'm up against don't you?  And at that dinner, not one of those guys would talk to me except this one down at the bottom and they were all--when Bozic was getting ready to introduce the buyer of the year, they started straightening their necks and pulling their ties, and when he called my name, the shock was unbelievable and I was wearing--my boyfriend bought me this three thousand dollar suede dress, to make a real impression and I walked up the stairs and tripped because there was a hole in the rug and Bozic and the president of the company grabbed me on both sides and I got to the mike, and I said, "Well, that's what happens when your winner wears high heels."  So everybody laughed, that was so funny.
