Story_ID: 644895
Speaker 1: I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.  So, and then I want you to give your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Jacqulyn, J-A-C-Q-U-L-Y-N, Shropshire, S-H-R-O-P-S-H-I-R-E [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire], 9/15/35 [September 15, 1935].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--that's a good question.  Today's date is--
Speaker 1: November 25th (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) November 10th.
Speaker 1: Twenty-fifth.
Speaker 2: Twenty--
Speaker 1: Twenty-fifth.
Speaker 2: --twenty thirteen [2013]?
Speaker 1: Twenty-fifth, 2013.
Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And your--our location?  Las Vegas.
Speaker 2: Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is--some people call me a philanthropist.  I'm, I'm just (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well you're, you've been a civic leader.
Speaker 2: Yeah I've been a civic leader.
Speaker 1: And philanthropist.
Speaker 2: Yeah and--yeah.
Speaker 1: Taking care of society.
Speaker 2: Taking--well, no I've, I've worked all the way through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I know you've worked--no, no, no I know.
Speaker 2: Pretty much just, just a civic leader at this point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, I want to--my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer; Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  I almost state- I forgot that.
Story_ID: 644896
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answer.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What's my favorite thing?
Speaker 1: Food, food.
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food is probably a good old fashioned fried chicken.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  I didn't expect that out of a prim proper lady like you.
Speaker 2: I know you didn't, but that's my favorite food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is black.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The favorite time of year is fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: To do what?
Speaker 1: Vacation?
Speaker 2: Oh my favorite pla- is Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Let's get it on (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), let's get it on.
Story_ID: 644897
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your background and your, you know, if we could start with your parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can we start with your father and you give his name and what you know about his growing up, and?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Lamar Calloway [Lamar Calloway, Sr.].  My family migrated from Cedartown, Georgia and we came up through Cedartown, as a lot of my family still remained in Cedartown.  But my grandfather left Cedartown to follow the railroads and we ended up in Kansas City, Missouri.  And that's where I lived growing up, in Kansas City with my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] and my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman].  And the rest of our family--my mother's family stayed in Cedartown, Georgia.  And my father's family continued following the railroad to Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: I see.  So your father and mother are both from Cedartown, Georgia and ended up in Kansas State, so, so did they marry in Cedartown or meet in Cedartown and then?
Speaker 2: My mother--my mother and father met in Kansas City; and they, they were married there.
Speaker 1: But were they both from Cedartown, Geor- ?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Was my mother and dad, and my dad's family.
Speaker 1: So do, do you know about your father's family, what they did or you know, their--do you know much about it, or how far back do you know on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well they picked cotton.  They migrated up I think through New Orleans [Louisiana] and I believe through Haiti nor- early on and they picked cotton and they worked for the Calif- Calloway--it's a strange thing about Calloways.  There's a Callaway with an A and there's a Calloway with an O.  But if you look at us we all look just alike.  So we're members of the O, the Calloways from Cedartown, Georgia; and then the golf and (unclear) company [Callaway Golf Company] is the Callaways so, you know, you can figure that one out (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: So how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father, he was a hardworking man.  As, as I knew when we migrated to Kansas City, Missouri, my father and grandfather worked in the foundries, so they were very--just, just hardworking men, who went to work early in the morning and came home very late at night.  My family in Georgia picked cotton as most of the people did in the cotton picking area.  So most of my father's family didn't stop in Kansas City, they continued on to Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: I see.  So there's a branch with the family in Cleveland (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644898
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] and what you know about--give her name, and?  Do you know her year of birth too, and your father's [Lamar Calloway, Sr.] year of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my mother came from--we all came from Cedartown, Georgia.  And my grandfather--and I have to go back there to bring you up to where my mother is.  My grandfather was Strom Thurman--that was his name, William Strom Thurman [William Thurman], so, we can figure that one out.  My mother was an only child, so she grew up in the Strom Thurmond era of Cedartown, Georgia.  And when they migrated to Kansas City [Missouri], my mother was still relatively young.  And both my mother and father are from Cedartown, so they migrated together.  We lived in Kansas City down where--the Bottoms where they--most people went to work and they worked in the coal factories or the foundries or hard labor.  And my mother loved to sing.  She worked--as a matter of fact, she worked for the Urban League [Urban League of Kansas City; Urban League of Greater Kansas City]--when they first formed the Urban League, she was one of the members in Kansas City. And we lived down on 3rd Street and I think the, the river [Missouri River] was only about two or three blocks away.  So we all came up from there.  I grew up with two brothers [Thurman Wilson and Lamar Calloway, Jr.] and aunts [Lula Thurman Freeman and Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] who came from Cedartown every year to help my--take care of us because my mother and dad and grandfather had to work take care of the family.  I can't say enough about my mother because she was an only child and having children wasn't something that she had on her things to do.  But my aunts, who neither one of them had children, felt that they should carry on the family.  So my mother had two brother- had, I had two brothers who both have passed.  And my mother whose whole quest wanted to be a light opera singer, and she would sing in church and places like that in Kansas City down on 3rd Street, which is as close as you can get to the river.  So I'm blessed to have had such a wonderful background.
Story_ID: 644899
Speaker 1: So are you saying your--is Strom Thurmond, which Strom Thur- it's the Strom Thurmond, you're saying?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: He's in my background.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's who you are then.  How long did you know that history ma'am?
Speaker 2: I didn't know for a long time, until--as a matter of fact, I really didn't know until I finished college [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] and someone was doing--I guess they were doing a background and it's like my, my husband's [Thomas B. Shropshire] father is Shropshire [William Shropshire], we know that he's from Shropshire county in, in Scotland [sic. England], so they were doing a background on my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] and her family because she, you know, they--and that's when they found out.  But I always knew that we were related to Strom Thurmond because my--one of my great aunts was married to, married to (unclear).
Speaker 1: Married to?
Speaker 2: Married to Strom Thurmond [sic.]--
Speaker 1: The senat- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in Kansas City [Missouri]--the one who makes caskets?  This is way back before the senator (laughter).
Speaker 1: I--oh this is way back before the senator.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: It's all the way back.
Speaker 1: The family went ba- oh.
Speaker 2: All the way back.  He made caskets.  He was a casket maker and he married my aunt Gert [Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)].  And my grandmother, who was Esther Thurman--that was her name.  So, so it's very, it's very interesting because the, the lady, there's one lady I think that came up and said that she was from the Thurman family, but none of us knew her.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And I think I'm the only one who inherited the blue eyes.
Speaker 1: I see.  That's fascinating history because, you know, when the other incident happened with the woman who, you know, was his daughter [Essie Mae Washington-Williams], you know, and I was thinking, gosh she could've changed the course of history, you know, but people said people knew, you know, and so that, that's the whole thing is that--
Speaker 2: She could've been his daughter, I mean she probably was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they liked--okay, that li- side liked mixing, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 644900
Speaker 1: So what you were saying about your mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin], she really wanted to pursue a career?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you know, that reminds me of--at the--I'm wondering if they would've been maybe a little contemporaries, but I don't know if you know the name Etta Moten [HistoryMaker Etta Moten Barnett] or Nat- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: --okay because she also, you know, her children were raised by her as she pursued her career.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so, can you--so your mother sang operatic music is that what she--?
Speaker 2: She sang in church.  There was no place for her to sing because we lived in the Bottoms [Kansas City, Missouri] in an Italian ne- they pretty much all-Italian neighborhood, but we lived near, near the foundries near where my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] and father [Lamar Calloway, Sr.] would go to work every morning.
Speaker 1: So was there any--are both your--so on both sides were fair skinned, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my mother was--she looked like a little Indian [Native American] princess.  She wasn't that fair skinned.  She was, she was just a beautiful, beautiful brown.  My father is the one and my grandfather both--
Speaker 1: Grandfather on your father's side or your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And my father's side--they all came down from Georgia.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you're living in, in an Italian neighborhood, is there any passing going on sort of or--'cause you're the second interview--I'm sorry I'm getting excited--you're the second interview I've ha- that I've personally done where--I had another interview where they were living really on the white side of town, sort of.
Speaker 2: Well we lived in what they called the Bottoms.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the Bottoms?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Bottoms was as far as you go before getting to the Missouri River and Mississippi River, whichever one that ran through there.  And the streets were not named they were numbered: 1st Street, 2nd Street, 3rd Street, 4th Street and I lived on 5th Street and we went to school pretty much up on a place called Independence Avenue, but it was still in the bottom of Kansas City, Missouri.  And--but in the Bottoms, it was such a wonderful life because we had Italians, we had gypsies; we had a conglomeration of people who lived there.  My grandfather was very much into politics.  He was a Republican, and if he didn't deliver the number of votes that they there were supposed to delivery at the end of the day.  They would take him down to the Bottoms and beat him until he did.  And that--I lived, you know, it was, it was where all the Italian gangsters and everybody else there lived.  But we had a community center.  And when we came home from school, although our parents had, are out working, we had a place to go.  And I, I did have pictures and you can look at them later, I pulled out some old pictures of, of the community center and things like that.  But that was our--we, we, we were like an enchanting melting pot.  However, we couldn't go to each other's school, you know, we had to go to Garrison [Garrison School, Kansas City, Missouri], which is where I went to school.  But we all lived in, in the same neighborhood if you're talking about people who lived together, we did.
Story_ID: 644901
Speaker 1: What sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up in the Bottoms [Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: The sights that I can remember more than anything because it's where I spent 90 percent of my time, was a place called Garrison Community Center [Kansas City, Missouri].  And even though it was in the center of town and we had a swimming pool and all of that, it was the only place that black kids could really go from that area to play.  So we all grew up in a community center next door to where we lived, which was right across the street from the community center was a grocery store and it was run--all of the businesses or whatever the businesses were at that time; the bakery, the, the grocery store were all run by Italians so most of--I grew up in an Italian neighborhood where there were blacks, but blacks only could live so far you know between 5th Street and 3rd street.  5th Street is where we lived and if you got past 3rd Street, you were in the Missouri River so.  You know, you could--my, my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] had a garden so he grew all the vegetables that we were, that we ate 'cause he would come home from working in the mines and then he would go and tend the garden.  We used to have fights down there, you know, when they have--what'd they call 'em?  Ring--fights in the ring?  Boxing.  That was his outlet, was to go boxing, go to the boxing and he would take me because the women--we lived in a, an extended family.  My aunts from Georgia [Shropshire's maternal great aunts, Lula Thurman Freeman and Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] would take turns to come up to help my mom [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] take care of us, so they could take care of us while she went to work so.
Speaker 1: So, what--are there any sounds that remind you of that period of time if you take yourself back or?
Speaker 2: My mother singing in the choir at church.
Speaker 1: Is there a song that reminds you of her singing?
Speaker 2: Precious Lord, take my hand, lead me on, let me stand ['Take My Hand, Precious Lord'].  That was it.
Speaker 1: And what--yeah, that song has such as plaintive quality to it.  What about smells, any smells from the foundry, any?
Speaker 2: No, I can't think of too many smells that I can recall.  The only smell that I can recall is them cooking, cooking collard greens in the kitchen on top of the stove 'cause the stove, you know it was like a potbelly stove for a long time before you really got into electricity; and, the, the smell that comes from--it wasn't a refrigerator, it was a icerator or something else.  The smells that came from that often because they had to bring ice in and the ice really didn't smell that great, but they had to put it in the top of the refrigerator I'm sure--I don't know if you me- (laughter) I don't know if you've talked to anybody who goes back in history this far.
Speaker 1: Yes, we do--we have.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear) but it's--I love these that--okay I love--okay I've been doing younger people and they're not like--I prefer the older stories okay.
Story_ID: 644902
Speaker 1: What were your aunts' names, the two that helped raise you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  My aunt's name was Gertrude Douglas [Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)]; the other name was Lula Freeman [Lula Thurman Freeman]; and their brother's name, was my [maternal] grandfather, was William Thurm- Strom Thurman [William Thurman].
Speaker 1: That's unbelievable (laughter).  Okay that's unbelievable okay.
Speaker 2: I have his picture.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--
Speaker 2: I brought out some pictures.  I have his picture over there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay well we (unclear).  Okay.  So when you, when you--so you had siblings, who are your siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, my siblings are Tom Shropshire [sic.].
Speaker 1: No, no those are--your two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my, my brothers.  My oldest brother was my mother's first child and he was Thurman, they called him Thurman Wilson that's when she married; my younger brother which is Lamar Calloway [Lamar Calloway, Jr.]--that's the only brother that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just three of us.
Speaker 1: Just three of you okay.  And what was the age difference?
Speaker 2: Sno- I 'wanna call him Snookie [ph.].  Snookie was the oldest, he was about ten years older; and my brother Junior, he was only three years older.
Speaker 1: So did you have a nickname if Snookie was one and Junior was the other?  Did you have a nickname?  You didn't you--?
Speaker 2: Jacquie [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire].
Speaker 1: Jacquie, okay.  And do you know who you were named after, or how they chose your name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644903
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is growing up in Kansas City [Missouri].  Now, one of the, one of the really big memories I had, was that af- during the win- during the summer after school was out, my parents, because they were all working, would have to send me to Cedartown [Georgia] every year.  My biggest memory is that the train that ran through Kansas City stopped in Birmingham [Alabama] before it got to Cedartown.  I remember that--they putting me on the train, giving me a pillow and giving me fifty cents.  I remember getting off in Birmingham and I couldn't sit, even though I am very fair, I couldn't sit in the lounge with the other people; but the porters on the, on the, on the trains were--they all, you know, were so--they would look after me, so they would sit me in another chair by myself until the other train came along, which really didn't stop in Cedartown, it slowed down.  It had a little, and I--it had a little place that was the depot, that wasn't any larger than the fireplace and they would slow down and my aunt Gert [Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] used to walk from her house down to the railroad to pick me up.  They would slow down, throw my bag off, and help me off the train; then my aunt would come down and pick me up and take me to the house.  I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And who were you, you think at that time when you were making those trips?
Speaker 2: Who was I?
Speaker 1: How old?
Speaker 2: Oh my god.  I went to school there one year.  I could not have been over six or seven.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So they would send you back every summer?
Speaker 2: They would send me back (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay--well that's, that's qu- how long a distance is it between Kansas City and Cedartown?
Speaker 2: Oh it's a long time.
Speaker 1: It's a long--
Speaker 2: Yeah, long way.  You stop in Birmingham, and then the next stop is Cedartown and then the next stop is Atlanta [Georgia], so it was quite a long trip.  But the thing about it that was so great, the fifty cents they gave me--and the box of chicken, I mean that was true.  But the guys who worked on the--what they called the red caps at that time, that worked on the train, it would come down from Chicago [Illinois], and they would see that I was comfortable.  I, I guess that whatever I endured made me a very strong person and someone who'd appreciate kindness--and that, that's, that's the way I grew up because they would always send me to Cedartown.  They never sent my brothers [Thurman Wilson and Lamar Calloway, Jr.] to Cedartown, but they would always send me to Cedartown to take care of me because my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] had to work.
Story_ID: 644904
Speaker 1: What were you like as a child?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know I was so well loved by everybody in the neighborhood [Bottoms, Kansas City, Missouri] because everybody thought that Bud Thurman [ph.], who was the first Republican there was my grandfather, so I was respected because my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] adored me.  I got the blue eyes from my grandfather.  He would take me to the fights with him and things like that.  And my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] being an only child, you know, she was treated like an only child.  So you know--all I can remember are the good things, how I grew up, how I went to church, how my mother sang in the choir, how I went to Garrison School [Kansas City, Missouri], which was the only black school that they had there.  All of those things I remember so well, but if you ask me, you know, something that's going on right now, I wouldn't be able to tell you.  But it was--we were, we were very fortunate because my, my aunt's husband, which was Arthur Douglas, was a white man and he sold insurance so she had a beautiful house with indoor plumbing--that was very important back in those days.  My Aunt Lula [Lula Freeman] didn't have--her husband had passed when I was a little girl.  One lived on--like a block apart.  One on one side of the ditch and one on the other side of the ditch to make it clearer.  So I would always stay with my aunt on the other side of the ditch, you know, so anyway.  She didn't have an indoor toilet for years, and years and years and years.  Now the interesting thing is, is that they bought a beautiful bed for me growing up to be in my aunt, my aunt Lula's house the one that didn't have a lot.  That bed is in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], the headboard and all of that, all of those pictures of all of my ancestors are in Martha's Vineyard that we took up there when we moved up there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow, wow.
Speaker 2: But it brings back a lot of memories.  The first teacups and all of those, I have all of that.
Story_ID: 644905
Speaker 1: What church, was it a Baptist church or what--?
Speaker 2: We went to Methodist church.
Speaker 1: You went to Methodist.  Was it A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or?
Speaker 2: A- A.M.E.
Speaker 1: It was, so African Amer- okay Methodist Episcopal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you--do you--can you describe--so your mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] is singing, who was the minister, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  The minister was Reverend Treadwell [ph.] who we all had to sit--they had pews on the side of the church.  The church still might be there, I have to go back and look--and we--all the kids had to sit in the pews, and he would look over and roll his eyes at any of us for misbehaving; Reverend Treadwell would see to it that we straighten up real fast.  And we went to church every Sunday, no question about it.  And then after Sunday Reverend Treadwell came home for dinner (laughter).  The truth of the matter, that's, that's what happened; and I don't remember the Baptist church so much as I do the Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was a black Baptist church and there was a black Methodist church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 644906
Speaker 1: Well how large was Kansas--?
Speaker 2: Kansas City.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Kansas City, Missouri is a very large, large city.  Kansas City, Kansas, which people get confused often which is on the other side of the bridge, it's not as large as Kansas City, Missouri.  Now I, I still go back to Kansas City because I have so many friends there still because I went to school at Lincoln University in Jefferson City [Missouri].  So the homecoming and all of that because we only had--we had two, maybe three black elementary schools, but everybody had to go to the same junior high school and the same high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you--what about--well let's, let's talk about your elementary school, so what was your elementary s- you said Gar- Garris- ?
Speaker 2: Garrison [Garrison School, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: So it was--was Garrison the community center too and Garrison--no--
Speaker 2: No, no.  There was, there was a Garrison Community Center [Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Center, but th- it was--so they both were named Garrison.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Garrison--so, do you remember any of your teachers there and or s- ?
Speaker 2: You know I remember growing up, and I don't remember much about grade school, I don't remember that much about grade school.  I remember a lot about high school, you know, but for some reason, I can't remember too much about grade school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So you went to Garrison elementary and was there--did elementary--did you go from elementary to junior high and then to high school?
Speaker 2: Everybody had to go junior high.  I mean when you left elementary school, you went to junior high for one year, like for the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Just for one year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And then and this is how they weeded us out at that time.  Those of us who probably were not as smart as the others, we were able to go to Lincoln High School [Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri].  Those of us who they didn't think would make it, then we--they stayed at one year in school, in middle school to weed out those who go on to high school and those who would stay in, you know, just a, I guess what they call a trade environment school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they had the same--I mean they had classes and everything but they learned other, automobile mechanics or something like that.  And then those of us who had high school and in some way of going to college or some thought of going to college or some means of going to college, they weeded us out.
Speaker 1: So you--where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Lincoln University of Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, you went to Lincoln Uni- so it was call- the high school was called Lincoln University?
Speaker 2: The high school was Lincoln High School.
Speaker 1: And then, then you went--okay, so Lincoln High School, so talk about your time there.
Speaker 2: I think it was so much fun.  I was a majorette and all of those fun things that you do, and we had excellent teachers because all of our excellent teachers knew our mothers so we had to behave. I mean there was no such thing as acting out.  We only had the one high school on the Kan- Missouri side and then they had one high school on the Kansas side which was Sumner [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas].  But most of us went to--all of us who were college bound went to Lincoln High School.  Those that were not college bound went--stayed on at R.T. Coles [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri] to take a trade.  They had automobile mechanics and things like that.
Story_ID: 644907
Speaker 1: In high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri], you, you--so were there subjects that you gravitated to?
Speaker 2: Business, typing, shorthand.  I was on the newspaper, the school paper.  I guess they did have us, you know, segregated out and I was in the college bound group.  And we scraped up enough money to send me to college [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: So was there always a focus on college in your family?
Speaker 2: Yes, because technically I was the first one who went so.
Speaker 1: So your, your father [Lamar Calloway, Sr.] then believed in that because you know sometimes the girls would be, you know, the boys, if there were boys and girls then the boy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see, my father died--my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] and father had divorced and he was in Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Oh so he div- oh okay.  So what--how old were you when they divorced?
Speaker 2: Oh god, you know, I was, I don't know, I can't remember how old I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's why your aunts [Shropshire's maternal great aunts, Lula Thurman Freeman and Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] helped in the, in the raising?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So who, so then who is encouraging college then?
Speaker 2: Oh my aunts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grand- ?
Speaker 2: My aunts.
Speaker 1: Your aunts?
Speaker 2: My aunts because I would be the first one, who really went to college in the family.
Speaker 1: So that, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And finished.
Speaker 1: So, that was a big deal?
Speaker 2: It was a big deal because--it's really strange--living in Kansas City [Missouri], we lived with an open door policy.  And my mother was very involved in the community center across the street [Garrison Community Center, Kansas City, Missouri].  But there was one man who always looked out after our family and his name was Mr. Devericks [ph.] and Mr. Devericks, I guess had more money, you know, to do things, but he never had children or a family so he adopted us.  So Mr. Devericks paid my college tuition, and he saw that I had clothes; and I worked the whole while I was there, I worked, I worked in the foreign language lab--not that and, and they liked that because I couldn't speak foreign language, but at least I could listen to it or whatever.  But I worked the entire time I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wanna take you back a little bit--well now, is Mr. Devericks, is he black or white?
Speaker 2: He's black.
Speaker 1: He's black, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's black.
Story_ID: 644908
Speaker 1: I wanna take you back a little bit to the community center [Garrison Community Center, Kansas City, Missouri] because you've mentioned that a lot, and you said you spent like a lot of time there.
Speaker 2: All day there while the grownups were working, we'd get home from school and we'd go across to the community center.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of activities were there?
Speaker 2: Well they had a swimming pool (laughter), they had that.  They had swings, a big playground.  It was, it was a big playground before you got to the river [Missouri River].  It was our home away from home because they would--over there are pictures but--there, there, the people would take us in until, you know, our working parents got home from, from work.  So when we got there--I lived right across the street, as far as from here out to that, you know, balcony from the community center, but we always had a place to stay until our parents got off from work.  And they would feed us and it's a big beautiful community center.  It's the forerunner of the Urban League in Kansas City [Urban League of Kansas City; Urban League of Greater Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri].  And my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin]--my mother and my aunt, both of my aunts [Shropshire's maternal great aunts, Lula Thurman Freeman and Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] were very instrumental in the Urban League and that's why I am so interested in the Urban League, but I just retired from all of it few months ago.
Speaker 1: So when did your, your mother and your aunts get involved in the Urban League?  Was this while you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It wasn't called the Urban League there.  It was called the Gay Nineties [ph.].  And the Gay Nineties dressed like in gay nineties, you know, when they would have their little soirees or whatever they called them during that time.  And then it inv- it evolved into the first Urban League in Kansas City and Mr.--I've forgotten the guy's name who ran it.  But I worked for the Urban League.  The Urban League got me my first job at TWA [Trans World Airlines], and I was the black that was in the office.  I didn't have a big job, but I was, was a secretary, or--you know.
Speaker 1: You know what's interesting to me is--I mean the Urban League during this time, it's very important in terms of social services--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  And before it became business--so much business focused, I think it was social service.  So what, what things are you hearing your aunts and mother talk about, d- you know, that are sort of important initiative.  Do you remember any of that, their conversations of the things that they were doing or programs?
Speaker 2: Well most of the things back in that time--I was a little girl like that and you see I have a picture of all of the--Gay Nineties and the Urban League and my brother and I standing in front with my mother or whatever.  That was their only means of social contact.  It really was because there was nothing else to do beside you know, go to the Urban League meeting for the ladies, and the men would go boxing.  They used to have a boxing ring down on 5th Street, and my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] sometimes would take me boxing to keep me from having to go to the Urban League or whatever.
Story_ID: 644909
Speaker 1: But it was a community of--I called it the enchanting melting pot.  Whatever nationality--gypsies, we had a lot of gypsies.  We all lived together, you know, and the Italians who, and the bakeries and, you know, we would--we didn't know what segregation pretty much was all about.  We knew when we got to school, we went to a different one.  We knew that we, we worshiped in different churches.  But when it got just being people, there was no difference of the street; it was all the same.  We were just (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how, so how were the--how did--were there any stereotypes around the Italians or any stereotypes around the gypsies?
Speaker 1: The gangsters, they used to take my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] down on 3rd Street [Kansas City, Missouri] and beat him because he was supposed to deliver the votes for them.  In the, in the elections, some my da- my grandfather was a Republican.  Couldn't figure that one out.  But he would have (laughter) he would have to go down and deliver votes, and if he didn't deliver enough, you know, my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] would have to go down and, you know, get him.  It was, it was the mafia--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in that area, in that time.
Speaker 2: Do--what were, what role did the gypsies play?  What, what did, you know, 'cause--so growing up what, what--how could you identify a gypsy?
Speaker 1: The gypsies?  Because the gypsies had a cult of their own.  They all lived in the same area.  They all dressed alike, they all ate the same food; it was just like a cult.  And they didn't mingle with a lot of other people.  They had their own lifestyle of whatever it was.  But I just remember they were just a bunch of gypsies.  I don't know where they came from.  I don't know what a gypsy is.  I don't know what they do.  I just know that growing up they had a cult that was gy- called the gypsies (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 644910
Speaker 1: So when it's time--so Mr.--it's you said Dir- Dirks- Dir- ?
Speaker 2: Devericks [ph.].
Speaker 1: Devericks, he's the one who gave you the scholarship, and so do you remember--where you--did you apply to college?  I mean do you remember that part, and?
Speaker 2: Well Lincoln High School [Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] was the only high school for blacks there.  So they weeded us out, and those who figured they could go to college, and those who would stay on for trade.  We all were tested--we were all categorized as college bound, they would send us to Lincoln High School.  For those who did not have the ability to go to college which was--they would, they would send us--they would send them to a trade school [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri], so all of us at Lincoln had the opportunity--I don't know if we could go or afford to go, but we were all college bound students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when you went to Lincoln, can you describe--'cause this is Lincoln University--
Speaker 2: Of Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: --of Missouri, 'cause there's a Lincoln University--
Speaker 2: In Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: --in Pennsylvania.  So can you describe that?  How large the class is; how many males, how many females?
Speaker 2: Well most of the, the students in Lincoln University came from Kansas City; Knob Noster, Missouri; St. Louis [Missouri] and down in that area.  Lincoln was settled by the slaves, you know, to be a educational institution.  All of us--that's where I got to be AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and they had ROTCs [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and they had all of that, that we could, we could go--that we had.  So, Lincoln University is a very important part of my life, because it's where I, we--they still get together for reunions and we still get together, and we still see each other.  I go home to Kansas City [Missouri] and Gates--my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] and Mrs. Gates [Arzelia Gates], and, and another mother were three of the most beautiful talented women in Kansas City, their offsprings--now Gates Bar-BQ [Kansas City, Missouri], I don't know if you heard about it or not.  They send me barbecue every summer to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] whether I want it or not.  So I have to have a, a picnic or something to eat up all of that food.  But their children--the offsprings of my mom, Mrs. Gates, and then there was another--there were three of 'em.  There were three of the most beautiful women in Kansas City.  They just carried on the tradition of sending us barbecue whether or not--like I said, whether we wanted it or not.  Now I go home to Kansas City--I try to get there at least once a year.  I don't have my brothers [Thurman Wilson and Lamar Calloway, Jr.]--I mean my, my immediate family are all gone.  But I still have friends that were family.
Speaker 1: So, how, how large do you think was the student population?
Speaker 2: In Kan- in--nine hundred.
Speaker 1: Nine hundred?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--how many males, how many females?
Speaker 2: Well by the time they finished weeding us out, it was probably pretty even, because anybody who they wanted to keep, to go on to Jefferson City [Missouri] were probably females.  Because the males would stay in Kansas City and be in a trade school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: You don't, didn't see too many females doing that.  So mostly females.
Speaker 1: So what about when you got to Mis- Missouri?
Speaker 2: Well I was already in Missouri.
Speaker 1: I mean college, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Oh, when I got to Lincoln University?
Speaker 1: Right, Lincoln University.
Speaker 2: It was like old home week because most of, most of the kids came from Kansas City, St. Louis and Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were all--we could take the train down to get to school and back.  But it was one of the greatest experiences in my life actually.
Speaker 1: In which way, can you--?
Speaker 2: Well because I had been so much sequestered pretty much living, you know, with aunts and uncles--I mean there was really no place for a little girl to go.  And then when we moved out on Bent- we moved on up, we moved out on Benton Boulevard [ph.] which was closer to school.  It didn't matter where you lived, where you lived, I mean you went to the same school.  But they did have a way of testing us.  And some of us went to Lincoln University, others went on to smaller colleges or they got jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you got active in the sorority there, AKA.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: So were there others--was Delta on campus, the Delta Sigma The- [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of 'em.
Speaker 1: All of them were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  AKAs, the Deltas, the Rhos [Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority] the--all of the guys the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity]; they were all on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because this is--at this point we're nine- let's see it would be 19--the mid-f- well not--the early '50s [1950s], right?  I think?
Speaker 2: It, it would be about '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay, '53 [1953], okay, okay.
Story_ID: 644911
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1957 I think from Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you've majored in business and economics?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That--even that I mean 'cause that's--so you continued--you were business major in s- in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri] and then you went on in that and so you talked about--so you graduate now, how many of the women are graduating and getting married?
Speaker 2: Back in that time, not too many, because there wasn't too much to do after graduation if you didn't plan to go to college.  So a lot of them married had families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you graduate is that when you get the job with TWA? What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Well the Urban League, they had, they were trying to break through the cycle, so the Urban League wanted to test them.  And they used me to test TWA, Trans World Airline, so they got me a job at Trans World Airlines with all of my degrees as a clerk typist so I worked there as a clerk typist and then--
Speaker 1: And how was that experience?
Speaker 2: I worked in employee insurance, so I really didn't get too involved.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My secretary probably was much younger than I was and it was just a test, such--so much like a test case to see--
Speaker 1: To see if they would hire (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  So when I finished at--when I finished there I wanted to, I wanted to work in business and economics, but they didn't have any openings, so they put me in--I taught--this is really, really weird.  I taught a fast fourth and a slow fifth at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School, Kansas City, Missouri] in--right around the corner from where I lived in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: A fast fourth and a slow fifth, what's that?
Speaker 2: Well often, they would have, you know, like you have forth--a full fourth grade and a full fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: They split 'em up into where I was teaching a split group, and I was teaching the same kids.  And it's so funny because the principal was the same one who used to teach me.  So I had, I had to work with these kids like the fourth grade was on this side and the fifth grade on this side; and this one learns Spanish and the other one didn't.  So that was quite an interesting, quite an interesting--so I, I did that until I met Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire].
Speaker 1: I see.  Now, how did--you know now the thing I 'wanna establish is TWA was actually based in Kansas City--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's where it began; and then were you still there when it moved its, its headquarters to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You weren't there.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I left TWA and went back to teaching school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644912
Speaker 1: You taught for maybe several years.  Now how did you meet Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire]?
Speaker 2: Well Tom was traveling with Ebony Fashion Fair at the time with Miller Brewing Company and they always had a dress in the fair.  I don't know you know, they always sponsored someone who had one of these beautiful dresses on.  I had--I was teaching school [at Booker T. Washington School, Kansas City, Missouri], but Tom was ten years ahead of me and his classmate was also a friend of mine; we all taught together at the same school.  So when they came in to do the f- Ebony Fashion Fair, I can't think of my girlfriend's name now, but she passed, she said, "Listen we have a friend coming in for the Fashion Fair.  Would you like to go out with us?"  So I said, "Oh, no, I gotta go home, work to do," and stuff like that.  They said, "Oh, Jacquie [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire] you need to get out.  Come on, go to the Fashion Fair."  So I went to the Fashion Fair, I saw Tom and just right away, you know our personalities just clicked.  And we, Tom was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just right away?
Speaker 2: Well you know Tom had the kind of personality that you loved him or you hated him; there was nothing in between.  But Tom had su- so much fun and then afterward we all went out to dinner and what have you.  Now the other two girls are married.  I'm not, so they said, "Well you know you and Tom should go to dinner or you and Tom should get to know each other," because they knew each other very well.  So I say, "Oh yeah, okay."  So I didn't think any more about it.  Then the next thing I knew that Tom was calling and said that they would be in town and would I, would I have dinner with him.  So I said okay, all right, I'll do that; and then I didn't hear from Tom for a long time.  And at the time he was in Brooklyn [New York], you know, they were what they call paper hangers at that time, putting signs up.  And you know, we just kind of communicated back and forth and back and forth; and then finally he was, he was going to I think Africa, or going someplace, Africa, so he sent my engagement ring through the mail.  He asked me if I would marry him, and I said yes.  And he sent my ring through the mail (laughter).  I mean that, that's Tom.
Story_ID: 644913
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, since we didn't get a chance to interview, about his background, can you tell us about him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Tom's family they, they lived up in a place called Hope--Hope, Arkansas, up with the Clintons.  Now he had another brother named Jackie [Jackie Shropshire] who was very close to Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  But Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire] lived in Little Rock [Arkansas] and then he went to school at Lincoln University in Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri].  He went to the service right out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he went to the same school you went to, but he was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He went at a different time.  So when I met Tom he was working for Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.], you know for Philip Morris.  He had been, been to--he had been to, I think Tom was in the [U.S.] Navy and he went back to Lincoln and finished and got his degree; and then he got a job with Philip Morris.  And when I met him--that's when I met at the Sepia Fashion Show [Ebony Fashion Fair].  And then he went away and he asked if--you know, we kind of corresponded through the mail.  And then he was--he had to go to--where did he have to go?  He had to go someplace.  And then all I know is that he, he sent my ring through the mail.  I think he took--he was at the time--they were in Africa.  I think he was going back and forth to Africa with Philip Morris.  And then he sent my mail--my ring through the mail and asked if I would marry him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So what did you say when you got (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Well we had to get the ring cut down a bit, you know yeah.
Speaker 1: So but what did--what attracted you about him?
Speaker 2: His personality.  His big smile.  I don't know.  Tom was one--he was just a charmer.  I mean he was just, just absolute charming and he just wooed me away.  And it's just, just amazing.  And he has a son [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] who has that same bright smile, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, did--so how long did you date before he proposed to you?  How long was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I think we probably had been out together maybe three or four times because he was still working in Brooklyn [New York] and I was still teaching in New York [sic. Kansas City, Missouri].  But we, communicated, you know, back and forth.  So he was gonna be sent to Africa on an assignment or someplace.  So he came back and asked me if I would marry him.  I said, "Yeah, but what does that mean?"  He said, "Jacquie [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire], it means that you have to move to New York [New York]."  I loved that (laughter).  So he came back and he asked me to marry him.  And we were married, we were married at a church in Harlem in New York.
Story_ID: 644914
Speaker 1: You were married in New York [New York] even?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you moved there and were married.  So can you describe your wedding day?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My wedding day.  I'm, I'm a Methodist, was at the Methodist church.  It wasn't--we only had the best man, the groom, the maid of honor, Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire], and myself--that was the wedding party.  And I dressed up and I don't know where my picture is, but it's somewhere.  And we--he was already living in the Lenox Terrace [New York, New York].  And we had a little one bedroom--well my teacher, I have to go back to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri].  My teacher was from Little Rock [Arkansas] with Tom--he knew Tom from Little Rock.  And when moved into the Lenox Terrace, we moved into a space where all of the--whole place wasn't this big.  Then I got pregnant so, there was no place, you know, there was just the one bedroom and small little apartment.  But the guy who I used to cover for his classes, I used to teach his classes at Lincoln University.  And he was working for the school system, he said, "Jacquie [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire], I'm a, I'm a, you I'm a--I don't need all this space in my apartment because you need the space now.  You're pregnant.  You have a, you have a baby coming."  I was teaching in Brooklyn [New York] at the time, going back and forth on the train.  So he gave us his apartment.  He was also from Little Rock.
Speaker 1: In the Lenox Terr- ?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So he gave us, he gave us his apartment because it did have a larger bedroom and a larger kitchen and what have you.  So we stayed there until Tom was sent to--oh we moved around, we moved to the Bridge Apartments [New York, New York], we moved to other apartments and what have you.  But then we moved to Africa and that's when our life really took off; (unclear) change.
Speaker 1: So let's, let's talk about those early years together because first of all, this is your first time out of Missouri--I mean, you know, I mean Kansas and Missouri, sorry those two places.  And so, you are--I mean how did you--were you homesick at all or was this all like new and wonderful?  I--?
Speaker 2: You know I was so young and so in love.  I didn't know what homesick was about.  All I know is I met this man and we have been communicating and we've been talking to each other and he--I think he came home once to see me or what have you.  And then he went to Africa and he asked me through the mail if I would marry him and I was just, said yes.  And went to New York that was it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So your son was born wh- at you know, at what, at what year?  Was that 1961 or '2 [1962]?
Speaker 2: That's when Teri [Terilyn Shropshire], the girl's born first.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) so your--Teri is your first?  So you're, you're--then you're mother on top of it.
Speaker 2: Mother catching, catching the train to Brooklyn to work; I mean, I, I got pregnant right away, but I was working.  I was teaching school over--well the guy who gave me the apartment was also my instructor at Lincoln University.  So when I first got to New York, I had to work, I mean you had to have two people working; one person couldn't make it.  So I got a job teaching school, kind of like a substitute and I was teaching over in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn.  So I had to take like three, three trains to get there.  Then they discovered that I was pregnant.  So I did it as long as I could.  And then when I could no longer catch the train from Harlem [New York, New York] to Brooklyn, then by that time they were, they were, they were getting ready to s- get Tom--for Tom and I to move to Africa, so it worked out okay.
Story_ID: 644915
Speaker 1: So you move to Africa in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, what was it, 19--well, 1964, 1965 (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is early.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean first of all what is sort of amazing about this story is, how did Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire] get his job, you know, at, at Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]; and Philip Morris is a big tobacco, you know, company?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, I, I think Tom left Little Rock [Arkansas] going to New York [New York].  He'd been to the [U.S.] Navy.  He'd been to all those places.  He met a fella named Herb Wright who was my--who ended up being our godson [sic.].  And he applied at Philip Morris for a job and they gave him a job hang- what they call hanging paper in Brooklyn [New York], where they'd put up Johnny signs [Johnny Roventini] and all of them on the board.  They di- he did that for a long, long time.  And then he kept moving up in the black community with cigarettes, you know they would get out--throw cigarettes out to everybody whatever.  And then when Philip Morris finally, you know, brought him into Philip Morris, you know, to work doing something other than signing paper, they wanted him to go to Africa.
Speaker 1: And so what did they want--what was his job in Africa then?
Speaker 2: Well his job in Africa was basically--they were growing tobacco.  So it, it was watching the tobacco farm; and also to, you know, just to have the Philip Morris--well it was (unclear) tobacco--they, they were growing tobacco in Africa.
Speaker 1: So this in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this 1964 in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what is the trip over; and is there any trepidation on your part to be going?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not at all.  It was the best time of my life.  Living in Africa was one of the best periods of my life.  I mean I was a poor little girl from Kansas City, Missouri living down by the river [Missouri River].  In Africa, I had maids and cars and I was his confidential secretary.  So I set up his office because business was my major.  I sat up his office.  I did all of his personal, confidential work.  They--and Tom said, "Well I can't go to Africa, I can't lose my wife's salary."  They said, "We will pay her the whole while she's in Africa to be your confidential secretary."  I had a won- I had a limo driver and taking me all over the place.  I had, I had people who work, you know, where--and I would say, "Well who are you?"  She was the cook or the cleaner, you know, I, I could not imagine what a poor little girl from 5th Street in Kansas City got to be in Africa.  And I started the first women's club in Africa; and I just took it on my life; and Teri [Terilyn Shropshire] was a baby then and so, it was no--but she went to school.  She went to the American school in Africa.  So it was, it was a wonderful life.
Speaker 1: So he really is, is moving up in the corporate world and you have then the benefits of corporate life in a foreign country.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We could go any place, you know.
Speaker 1: So what places--now were you in Lagos?
Speaker 2: Lagos, Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you lived in Lagos.  So what was Lagos like?  I always hear stor-
Speaker 2: Oh my god, it was wonderful back then because they had the USAID [United States Agency for International Development] there.  A big US A- USAID.  And I mean we had a ball.  We partied.  We had a good time.  We all knew each other.  We would go to eat--to the beach with each other.  We had--we would--had a movie screen.  Every Sunday we would look at movies with each other.  It was a large, large contingency of USAID.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So we just fit right in.
Speaker 1: I see, so, so, okay.  And what was USAID doing there at that time?  Do you know what the projects were that they were working on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were working on, they were working on nutrition.   They were working on building up Lagos with, with different jobs and training and trying to make it a viable country, Lagos particularly.  But there are a lot of Americans and then the oil, you know, they had the oil down in the lower part of Lagos.  It was a big oil producing company.  So they had a lot of the people who dug--brought the oil in--I mean it was there--I mean it was so many Americans there, you never knew that it was Nigeria 'cause they had big beautiful edifices and, you know, the kings and the queens and--matter of fact, one of my--Teri's.  Is it Teri or Tommy [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.]?  Teri's godfather, or, no it's Tommy's godfather is Nigerian and one of his sons went to school, went to school outside of Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  Kiel [ph.], I, I--he still bothers me now.  But Kiel is still--Kiel is still walking around in robes and all of that stuff in Switzerland, so we haven't lost him yet (laughter).
Story_ID: 644916
Speaker 1: And what are you learning about Nigerian culture?
Speaker 2: I learned that if you have a good Nigerian friend, you have a friend for life.  I know a lot of people who have been educated there--who've been members of the UN.  Matter of fact the godfather was--my, well my kid's godfather was one of the highest members in the United Nations, when, you know, between Nigeria and here.  I think AID [United States Agency for International Development] has been one of the best things that could ever happened to Nigeria.  I hate to see what has happened to it now.  It's a hurting thing to see them fighting each other and the oil and, and it's, it's, it's not a safe place to be, or a safe place to go.  But I still have those memories and--but, it, it, it's hard not to wanna go back to Lagos [Nigeria], and see what it's like, to see our house, to see our--where we lived and all of that.
Story_ID: 644917
Speaker 1: Where did you live?
Speaker 2: We lived on, on--we--well they had Ikoyi [Lagos, Nigeria] and then they had another little island.  But right there in Lagos [Nigeria], right--well not in the middle of it--I mean we--yeah we did, we lived by the hotel, but we lived in--where most of the USAID [United States Agency for International Development] people lived--because that's where Whitney Young was killed, if you recall.
Speaker 1: He was killed in Nigeria?  In--was he killed in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh--I--okay.
Speaker 2: You remember?  'Cause he was visiting with us.
Speaker 1: He was visiting with you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well they were having a symposium in Nigeria, where they had a lot of--Bayard Rustin and all of that group of civil right leaders; Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  I have the last picture of Whitney Young and, and Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] being at an affair at that same time.  I have all those pictures; and they were holding a symposium in Lagos, and it was at my house--I mean they came to our house to get together before they would go to wherever they were supposed to go, which was futher down the street.  And Whitney decided that he wanted to go for a swim, and he wanted to go with, you know, take Teri [Terilyn Shropshire], our daughter.  And I said no, no, no Teri has to go to school, Teri has to go to school.  She cannot go for a swim.  But I'm trying to think of the guy who did go for a swim with him and he never came back.  But any way they were all at my house getting theirselves together, Jesse Jackson and that whole group, to go to this symposium with some African leaders down the street.  So we kept waiting for, waiting for, for him to come back.  We kept waiting for--what I'm talking about, I'm lost at the moment--Whitney Young to come back; and then finally we got a call that he had drowned in the water.  So they brought him--brought his body back up and called his sister who lives--I think she lives in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now, and that's where he died.  And his wife [Margaret Buckner Young] flew over.  They brought in Air Force One to bring him over, bring him back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because he was head of the Urban League [National Urban League], you know, and--
Speaker 2: Well it was the Urban League, and it was a whole lot of civil rights--
Speaker 1: Things happening.
Speaker 2: Bayard Rustin and Jesse Jackson; and all of them were there for this round table.
Speaker 1: I see, so what did he die off?
Speaker 2: He drowned.
Speaker 1: You don- we don't know the cause of the drowning?
Speaker 2: He went swimming with one of the other guys who, who managed to be saved.  It's always been a--it's been an enigma to me forever.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what did the guy say?
Speaker 2: Well we were at the house, and then the--this call came in that Jesse had drowned.
Speaker 1: I mean that, that--
Speaker 2: I mean that--
Speaker 1: --Whitney had drowned.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But there wasn't an inquisition, there was no autopsy?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) They came in, they took his body immediately on Air Force One back to the states.  No.
Speaker 2: So Air--then, then who would've sent--then that's--Kennedy is president at that time, right?  Is Ken- no--John- is John F. Kennedy president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I think?
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was him or Johnson [sic. President Richard Milhous Nixon].
Speaker 2: Okay, I see, okay.
Speaker 1: But his sister--they flew his sister out, and they had, you know, on Air, when, when Air Force One came in, it came in with a lot of the black leaders, and they flew his sister out; and then they took his body back.  But then, they, they, had a memorial service for him in Lagos which everybody came back to.
Speaker 2: I see.  That's very historic time--I mean for you to be in the center of all of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what was Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] saying about it?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Tom was devastated.  Because I took the call, and I was like seven months pregnant [with Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.].  And I just started fainting like I couldn't believe what I heard; and that's when Tom came and, came and got the phone.
Story_ID: 644918
Speaker 1: So Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire]--his work over there [Nigeria] you said was overseeing the tobacco plants?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Growing tobacco.
Speaker 1: T- growing tobacco?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how, how, how long had that relationship existed with Nigeria and the growing of tobacco?  Had that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were over there for five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well do you remember what his challenges were or if he loved his job and?
Speaker 2: Who Tom?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, Tom loved his job.  Tom has loved all of his jobs--I mean and he, he does well and to be able, able to grow--to manage a huge tobacco growing thing and to have so many people working for him and what have you, it just elevated him from just being a salesman and to running a business.  So when he came back here, you know, he was with Miller Brewing Company in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: So he, so he went--so while he's there, he's working at Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then how does the Miller Brewing--?
Speaker 2: They bought--Philip Morris bought Miller Brewing Company.
Speaker 1: I see, so he then got transitioned there.
Speaker 2: Got transferred to being a vice president at Miller Brewing Company in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well this is, this is a--now before we leave Whitney Young, how had you--had--when, when did you get to know Whitney Young?  I mean I know that your family has always been active in the Urban League, but how, how do you get--you know there's one thing for you to be active in the Urban League, it's another to be hosting him at your home.
Speaker 2: Well Tom was very active with the Urban League.  Philip Morris is very active with the Urban League.  They give a lot of money to the Urban League.  Tom--they were there for--we've always been very active with the Urban League, you know, like starting up and I started up the Urban League here [Las Vegas Urban League] in--
Speaker 1: Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: --in Las Vegas, yeah.  So we've always, always been active with that.  And Tom and Herb Wright used to give a lot of money to the Urban League from Philip Morris; so that's how we got involved.  And it's always been my passion because my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] (unclear), my mother--my mother, there was like an Urban League, the first Urban League in Kansas City [Urban League of Kansas City; Urban League of Greater Kansas City], which is the forerunner of the, of the Gay Nineties [ph.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She was involved in the first Urban League in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: So the thing I'm wondering, who is Herb Wright?  Can you describe them?
Speaker 2: Well he's pretty hard to describe.  Herb worked for Philip Morris.
Speaker 1: Now is he black or white?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's dead.  He died quite some time ago and his wife, his wife Freda [ph.] used to teach school and she--beautiful, beautiful voice and what have you.  But Herb was well known in New York [New York], very well known in New York.  And he stayed with Philip, Philip Morris and that's where we first met Herb, was at Philip Morris when he used to come around with the Ebony Fashion Fair.  And then Herb became the godfather of Teri [Terilyn Shropshire], my daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he's always been a--
Speaker 1: A part of your life.
Speaker 2: --a best, the best man in my life.  And when Tom had to go away, he and Mel Good [ph.], and there was a whole group of 'em used to come around on Saturdays and sit with me like they were all babysitting.  So I could go get my hair done or either if they were gonna play cards, they would take, take the baby with them to go play cards over in Inglewood [ph.] while I did what I had to do.  So it was a wonderful life.  I don't know what happened to everybody, but it was a wonderful, wonderful life.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So now who--what are the--how many blacks are in, you know, moving up the ladder at, at Philip Morris at the time, and I'm talking about the time, you know, that there's Herb and, and--
Speaker 2: It was pretty much, there were pretty much--in the corporate part of it, it was probably Tom and Herb.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And maybe one more.  I don't know, but after that they were all cigarette salesmen.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  So, so Herb preceded Tom or Tom preceded Herb but they came in at (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No Herb, Herb preceded Tom.
Speaker 1: Tom okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Tom was living in Baltimore [Maryland] for awhile.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then when the job came up.  That was before.  I didn't know him then, but there's a lot of people from Baltimore who knew him, was still here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you are--so you--and his friends, who were the people you mentioned Mel, Mel Goo- you said Mel Good.
Speaker 2: Mel Good, trying to think of who his friends were.  Every, everybody Tom met was a friend.  A lot of the--a lot of them had passed though.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of them--
Speaker 1: Do, do you--oh sorry.
Speaker 2: --I think the only one that they have here was with Miller Brewing Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644919
Speaker 1: Are there other memories you have of Nigeria that you can talk about?  Just maybe two or three (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --other memories to share?
Speaker 2: A couple of memories that I really had, was with--we formed the first women's club in Nigeria.  So we had--we used to meet and they had a lot of oil wives, and then they had a lot of people with USAID [United States Agency for International Development].  So we formed a woman's club there and we used to have, you know, have a lot of fun doing things.  Nigeria was one of the best parts of my life because I had an opportunity to grow; I didn't have to work or I, I took care of the kids and I had time to be a stay at home mom if that's what I wanted to do.  And then I ha- I was the confidential secretary for the, for the company because I would go in and take Tom's [Thomas B. Shropshire], you know, stuff.  So I was on payroll the whole while I was there--that was a good part.
Speaker 1: Right, because you're getting paid and you could be a wife and--I was, was there a lot of work with doing--being the confidential secretary?  You were really keeping his calendar.
Speaker 2: I was keeping his calendar and I was doing a lot because I was a business major [at Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri].  I was able to do a lot of his books.  I was able to keep a lot of his confidential work.  I did all of his confidential work.
Speaker 1: Now is he--what is required of him at this point, you know, and do you have social obligations at all, you know, in that role for Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.]?  Do you have to entertain and?
Speaker 2: We had to entertain, yes, a lot in, in Nigeria because we always had a lot people coming in and out and even the people from New York [New York] coming in and out, so that was my, that was my quest, you know, there.  But other than that, you know, I still was a mom.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Even though I had, you know, people waiting on me hand and foot, I was still a mom.  I had two kids and a driver who drove on the left side of street, so, you know (laughter) I was still a mom.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, so wait a minute--so the drive- so you have a cook?
Speaker 2: I have a cook, I have a driver, I have a nanny; and they all have--they all live on the same property that I live on.  They all have their own housing right there, you know, they come to work everyday.  And we had two dogs we brought home with us and didn't have to--the weather and stuff didn't agree with them so, we couldn't keep them.  But typical family, just a typical family only I didn't have anything to do, you know.  And it was so many from USAID over there.  And then we had somebody who was with a bread company over there; and it was so many Americans.
Speaker 1: That it didn't, it--it didn't even matter.
Speaker 2: It didn't even matter.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then what were you--what was the school like?  Were you happy with the school 'cause both of your children--?
Speaker 2: Well, you only could stay at that school through I think fifth grade--fourth or fifth grade.  And then the ones who were over for oil, they had to take their kids and send them to Switzerland to school because the school only went through six or seventh grade.  Now the Nigerians had their own schools; this was the American school.  So most of the, most of the oil people sent their kids to Switzerland.  Well I wasn't sending mine to Switzerland unless I went with them.  So we got that straightened out.  So we came back home in time to put Teri [Terilyn Shropshire] in school in New York.
Story_ID: 644920
Speaker 1: So you came back and are you working for--is he working for Miller Brewing in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: He's working from--he was working for Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] in New York.  And then when Philip Morris bought Miller Brewing Company, that's when we moved to Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--I have it down as 1972.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 1972--now you've missed--I mean you sort of missed and you haven't, you know, have you missed the whole Civil Rights Movement and, you know, but you're--no not really because you're sort of in the midst of it with all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I'm, I'm so Urban League-ish. I didn't miss--
Speaker 1: But you know everything that's going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't know anything about--I mean I just, I've just, you know, got off--I mean I was on the board of the Urban League for so long and--I established the Urban League here [Las Vegas Urban League, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I've just still been in- into doing things and then suddenly, you know, my knee is hurting, I'm putting gel on my knee, I'm hobbling around.  So finally I said I resign.  Call me for the benefits and things like that, but I'm t- my knee hurts.  But I'm just, you know, I've always been a philanthropist.  I've always--in a way that when I see somebody need something I try to help them get it, whether I can do it alone or not.  But the Urban League has always been so good to both Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] and I because it got Tom his first job and it was meaningful.  I don't always like what they do and how they do it, but that's their business, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  So 1972, when you move from--so you moved back to New York and then he becomes vice president for market planning I have it for Miller's Brewing.  So what is his--what is he in charge of there; and how do you--I mean from New York, New York to the Midwest--I mean I know you're from the Midwest originally but--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well Miller Brewing Company was bought by Philip Morris; and Tom was the vice president of Miller Brewing Company and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But this is a big position?
Speaker 2: A very big, big--very big position.  And the other guy was out of New York for Miller, but he, he was the second man in charge; and he did a lot, did a lot for the community.  I was very proud of Tom.
Speaker 1: Well I--what I had read, was that he did in, in--you know, within the company, you know in terms of bringing in minorities, a lot and he did a lot, you know, within the, the community itself.
Speaker 2: He did, he did.  That's Tom, you know, Tom was--he had a temper--I mean he had a temper like you would not believe, but nobody paid any attention to him because he was smiling the whole while, you know.  But, you know, he's, he's--it was his idea to come to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]; it wasn't mine.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He just said he wanted to live on a golf course and--'cause we were living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time and he always wanted to live in L.A.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So whatever Tom wanted, Tom got, but he just left a little sooner than I expected.
Speaker 1: But--I know, I know.  So what was your life in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] like, you know, because you've come off of--I mean you've been international; and you've been living--
Speaker 2: It was funny you should ask, because that's where I'm on my way now: to Milwaukee for Thanksgiving.  Milwaukee was such a wonderful, wonderful--you know, it was just a wonderful place to be.  I loved being in Milwaukee.  Everybody was so friendly and our kids [Terilyn Shropshire and Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] had a wonderful place to grow up and it was, you know, it was different from New York; I mean they could ride their bicyles up and down the street and, you know, it was just like a hometown atmosphere, which I hadn't had in a long time.
Speaker 1: Now where did you, where did you live there in Milwaukee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Milwaukee?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We lived on--see we lived--matter of fact, I'm going to Milwaukee.  We lived right off of the expressway, I'm trying think of--'cause we lived there for--1365, what do--?  We lived right there on the corner, I'm trying think of what is the--in, in--
Speaker 1: Do you know what area?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was right as you come off of the--I'm trying to think of the address.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, that's where we're going tomorrow--the address.
Speaker 1: So describe your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Our, our neighborhood, when we moved in was totally mixed and then--but we were one of the first--there were two or three black families already there when we moved in.  And we moved into a area that was--you just get right on the expressway and you're right down to where you're going.  We didn't live way out in the country some place.  I don't know if you know [HistoryMaker] Virgis Colbert and all that--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  I mean I've heard of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Virgis lives on one side of town and we lived near where the school was.  So--and that's really crazy because I'm on my way to Milwaukee tomorrow (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But we lived right, right out by the schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't live--you know, we lived in, in the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 644921
Speaker 1: What is your life--what does it become there, because how old are the kids?  Teri [Terilyn Shropshire] is?
Speaker 2: Teri's fifty-two.
Speaker 1: No but what--how old was she back then you think?
Speaker 2: Oh Teri.  Teri went--I would say Teri could not have been over five or six years old --
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your son is how old at that point?
Speaker 2: Tommy [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] is forty--it's, it's ten years' difference.
Speaker 1: Oh ten years different--so but he wasn't born then, was he born?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was born in New York [New York], both of 'em were born in New York actually.
Speaker 1: Oh, so wait a minute so--you went back--so Teri spent time in, in Nigeria.  Tommy did not.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But now Tommy is--he's a big attorney in--
Speaker 1: London [England].
Speaker 2: --in London, but his home office is in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you--so you're, you're in--so you settle--
Speaker 2: Fairy Chasm Road [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--that's where I lived.
Speaker 1: Fairy Chasm Road.  Okay, great.  And then you get involved in the community there yourself?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And especially once again in the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now are you part of any other organizations?  Do you join The Links [The Links, Incorporated]?
Speaker 2: I'm a Link.
Speaker 1: Do you join The Links in--where do you join The Links?  Do you join it in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was in The Links in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.], did you join--?
Speaker 2: The Girl Friends I joined out here [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so you become a member of the, The Links and--I don't know--
Speaker 2: The Girl Friends and the--
Speaker 1: Well you know what I had you involved with?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had--the Urban League, so talk about your Urban League involvement 'cause you--the--you--I think you even become executive director and chairman so, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Urban League was part of my growing up in Kansas City [Missouri].  They called them the Gay Nineties [ph.] then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But they eventually became the Urban League.  I became really, really deeply involved with the Urban League in Milwaukee [Milwaukee Urban League, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  In that way I worked for the Urban League there and spent a lot of time there in Milwaukee because at the time, I really didn't have a lot to do.  Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] was with Miller Brewing Company and what have you.  So I worked for the Urban League the whole, the whole few years that I was in Milwaukee.  And then after we left Milwaukee--
Speaker 1: Well no, let's talk about the things that you did with the Urban League because--
Speaker 2: With the Urban League in Milwaukee?
Speaker 1: Yes, and I wanna ask specifically, you know, about--'cause I think that the Urban League during the time you were there, that they remodeled and moved into a new building.  Does that sound right?  On Wright Street?  No?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's right, but it wa- they did that af- they did that after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's all, all brand new.  When I left the Urban League, we were still in a little house, sitting on the corner on Center Street.
Speaker 1: And what were the issues there?  Like how old was that Urban League, you know, in terms of Urban Leagues and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my god, it's one of the first in that area.  And the guy who had it [Wesley L. Scott], he had been there forever, I can't think of his name right now.  But it was in a house, I mean it was just that old.
Speaker 1: And so you were the first female president--executive director then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 644922
Speaker 1: So how did you find them--what were the issues in the Milwaukee [Wisconsin] community because it's a different--it's sort of like the community somewhat I mean that you grew up in Kansas City [Missouri]; it's a working class--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was basically about people getting jobs, going to work.  We had different programs, you know, that they could get into.  But at, at the, at, at, at, at that time it was, it was, you know, it was so small it was like your house, I mean the house was the Urban League [Milwaukee Urban League, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and people would come there looking mainly for jobs.  We had a nice board or what have you.  But it's always been about getting jobs, you know, seeing that people could get jobs and they're ready for work or people would come to the Urban League looking for some time--we didn't do much food at that time, but now they have really expanded.  But we--I mean the Urban League, the one I knew, it wasn't as big as this place here in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: So, so how--who were, who was the mayor at the time and some of the city council people that you interacted with?
Speaker 2: In Milwaukee?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Most of them were white.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can't remember any black.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like the mayor's office and all of them they had--oh, Donald Sykes, who worked for the mayor and some of the guys who worked, you know, within the mayor's office, but they never--I can't remember anybody really working that much for the governor, but I do remember people, you know, working for some of the mayor's office.
Speaker 1: And so, what are you proud that you accomplished there?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if I really accomplished anything, but what I've tried to do is put other people in the position to accomplish things that could happen.  There was very little for me to accomplish that I really didn't have; and when I have a lot, I, I always believed that you got yours, now you help somebody else get theirs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that was my philosophy working for the Urban League; and it's been my philosophy working--I started the Urban League here [Las Vegas Urban League, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it's always been--it's never been about me.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 644923
Speaker 1: You actually also participated with the Milwaukee historical society [Milwaukee County Historical Society, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the Milwaukee convention and visitors bureau [Greater Milwaukee Convention and Visitors Bureau]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I'm trying to--I don't know if it was American Red Cross.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: But the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you, you were--participated--are there any things you wanna talk about regarding that?
Speaker 2: No, except that I'm gonna be on a plane tomorrow going to Milwaukee, Wisconsin (laughter) for (unclear)--well we started the first--one thing that I'm a little proud of, that they have kept going and I did it with Wayne Embry's wife and another doctor's wife--is that our young girls were beginning to get into a lof of, you know, stuff that they shouldn't even know about.  So the three of us formed the cotillion [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. Debutante Cotillion].  And the cotillion wasn't something that you could just get a white gown and go and say, "I'm in the cotillion," you had to work the whole year to be able to cotillion.  So I'm very proud of that.  One of my girlfriends who helped me form it died, but--Mickey [Mildred Pollard].  That's where I'm going.  Olivia [ph.], Terri's godchild is coming out this year in the cotillion.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we (cough) excuse me--my throat this morning.  We, you know, actually interviewed [HistoryMaker] Wayne Embry this year.
Speaker 2: Did you?  Good.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, we did so--
Speaker 2: Where was he, in Phoenix [Arizona]?
Speaker 1: He--no, he was--I know he lives in Phoenix, but he came to Chicago [Illinois] for a meeting.
Speaker 2: That is so great because I'm gonna see him in about another couple of hours or so.  Because Olivia, one of Wayne--well Terri and I are just, we grew up--I mean Terri Embry and I are just like kissing cousins.  And we started the first cotillon for girls who--we didn't, we didn't go to the cream of the crop. We're one of those who--we had to help get their gowns and stuff like that, years, and years and years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh so that's--okay so--'cause a lot of times the cotillion is associated maybe with Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], you know, so they're already privileged girls.  But you went with girls that were less privileged and had them work; and then the cotillion is coming--you know, it's a coming--?
Speaker 2: It's, it's a true coming out party.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's true coming out, so--I haven't--well it--there were three of us involved, Terri Embry and myself.  The other girl died, Ruth [ph.].  And so this is the first time I been back for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, Terri's godchild is coming out, so.
Story_ID: 644924
Speaker 1: --Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] is, you know, at Miller Brewing [Miller Brewing Company]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'cause he--you lived there for thirty years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's really 1972 to 2000.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know that you lived there.  Now during that time did--is--you mentioned another person, who's there [HistoryMaker Virgis Colbert]--who just retired but--who worked--you said he worked further out.  And he, he rose up the ranks too--oh gosh--he works at Miller Brewing--you mentioned his name--I'm now forget- I'm forgetting.  But what, what is Tom able to accomplish, you know, in that time period?
Speaker 2: Which period is that?
Speaker 1: The Milwaukee [Wisconsin] time period.
Speaker 2: Oh my god.  Tom thought he would die and go to heaven, you know, he wasn't thrilled and delighted about going to Milwaukee at all.  But he was able to grow in Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] because in Philip Morris he really didn't have that--they didn't have--they only had two and that was he and Herb Wright, maybe three.  There was no place for him to go, basically, in New York [New York].  So when they bought the Miller Brewing Company, he had--he had been in Nigeria.  He had done, he had done all his homework.  And when they bought it, they made him a vice president.  And--which he richly deserved.  And he was very happy.  He was happy in Milwaukee.  He, he had friends there and he enjoyed himself a lot.  He really--Tom, Tom loved living in Milwaukee.  He loved Miller Brewing Company, and it was his life.  We used to go on the Miller Masters every year with them.  Tom's life was in--he loved Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I don't think he would've, he would've gone--I mean when he retired we came here [Las Vegas, Nevada] because he wanted to live on the golf course.
Speaker 1: Now when did you establish your home on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when during that time, were you starting to spend time on the Vineyard?
Speaker 2: I think it was during the time--gee when did we start spending time on the Vineyard?  We had been spending time as guest of [HistoryMaker] Wayne Embry for a long time.  So Wayne said, "Get your own place," kidding him of course.  So that's when we started, that's when we started.  When Tom came to the Vineyard he fell in love with it for the first time.  So Wayne Embry is the one who got him to buy a place over there.  Now what transpired between the two of them, I don't know but I was very thrilled and delighted.
Speaker 1: Because Wayne Embry, he had been very significant, not only as a sports player.  So maybe the two of them owned the city in some respects, they were leaders within the city 'cause at that point Wayne Embry is managing the team--you know, the, the team there [Milwaukee Bucks].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He and, well most of them are, are gone now but Wayne, Wayne is still around.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean he's--
Speaker 1: And then he, you know, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson was--
Speaker 2: I saw Oscar.  He's in Cincinnati [Ohio], he's in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: He's in Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he was there at some point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He and his wife, who's not that well.  We were all (gesture) like that--Yvonne Robertson [Yvonne Crittenden Robertson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah we were all this--Milwau- I mean Milwaukee was a great--I can't speak for everybody else, but Milwaukee was really a great place to be.  Especially when you had children.
Speaker 1: And so where are your children [Terilyn Shropshire and Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] going to school at this point, where do they go to school?
Speaker 2: My kids?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Teri is a film director, she's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no but I'm saying in Milwaukee when they were in Milwaukee.
Speaker 2: Oh where did they go to school?  Well they had, they had--most of them--a lot of them went out to where--near where our kids went to school, out in Brown Deer [Wisconsin], they had a school out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then a lot of 'em went to the school over where Mickey [Mildred Pollard] and Randy [Randle Pollard] live.  I forgot what the name of the school is.  But, yeah they all went to really good schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause, 'cause Brown Deer is a l- I thought that was a--it's a lovely community out there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, that's where we lived on Fairy Chasm Road.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you were in Brown Deer, okay.
Speaker 2: We weren't in--well we were--Brown Deer Road ran from one end of the place down the other.  We were right at the ex- right near the expressway.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 644925
Speaker 1: When he retires what, what are your thoughts at that point 'cause you said that he--so--when he--do you remember his retirement party?
Speaker 2: Who, Tom's [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I can't even remember when it was now, because--oh it was over in--I think we had it in Los Angeles [California], I believe--I can't remember when Tom's retirement party was 'cause he probably had two or three.  I know the company gave him one in--because when he retired, he retired from Miller Brewing Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was--did [HistoryMaker] Virgis Colbert--that's who's name I'm--did he come up under Tom?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Virgis--yeah, Virgis and his wife [HistoryMaker Angela Johnson Colbert]--we were, we were really close, they, they have a place right, right next to us on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].  Virgis came up under Tom and then he came--he got to be, you know, his own person, and now he's, I--he's still--I don't know if he's still connected with Miller at all.  I don't think he is.
Speaker 1: He's retired now.
Speaker 2: Yeah he's retired, yeah, but no he and Tom came up together.  One didn't move without the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, but he was there before.  Tom was there before Virgis was there.
Speaker 2: Oh long before Virgis, long before Virgis because Virgis--I'm trying to think where Virgis came from when he moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] because he and his wife--I'm trying--see I'm trying to think of where they came from.  But anyway he was under Tom, he was under Tom.
Speaker 1: You know what makes me a little sad and I know, is that this--you know look at the, the jobs and things he's created, a lot of things have disappeared now that, that were done during that time.
Speaker 2: A lot, especially a lot of things that, a lot of the jobs have disappeared because of mergers, you know where--well Miller is not really Miller anymore, it belongs to Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies], I mean you know in St. Louis [Missouri].  So you know I guess things bring about a change but sometimes, you know, it's hard to distinguish when it's a change or if it's a takeover.
Story_ID: 644926
Speaker 1: Now I also had you president of Momentum Unlimited of Milwaukee [Momentum Unlimited, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: That was my company.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I was a business major and I used to teach business at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] when the business teachers had to leave.  So when I came out, I, I knew I didn't 'wanna go back to working for TWA [Trans World Airlines], you know with insurance policies, so I set up my own company, which was strategic planning.  And it was at a good time because that was the time that the light rail was beginning.  So I formed a group and we did a study of the light rail system; and that's what started me off with my company.  Unfortunately, once I got my company up and going, Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire] was ready to move someplace else, move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  But we did do a lot of strategic planning for the city.
Speaker 1: I see okay.  So during your time there I think the--that beautiful museum, the art museum [Milwaukee Art Center; Milwaukee Art Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was built during that time and you have the children's museum--I mean they're down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're down on the river [Milwaukee River].
Speaker 1: Right.  And the Milwaukee festival and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh, Afro Fest [African World Festival].
Speaker 1: The Afro Fest.
Speaker 2: We started Afro Fest in (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh you did.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time that the festivals were going on, they would have ethnic festivals within the festivals, like Irish fest and this fest and that fest and all of the other fests.  So, you know, when you don't give Milwaukee [Wisconsin] anything to do it's gonna rabble rouse.  So they decided why is it that we can't have our own festival.  So they got a lot of the guys together from different walks of life and I think there were two of us, me and Terri Embry--I think we were the only two women they allowed to be on, on what's going on.  So they said, "You know, this is crazy, everybody has their own festival.  Why can't we have a festival?"  So we all say, "Yeah, why can't we have a festival?"  So we got along--we got permission to have a festival from the people.  They said, "All right, now that you have this permission you have to put--you have to manage it."  So we did, we had people coming in, music coming in, food vendors coming in just like everybody else did.  And we called it Afro Fest.  And I haven't been to Afro Fest for awhile, but I don't think it's as busy as it used to be, but we used to take over the festival for the whole thing and we had a ball.
Speaker 1: And then really people would come from other parts--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like, I've, I've been to Chi- from Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --up to the Afro Fest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I haven't been in a long time.  As a matter of fact, when I go, when I go to Milwaukee, tomorrow or the next day, I'm gonna ask.  They have it, I know they have it because I've asked, but it's much, much smaller.
Story_ID: 644927
Speaker 1: When you move to Los Angeles [California] what was that like?
Speaker 2: Didn't--well we first moved to Mission Viejo [California].
Speaker 1: Mission Viejo.
Speaker 2: Which was down in Southern California--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't like that at all.
Speaker 1: And why was that?  Nothing to do?
Speaker 2: No, it was nothing to do.  And then my son was just leaving school, and, and Tommy [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where did he go to school?
Speaker 2: Well he went to school at Nicolet [Nicolet High School] in Milwaukee [sic. Glendale, Wisconsin] and he was doing great, he was doing great; and then when we moved him to the school down, you know, down in California they kept pumping him up to be a football player.  I said oh no, no, no, no, no, no, my son--I mean they wore clogs to school and flip flops and what have you and I told Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire], I said you can stay here, but I'm taking my son back to L.A. to put in a proper school--I'm taking him back to Milwaukee because they weren't doing--I mean I look at these kids walking around with shorts and stuff.  I said no.  I didn't come up under that.  So Tom said, "Okay, well--," Tom said, "well I'm not moving back to Milwaukee."  I said fine, that's okay, do what you wanna do.  So Tom stayed in L.A., and I took Tommy back to Milwaukee until he finished school (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that took how--a year longer?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was that a year longer?
Speaker 2: No, Tommy was--Tommy was in Nicolet yeah, he was like in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh so it was two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, so, your husband would commute back and forth.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well Tom had retired [from the Miller Brewing Company].
Speaker 1: Right he had retired, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But he just wanted to live in--he loved L.A.  He just wanted to live in L.A. And, and--we moved down in Mission Viejo which is a beautiful, beautiful place.  But I couldn't see my son going to school in shorts and flip flops.  So he stayed down there for awhile, then he sold it and we bought a house in L.A.
Speaker 1: So where did your, where did your, your kids go to college? Teri [Terilyn Shropshire] went where?
Speaker 2: The both went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].  And then Tommy went to law school in New York [New York], at New York--
Speaker 1: University?
Speaker 2: --University [New York University School of Law] of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah at the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Law school there?
Speaker 2: --yeah, at the law school there.
Story_ID: 644928
Speaker 1: So you live there [California] for awhile, and then who decides that they--oh so your husband wants to play golf all the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire] decided that not only did he want to move out of the house which was huge.  He couldn't walk up and down the steps.  That's when I knew he was beginning to get ill because we had steps that went like this (gesture), you know, right on the corner; so we knew that we had to make a move because he couldn't handle the steps and there was no way to get an elevator in.  So my friends Mickey Pollard [Mildred Pollard] and her husband [Randle Pollard] where I'm going to the cotillion [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. Debutante Cotillion] said, "Well we go to Las Vegas [Nevada] every year and maybe you should look over there."  So we said okay, so we looked over here and we found a house all on one floor in Canyon Gate [Canyon Gate Country Club, Las Vegas, Nevada].  And that's where we were, and when he passed I moved here.
Speaker 1: So talk about your life in Las Vegas 'cause what, what was life like here 'cause you got active here?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, you know, it's really, very funny, Las Vegas is a, is a very interesting place to be because all of my friends from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] are here now (laughter).  Most of my friends from Milwaukee are here in Las Vegas.  So I, I don't have a chance to miss 'em too much because the Pollards come every year from Christmas, and I was out last night with Karma [Karma Rodgers], and Karma has an office here but she still lives in Milwaukee.  So we call this Milwaukee West Coast (laughter).  We have a lot of people who come from Milwaukee who end up here in Las Vegas.  Because Las Vegas is not what everybody thinks it is.  I mean you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is it?  Can you describe it to me?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Las Ve- you find that a lot of people from Las Vegas, they don't really gan- gamble or what have you.  But they come to Las Vegas because it's an easy lifestyle, you know, you don't--it doesn't cost a lot to live in Las Vegas; you know, your, your transportation or you can live out here.  We have our same organizations.  We have The Links [The Links, Incorporated].  We have The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.].  We have everything here but, it's like a vacation, it's like, it's like a vacation.  I wouldn't wanna put my kids in school here.  But as you retire this is an excellent place for a retirees, because, you know, it's, it's just built that way.
Speaker 1: Now you got involved--'cause there wasn't an Urban League here.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And you established it [Las Vegas Urban League, Las Vegas, Nevada], so what did you do.  How did you find the, the state of the black community here?
Speaker 2: There, there was a state of the black, black community with the Urban Chamber of Commerce.  They have a very strong black community.  It's small, but it's very, very strong.  But there was very little that was being done in the neighborhoods.  There was very little that was being done--they had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the schools, there was no impetus to encourage people to get jobs or what to do when you get jobs or how do you go about getting a job.  Because the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], you know, if you been over in North Las Vegas [Nevada] that's what it is.  The Strip is where everybody is, so now Las Vegas is beginning to get a culture of its own, you know, it's beginning--it's getting the Smith--we did the Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: Well that's--
Speaker 2: We did the--we did the, the--what is it--the center that is over off of--
Speaker 1: You did the Smith Center?
Speaker 2: Yeah we did--but that was, that was--that had nothing to do with the Las Vegas that we know over and about, you know, where everybody--where, where, the black--
Speaker 1: You mean Symphony Park [Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Well no, Symphony Park and the Smith Center is not a part of North Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: North Las Vegas has a life of its own with the Urban League and the Urban Chamber of Commerce and all of that.  They have, you know, that's still a life of their own which nobody is doing anything to improve.
Story_ID: 644929
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your work with the Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada] 'cause I was very impre- you know, 'cause this is what you're starting to talk about that, you know, having Las Vegas [Nevada] establish a life outside of the Strip [Las Vegas Strip]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me what, what the Smith Center is?  Because--?
Speaker 2: Well when I first moved to Las Vegas, you know, I started the Urban League [Las Vegas Urban League] and we did all of that.  And then once everything got started everything was fine, so finally Tommy [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] or Teri [Terilyn Shropshire]--somebody said, "Give my mom something to do."  Be sure she has something to do, so I knew that my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] was a light opera singer and she never had the time or the place to sing, so--because Tommy's client was MGM, one of the guys who was involved with thinking about the Smith Center said okay we'll find something for her to do.  So they came and they sat over here, and they said, "We want you to be on the board at the Smith Center and we're just starting it out, and we have--we don't have anything--we don't even have a plan yet.  We're starting from scratch, but we want you to be involved."  So I said okay, you know, I didn't have anything else to do.  So we met constantly just talking about the Smith Center.  Just thinking about what it's gonna look like and how it's gonna be built.  I was with them from the architectural committee all the way through putting the last brick, and as a matter of fact, I have a picture of the last nail that went in over there.  It gave me something to do.  It gave me an outlet that I felt that we could do a lot of things that we didn't have to do on the Strip, that we could have entertainment, you know, that does not have to be inside of a casino; and there were a lot of things that we could do.  So I was the only black and there were only two females on the architectural committee.  So we, we have followed all the way through, from beginning to the end.  And I'm very proud of that.  That is one of the things that--a legacy that I'm very proud of.
Speaker 1: So, the chairman was Don Snyder [Donald Snyder]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right?  And then there was Keith Boman, and Kim Sinatra, and Edward [ph.], and Jacobs [Gary Jacobs] and--so a whole host of people.
Speaker 2: They were on, they were on the architectural committee.
Speaker 1: They were on the architectural committee.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I see, they weren't on the board?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're on the board now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  And then this name comes from--it's named in honor of Fred [Fred Smith] and Mary Smith, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you had to figure out as a group how to raise money, you know, where the money was gonna come from.  In fact, I understand that you donated yourself a large sum of money, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all agreed--and we knew going in how much money it was gonna cost.  The people on the board--a lot of the people came in after it was built.  But we had an architectural committee and we found it and we went out and we solicited people we knew who had money and was willing to put up enough for us build a cultural center and they did--I mean they came from every place.  At first, we had--I think I was number sixteen if you see the wall, I'm number sixteen--that grew it into what it is.  And now, you know, it speaks for itself.
Story_ID: 644930
Speaker 1: So there are performances and everything happening there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had performances.  They have cabaret.  They have--it's one of the best things that I have seen happen as an edifice in, in Las Vegas [Nevada].  I mean they have the children's discovery museum [Discovery Children's Museum, Las Vegas, Nevada] right next door now; and Symphony Park [Las Vegas, Nevada] has just really opened up.
Speaker 1: Well this is really--I mean this is important if you're gonna have a life outside the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 2: Yeah it is.
Speaker 1: You know because every place here, you know, there's casinos all over the place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And even if you wanna go to see somebody, Clint Holmes, anybody, you have to go through a casino to get there.  It's not like I can walk in the door and, and suddenly be in an auditorium.  There are a few places, but you still have to walk through a casino to get there.  And my thing was that this is my legacy to my mom [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] who had a beautiful operatic voice and had no place to sing.  Now, my mother has a place to sing.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's lovely.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, that's lovely.  That's--
Speaker 2: That's why I got involved because Tom's idea was when I came here to give my mother something to do, he told the guy--his buddy who was--see Tommy's [Shropshire's son, Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] in mergers and acquisitions so anytime somebody is getting ready to do something it hits New York [New York].  But now Tommy is spending most of his time in Johannesburg [South Africa], but he said, "Give her something to do."  So they said okay, so they asked me to be on the founding board.
Speaker 1: And I, and I understood that you gifted the Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada] a million dollars?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, which is--
Speaker 2: I gifted them a million dollars, paid it off and now I--I have a box where all my friends can go and sit.  And I'm just about finished paying it off and that's my legacy to, to Las Vegas--it's something that I can give my friends eight tickets to and know that they have a good seat in a box.  They don't know that's why I'm giving it to them.  But I just gave some to somebody, I think somebody who was sitting here last night.  I gave tickets for 'Evita' [Tim Rice] to--my cleaner girl who's having a big birthday had--wanted tickets to 'Evita,' so I gave her the tickets to 'Evita.'  I'm not gonna be here, I'm gonna be in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], so I'm glad to see her go.
Story_ID: 644931
Speaker 1: Las Vegas [Nevada]--this is the third place you've been, you know Nigeria, Milwaukee [Wisconsin], Las Vegas; you've touched each one (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And New York.  But you've touched each one of those communities, and you've touched them with the Urban League.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about your life here, you know, in Las Vegas because, you know, just if you could talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had no intention of ever staying in Las Vegas and coming to Las Vegas.  I didn't like L.A. [Los Angeles, California] too much because I just wasn't a West Coast person.  I always, always wanted to go back to New York.  And I'm, I'm going back--I mean I've made that decision 'cause I've already got an apartment there, I'm gonna go back to New York eventually.  I came to Las Vegas because Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire]--is what Tom needed to do.  He needed to be in one place.  He was getting older.  He needed to be on one floor.  He needed--he wanted to go--wanted to be on a golf course.  And he--and he wanted to live on a golf course because in L.A. you'd have to drive a long way to one.  Everything that has come about--decision about why I'm in Las Vegas is because this is what Tom wanted.  And it worked, it worked, you know, for us and it worked for me at the time after he passed, I wasn't sure what I wanted to do or how I wanted to do it.  So we sold the house and the kids [Terilyn Shropshire and Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.] said, "Well, why don't you move into Turnberry [Turnberry Towers, Las Vegas, Nevada].  You're close to the, you know, to the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  You're close to the airport.  You're close to everybody else."  So I said okay.  "And Mom, get involved in something."  So I got involved in the Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada].  I moved in here and I'm torn now about if this is where I wanna stay or do I wanna go back to New York.  Right now, I don't know exactly, you know, what I want to do.
Speaker 1: And, and you have a nice group of friends here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, we met them so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are so, they are so sweet.  They're sweethearts yeah.  So it's, it's gonna be hard to just--for me to get up and walk away from them.  I mean I can walk away from this place any given time.  But a lot of them are from Milwaukee, a lot them are from Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: So it's like extended family that you have.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  As a matter of fact, it's amazing how many people from Milwaukee are here.  As a matter of fact, I just saw Karma Rodgers.  We hung out last night from Milwaukee.  And I'm going to Milwaukee to, you know, the cotillion [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. Debutante Cotillion] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For cotillion.
Story_ID: 644932
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell me about your, your children, can you talk about each of them?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There they are.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Look at me.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah I can tell about--.  Teri [Terilyn Shropshire] is the oldest.  She went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].  She's a very loving, loving, caring person.  She's a cinematographer; she got into film.  She's never been married, she's kind of the bossy one.  And she, she needs to stop and take care of herself.  We're going--like I said we're going to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] next week or tomorrow--next day or whatever day it is.  She's taking over the family--I mean she has taken it on herself to see that we're all okay.  I'm okay with that, but I want her to leave some time for Teri.  But not Teri, Teri's, Teri's gonna talk, you know, see that we're all okay.  They love her--they just honored her last week--the society--I mean she gets so many honors from people because of her sweetness and her kindness; and I can't,--you know, she's so much like my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin].  When I look at her, I see my mother.  Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.], on the other hand, is quite an illustrious attorney.  He just joined the men's Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  He lives in London [England].  He has a condo in London--his law firm is Linklaters [Linklaters LLP] in New York [New York].  He has two lovely little daughters, Bailey [Bailey Shropshire] and Emily [Emily Shropshire] who love him dearly.  He married Chris [Christina Shropshire], who is one of his classmates who is Caucasian, and they have beautiful Caucasian children.  They both are very happy in London.  The kids go to school there.  Tommy comes back and forth to New York, all the--.  You know, I'm, I'm just so proud--not only of them but how they--what they have become.  They're just wonderful, wonderful, loving, loving, giving kids--I mean no longer kids, you know, but I, I'm so blessed, I really am blessed because they don't let me want for anything.  At any time Teri will call and say, "Have you taken your medicine?" Or something like that, "Yes, Teri, I'm taking my medicine."  But they--I, I just can't say enough about them without sounding like I'm bragging because everybody loves their children and everybody has the same thoughts about them.  But I'm just, I'm just very fortunate and very blessed, and I'm very happy to be able to help other people, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 644933
Speaker 1: So let's talk because when you were, you know, when we asked--when I asked you what--your profession, you said a philanthropist.  So can you talk to me why you believe that philanthropy and giving back is so important?
Speaker 2: Well I guess because I came from nothing.  I came from a family who depended on each other where at any given time there was at least eight, you know, and there could be two of us--I could be sleeping in the bed with my brother.  You know, I, I, I came from somebody who has always wanted the best for somebody else.  I always knew that mine would come eventually, but I've never had to want for anything and I've seen so many people who have; and that's part of my mother's [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] legacy and bringing up.  It hurts me to see people--it hurts me to see things that I can do something about, you know, be it the Urban League where people are being helped.  My mother was the forerunner, they called themselves the Gay Nineties [ph.] of the Urban League.  So I was just picking up pretty much what they're doing and--that they're doing for--it's not about me, I mean there's--I'm so blessed that I, I don't know what to do unless I'm helping somebody else; and nobody really has to ask me to do anything.  I see what needs to be done and I try to do something about it.  I try to support the things that I feel is important to us that a lot of people don't.  I was very disappointed when I came to Las Vegas [Nevada] and we didn't have a place where we could all go together without going through a casino.  I would, you know, go to the schools, and, you know, see what's going on there, or if somebody needs books or whatever or why not, why not.  But I grew out of a family like this.  My mom was like that; my aunt.  We're always giving.  My [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] who was a Republican and always getting beat to death at election time, but that's what's in me.  I, I am so fortunate to have had such a wonderful life with my husband [Thomas B. Shropshire].  I promised him that I would always take care of things, and I'm living that promise.
Story_ID: 644934
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: You know I think the black community is doing as much as it can for itself.  I think the black community needs help from other people who have the wherewithal to help the black community.  When I see empty blocks over there that the Mormons have if they haven't built anything on since I've been here.  The Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada]--I mean the recreational center [Dr. William U. Pearson Community Center, Las Vegas, Nevada], I sat down with Yvonne Gates [HistoryMaker Yvonne Atkinson Gates], and we did that together, the one that's, you know, over--the big community center that they have over there now, that Yvonne Gates and I worked that through, so the kids could have a place.  Now they have a track and they have a--it's just a big beautiful community center.  Well, Yvonne Gates is on the board, county commissioners [Clark County Board of Commissioners]; we did that, to put that up for the community.  I would just like to see the black community developed into something that doesn't look like a bunch of, you know, places where the in- you know they could be meeting places, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  But I don't know Las Vegas [Nevada] is totally different, it's like this is Las Vegas and I'm waiting to see what's gonna happen to the community and where does the community begin and where does it end?  And what are our politicians doing?  Like when I saw the guy come in who took over the court that has all this new stuff downtown.  Downtown seems to be the only part of Vegas that people know.  There are beautiful homes other places.  But I still am concerned about the community that's, that we go pass, that's empty with, with, with, you know a few new buildings going up, but not a lot.  And then you go and you see all of this--I mean I don't understand how the city organizes itself and what they do for our community and, you know, I, I don't know.  I don't see a whole lot of jobs being created.  Is this, you know, it has the opportunity--I mean it has the reputation of being a gaming place and I guess when I look out here, that's what it is.  Now a lot of people have moved out of Las Vegas, out to Summerlin [Nevada], and some other places where there are lovely, lovely, lovely homes.  But when you see the crime and everything that goes on down here, it wonders, why?  I mean this, this is a--it's a different place, it really is, and it's a place that I don't think I wanna spend the rest of my life in, you know; I'd rather go back to New York [New York] or someplace, but I don't know it's, it's a tourist town.  But there, there's been a lot of improvement since I've been here, a lot.
Speaker 1: Well you've been, you've been part of that improvement.
Speaker 2: Well I think maybe I'm, I'm, I've done as much as I can to improve some of the places, but some of the other places to make them livable--I mean we shouldn't have to drive through any of the streets and just see empty lots sitting there that could be housing for people who don't have the wherewithal to even to have water.  Why are you leaving that place empty?  Why, why can't you build, build something that people are proud to go to when they say I'm going home, you know?  We don't have to have a car to go every place.  We can walk.  But just to have empty lots of land that just lays there and nothing is ever developed, while they're developing everything here and developing everything downtown.  Why aren't they developing, you know, the Westside of Las Vegas?  It hurts a lot to see just so much empty space that there could be things done with.  But it's not, you know, this is Las Vegas.
Story_ID: 644935
Speaker 1: So what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I've already done it.  My legacy was basically the Urban League, the community center [Dr. William U. Pearson Community Center, Las Vegas, Nevada] and the Smith Center [Smith Center for the Performing Arts, Las Vegas, Nevada]--that's my legacy.
Speaker 1: And what do you want people to say about [HistoryMaker] Jacqulyn Shropshire?
Speaker 2: Whatever Jacqulyn did for the community, she did it out of her heart, that's all.  I didn't expect anything in return.  I just expect--I just did it out of my heart.
Speaker 1: And since your husband--we never got a chance to interview him.  What would you consider his legacy?
Speaker 2: Tom's legacy would have been as I know Tom [Thomas B. Shropshire], would've been to try to make things better for our community.  Tom was deep into our community; and to--I think basically Tom, Tom--I don't know what to say about Tom, well Tom's legacy--I think Tom's legacy would've been whatever I wanted to do, you know, I don't know--I think Tom gave all of his legacy when he was alive, I think he did.  I think Tom knew exactly what he wanted to do when he wanted to do it and how he wanted to do it, and he did.  And I think his greatest legacy beside his family was just to look back and be proud of what he had accomplished.
Speaker 1: And can I talk about your legacy as a couple?
Speaker 2: Well Tom, you, know, the funny thing is, is that like I said I met Tom when he was traveling with Ebony Fashion Fair.  And when he sent me the ring through the mail asking me to marry him, I didn't know what to think, but Tom was one of the--he had a temper now, Tom had a temper, but he was one of the most loving, giving individuals that you'd ever want.  He was an excellent father.  You can see the results of that with his kids [Terilyn Shropshire and Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.].  He never said no to me.  Tom never--he might dance around it, but he never said no.  Tom's legacy was always been--I mean he was the first Urban Leaguer, he, he and, he and, you know, some of his friends from New York [New York] really started, you know, working with the Urban League for a long time.  But Tom was a very giving person as well.  I'm just proud of the family that he sired and made us all--the ability to think for ourselves and to be loving and giving the same as he was, that's his legacy.
Story_ID: 644936
Speaker 1: He was originally a part of the Strom Thurmond family that--I don't know if they came out of the Carolinas or what.  But I know that they somehow, I don't where, ended up in South Carolina and then a couple of them moved over to where my [maternal] grandfather [William Thurman] was born which was, I don't know exactly where grand- if they we--if he was born in Cedartown, Georgia or where, but it's right there with that Georgia and Carolina line, right there together because the Strom Thurmond [ph.] that I knew that belonged to my side was a casket builder.  He built all the caskets and things, and his name was Strom Thurmond.
Speaker 2: And that's true 'cause Strom Thurmond was a--maybe a fourth or something--I mean--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I think his name goes with the fourth.
Speaker 1: But--yeah he's a--he is, he is the one that my grandfather is--I had a picture of my grandfather.
Speaker 2: I'm hoping we can get these pictures.
Speaker 1: Yeah that--they still going--my grandfather when he died he was, you know, Strom Thurman.
Speaker 2: So they liked the black (unclear), black part of--the, they, dipped a lot.
Speaker 1: Well they all have blue eyes, and--that's where I got the blue eyes from.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: It was from my grandfather.
Story_ID: 644937
Speaker 1: And then what was Cedartown like too?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the other thing--I didn't ask you when I--
Speaker 2: Cedartown was a little stop where the train didn't even stop between Birmingham [Alabama] and Atlanta [Georgia].  What happened was it would get 'em in Kansas City [Missouri] and the porters would put me on.  And then I would sleep all the way, they would give me a pillow and fifty cents.  And I would sleep all the way, and when it got to Cedartown it would slow down, throw my bag off, and my aunts [Shropshire's maternal great aunts, Lula Thurman Freeman and Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] would have walked from the house down to the train station.  And they would just slow down long enough to get me off, and then they would pick back up and go on to Atlanta.  It wasn't really an official stop.  They just kind of slowed down.  Because of all of the porters were out of Kansas City.
Speaker 1: So what was the, the little sto- what was it like?
Speaker 2: Cedartown, Georgia?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: It was a cotton picking comp- it was cotton picking place, where people get up in the morning, go pick cotton and come back, then they can come home and that was their thing.  It only had three streets--Cedar Hill Street.  I said there were three--there were three--I know Thompson Street, Cedar Hill and two other streets, Cedar Hill Street and one other street.  There were only streets in the whole place.  Somebody did a book on it, I've got to find it--on Cedartown that, that was from Cedartown--I said I gotta find them wherever they are.  But there were only three streets and, and, and the streets were--the well to do people lived, you know, on one street, the, the school teachers and things lived on--I mean the regular people lived on one street and the school teachers lived on, on Thompson Street.  And the doctors and things lived on Marietta Street; and then other lived on Cedar Hill Street or whatever.  There were only three streets in the whole place (laughter).
Speaker 1: See, you know, I mean--but it's, it's life--it paints a different part of life--I mean that's why we wanna do these interviews 'cause you learn so much--
Speaker 2: Yes, you do.
Speaker 1: --about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about the community.
Speaker 2: They say well it's close to Marietta [Georgia], and it's between Atlanta and Birmingham; yeah, that's right.  But it's kind of north.
Story_ID: 644938
Speaker 1: That is my great-great-grandfather, William Strom Thurman [sic. maternal grandfather, William Thurman].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: He might not want to say it, but I (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my oldest brother, Thurman Wilson.  And note we have different last names.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother with her group, and she's the third person on the first row.  On the third from the left--from the right, one, two, three.  Just trying to tell you, she's right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother and my stepfather.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and their names?
Speaker 2: Goodwin, Henry Goodwin [ph.]--Bernice Goodwin [Bernice Thurman Goodwin], Henry Goodwin.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my oldest brother, Thurman Wilson.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me, [HistoryMaker] Jacqulyn Shropshire; Dorothy Vaughn [ph.], my best friend; and my daughter Terilyn [Terilyn Shropshire].
Speaker 2: Teri Shropshire.
Speaker 1: Teri Shropshire.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my aunt Eve [ph.], who is my father's [Lamar Calloway, Sr.] sister.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my stepfather.
Speaker 2: And his name again?
Speaker 1: Henry Goodwin.
Speaker 2: Goodwin, okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my aunt Gert [Shropshire's maternal great aunt, Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] and my brother Thurman Wilson.
Speaker 2: So those are the aunts that raised you?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And that's a picture of my oldest brother, Thurman Wilson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: He just died a couple of years ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, he did?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And his name again, please?
Thurman: T-H-U-R-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire], myself, Terilyn and Tom Jr. [Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And this is 1987--this picture is 1987.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture that was taken outside of the, outside of the courthouse when all of the ladies there were working in the auxiliary.  This is my mom right here.  This the recreation, at the recreation--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  On the second from the right.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's the community center [Garrison Community Center, Kansas City, Missouri].  Well, that's city hall in Kansas City.  But they all worked for the community center.
Speaker 1: That's the one that where everybody is who's around.
Speaker 2: That's the Gay Nineties [ph.].
Speaker 1: See that's my aunt Lula [Shropshire's maternal great aunt, Lula Thurman Freeman] right here.  And that's me, my mom and my brother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In the center.
Speaker 1: Oh that's my mom.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's when I came out as a debutante.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Let me see who I can find here that I know.  That's where I grew up, in the community center.  There--she's around there somewhere in one of those pictures.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So what is it a picture?
Speaker 1: That's the picture of the community center where we all grew up, what we call it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And those people are--
Speaker 1: In Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --are they neighbors, or are they (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well they were having a convention.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And they were all convention--delegates that were coming to the, to the--some kind of convention right here was welcoming delegates; and that was taken in Kansas City, Missouri--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --at one of the community centers.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So was it a union league--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --convention?
Speaker 1: What's union league?
Speaker 2: Urban--yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Urban--
Speaker 2: Urban League.
Speaker 1: Urban League.
Speaker 2: Oh, and those are my classmates when I was in high school [Lincoln High School; Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, Kansas City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And where are you?
Speaker 2: Kansas City.
Speaker 1: No, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, where am I?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) in the picture.
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So, far left.
Story_ID: 644939
Speaker 1: That's a nice picture (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, that's a great picture.  We were in New York City [New York, New York].  Aw, my first trip to New York City, boy did I think--.  Okay. That's my brother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  From the left?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's brother Snookie [Thurman Wilson], his wife, me and Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And his wife's name?
Speaker 2: Joyce [ph.].  They both passed away.
Speaker 1: That's my mom [Bernice Thurman Goodwin].  That's on a Hallmark, that's on a Hallmark card that Hallmark used her on the front of.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I have, I think I have it framed back there somewhere, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh my god, oh my god.  That's my mother, and that's her father, my grandfather and it was taken at the Urban League thing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and who's the name?
Speaker 2: I don't know who these two are, but that's my mom and my grandfather.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: William Strom Thurman [William Thurman] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that's a picture that was taken in Guam of my brother when he went there with my cousins.  They took him--well he lived over in Guam with them--he lived in Cleveland [Ohio], so I don't why he's there.
Speaker 2: Now what is this, I'm wondering?
Speaker 1: That was a group that my mother belonged to right here, some kind of society group.  And that's her and my stepfather [Henry Goodwin (ph.)], right here.
Speaker 2: That's your wedding picture, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's my wedding picture.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?
Speaker 1: Oh, my god.  What year did I get married in?  Everybody should know what year they got married in.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sixty-one [1961]?
Speaker 1: That's good enough for me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Are any of these other significant?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: That's me and my brother there, but yeah I think we were married in 19--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 2: --sixty-one [1961], yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Are these you?
Speaker 2: That's Teri [Terilyn Shropshire]; that's my daughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Teri, that's Teri, that's me and I don't know who that is.  And this is--I don't know who those folks are either.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Who's this?
Speaker 1: That's my mom.  That's my dad; and that's me and my brother.
Speaker 2: Now your dad's name is?
Speaker 1: Lamar--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --Lamar Calloway.  L-A-M-A-R.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right here, Lamar, Sr. [Lamar Calloway, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mom, and that's my aunt Gert [Shropshire's maternal great aunt, Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)] and my brother Snookie [ph.].
Speaker 2: And this is--that's my brother Junior [Lamar Calloway, Jr.].  And the rest of 'em are aunts, and, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's my brother, my mother--me and my brother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my--I don't know, I really don't know.  This is Uncle Bill [ph.], and I don't know who Uncle Bill was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: What about this?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my, that's my, my older brother Junior--I mean Snookie with Grandpa.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's Snookie right there.  That's the other brother.
Speaker 2: I was thinking (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's Granny and Junior.  She's the head of the household.  See how she came out through Haiti with the--with--she never took that off her head.
Speaker 2: Oh, she never did?
Speaker 1: No, she never take that off--I mean she'd take it off to comb and wash her hair and then she put it right back on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I don't know who these--that's my brother--my older brother Snookie.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Who's this?
Speaker 2: That was my cousin Jenny [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that's my aunt Eva [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh, we have Eva?
Speaker 2: She's beautiful.
Speaker 1: That's a picture that showed up on a--that's on a calendar when I was in kindergarten.  They came out and took that picture and said I had, you know, that I had to wipe his nose.
Speaker 2: Oh, they did?
Speaker 1: When I was kindergarten.  Yeah, said, "Blow hard," it's--what is it--thirty-four--September 1st?  I can't see the--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --thirty-four--would it be 1934?  Wasn't even born in 1934.  So I don't know, I was in kindergarten, I know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, September--yeah.  Oh, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Teri (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, this is Teri?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Teri.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is--the, the neighborhood house, like in 1903--
Story_ID: 644940
Speaker 1: The picture that's taken with--at that time was President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  We were invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for a White House dinner; and as a part of the dinner, they took pictures of us shaking hands with the president.  And Teri [Shropshire's daughter, Terilyn Shropshire] who just didn't know exactly what to do when the president bent over and, and shook her hand.  That was the--that was really a thrill of the evening for her.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Tom [Shropshire's son, Thomas B. Shropshire, Jr.], Teri, and Mom; and I think we were at Tom's mother's [Irene Shropshire] before she passed for Christmas.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And is that--?
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my stepfather [Henry Goodwin (ph.)] and my mother [Bernice Thurman Goodwin] sitting on the porch of a friend in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And who's this?
Speaker 2: That's me believe it or not.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I'm just--you said Mom, so, (unclear) confused me a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is one of the most recent pictures that Tom [Shropshire's husband, Thomas B. Shropshire] and I took since he passed.  We were at a--as a matter of fact, we were at a party, at a con-
Speaker 1: Before he passed.
Speaker 2: Before he passed.  We were at a party at a convention, and I couldn't get him to take off his name tag.
Speaker 1: And that's the entire family.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Can you name everybody from left to right?
Speaker 1: Oh, all right, from left to right is, I think his name is Kenny Shropshire [ph.]; this is his mother--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what's his mother's name?
Speaker 1: --right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What's her name?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: Kenny's mother's name, I can't think of what her name was.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) that's fine.
Speaker 1: And this is Toni, her name is Toni Shropshire [ph.]; Bruce Shropshire [ph.]; Patricia Shropshire [ph.]; Marian Shropshire [ph.]; Tom Shropshire, Jr.; Christina Shropshire; Jacquie Shropshire [HistoryMaker Jacqulyn Shropshire]; Tom Shropshire; and Teri Shropshire.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's me, Tom and I'm trying to--I can't think of her name, but I think it's Belle [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It looks like we were at a convention 'cause he has a name tag on; and it looks like it's the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Now I know that was in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Oh good.
Speaker 2: That's me and Tom and Bailey [Shropshire's granddaughter, Bailey Shropshire].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is Herb Wright, who was our best man and Teri's godfather.  They both worked, were executives at Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: That's my aunt Gert [Shropshire's maternal great aunt, Gertrude Thurman Douglas (ph.)], who's the only one had a car in town and she refused to cut off her braids.  She could sit on her hair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She was in Cedartown; you know, people in Cedartown didn't have cars.
Speaker 2: Those are our wedding pictures.  They were taken at the church in New York City.
Speaker 1: And that's Teri and Tom; our daughter and son, Tommy, Jr.
Speaker 2: And that's--I don't know if that's Teri, I think that's Tom, yeah Tom was born in Nigeria.  Now it's really interesting about this picture here.  You remember I told you when Whitney Young died?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's about the same time they were here in this living room--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --in Nigeria.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's Tom and Tom, Jr.; and that was taken in Nigeria as well.
Speaker 2: That's me and Tom--or is that Teri?  I don't know if that's Tom or Teri, probably Teri; anyway, one of the two.
Speaker 1: And that's me and my best friend in Kansas City, Missouri on bicycles, we could not have been over twelve or thirteen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Oh now that's me in Cedartown, Georgia outside of my aunt's house.  I couldn't have been over six or seven, probably just got off that train.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's Jacquie Shropshire (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's the family--
Speaker 2: And you have to go--who the family is.
Speaker 1: --for Christmas.  Teri; me; Bailey, that's his oldest daughter; Chris, his wife; that's Emily [Emily Shropshire] his youngest daughter; and that's Tom, Jr.
