Story_ID: 13211
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I am the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like you to start out by stating your name for us and spelling it.
Speaker 2: I'm Calvin Smyre. C-A-L-V-I-N, S-M-Y-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Five--May 17th, 1947.
Speaker 1: And, today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh!  March the 21st--I think it's the 21st--21st, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, 2000 and--.
Speaker 2: --2002.
Speaker 1: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 2: State Capitol--Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Can you give the address--?
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: No, it's-I think it's 224 Capitol Avenue-but we'll get it from Janet.
Speaker 2: And, I'd like to have your profession.
Speaker 1: I'm a banker, and a state legislator.
Story_ID: 13212
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: (laughs) Oh boy!  What is my favorite food?  I eat more of it than anything else, so I'd have to say--chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: And, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If you ever see a turtle sitting on a fence post, you know he didn't get there by himself.
Story_ID: 13213
Speaker 1: Mildred Bass Smyre.
Speaker 2: And if you could tell us about what you know about her background growing up.
Speaker 1: My mother was born in Cordele, Georgia.  And, left there, and was in--moved to Columbus [Georgia].  And, and tended--spent the high school, and went to Albany State University [Albany, Georgia], for a short period of time.  And, and, basically, was, was living there in Columbus, and met my father [Carter Smyre, Jr.], and, and they were married.
Speaker 2: Did she talk, at all, about her growing up?  And, and--?
Speaker 1: Very little, they, they--when they moved--when she moved from Cordele to Columbus, and basically a military town.  And, Columbus is a quiet city--it's a city where everything is, sort of, settled.  And, she grew up there, and was very active.  She was involved in a lot of social, girlish activities that she used to tell me.  And, and was very active in those sorts of events.  That's about it.
Story_ID: 13214
Speaker 1: And, your father--can you give his name?  And, and, you know--his background?
Speaker 2: My father is--name is Carter Smyre, Jr., from a military family.  His father--Carter Smyre, Sr, was in the military.  And, my father says, as soon as he was of age, he entered the military.  My grandfather served for thirty-two years, in the all-black 29th Infantry.  And my father served twenty-six years, in the military.  And served in many parts of the world, and around the country.  And, end of serving twenty-six years--retired there, in Columbus, and went into the real estate business.  And, of course, met my, my mother--right out of high school--and, they were married, there in Columbus [Georgia].  And, he was stationed at Fort Benning [Georgia] at that time.
Speaker 1: So did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Very well.
Speaker 1: Can you--did he talk much about his growing up, and, and also the, the infantry that he served in?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, of course, Carter Smyre, Sr. was a stern man.  And I spent more time with my grandfather than I did with anyone in my family--as most grandsons do, to some degree.  And, I learned a lot from him.  I learned a lot of discipline from him.  I learned what the values of life, to a large degree.  And the Army teaches discipline, and with my grandfather, who, who was a man of few words and a lot of action.  And, my--my father bore a lot of the same characteristics and traits as my grandfather.  And I just, I miss them dearly, and when he passed away.  And in early on in 1970, and he always instilled in me--education is the key.  Of course, back in those days, the educational opportunities were not there.  And he used to tell me a lot about the Army, in terms of the segregated Army.  And we had to--I'm not saying we don't have two societies now, but to a--to a much greater extent, in those days it was two societies.  Because the Army he served in was the 29th Infantry, which was all-black Army Infantry.  And at that time--and everything was segregated.  And I guess it was--well I know it had to be difficult, in those days.  And my father followed him in his footsteps, in terms of, the military.
Speaker 1: Sir, I'm just wondering, I know your grandfather, you say, was a man of few words and a lot of action.  But did he share any stories about the 29th Infantry, and, you know, why he served that long, and what attracted him to it?
Speaker 2: No, I--it, you know, I think that I don't recall the circumstances.  But, from a historical perspective, I think the Army was an avenue for vocational, and for a good living.  If you recall, the Army, at that time was a status, and it was patriotic--when patriotism was truly in.  And I would surmise that that was an outlet for him.  And I think there's a direct correlation with my father going into the service and as an enlisted man.  And then, as the trends changed, he saw an opportunity, and he retired, and then re-entered the army through the OCS--Officer Candidate School.  And became an officer of the United States Army, and was a chief warrant officer and a helicopter pilot, and--which is a significant accomplishment back in those days.  And it was a--it was a, truly a highlight of my life, but a tragedy to some degree in terms of seeing my father and grandfather serve fifty-eight years in the United States Army.  And my father retired, and wanted to teach flight school, and was denied--because he was an African American, because he was black.  He could take a helicopter apart, put it back together, and then fly it; and then, then to apply for a school in Alabama, and to be denied, because he was black--pretty traumatic.  But, you know, that was the times.  And--but society has--we've grown some, but in that--in those days, it was opportunity denied.
Speaker 1: You know what I find particularly fascinating--my father had been in the service for twenty years, but, you know, all--I've--a lot of people, you know, we--I've interviewed, talked about, you know, coming south for training and it being so miserable.  And so, I just find this, you know, really sort of fascinating, that they were in so long.  You know, and I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, both of them--so, that's--.
Speaker 2: And you know, there's a disconnect in the service.  I was listening to, to the radio this morning, to 'Tom Joyner Show', and, and interesting enough, on tomorrow, there will be, in, in Fort Seale, Oklahoma--Lawton, Oklahoma--that's where I attended junior high school.  So, I had a little flashback there.  And that's the way Army life is--you're twenty-four months in, and twenty-four months out.  And, my father was stationed there at Fort Seale, which is the--a missile base there.  And he was a pilot there, and I attended Lawton Junior High School there.  And just thinking about it, it was that way everywhere.  The longest period of time I stayed anywhere was in Germany.  What we were there--my father was there five years, but we were there for four years.  And other than Columbus, that's the longest stay.  Because everywhere else--all of the other military bases that we--he was assigned to, we were basically two years in, and two years out, and it was that way around the country.
Speaker 1: That's--now, why do people, you know, who are military and craft--for, you know, are, you know--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: They talk about at--you know, getting used to it, or it's natural.  But, you know, also, having to pull up.  You know, when they've just--
Speaker 2: It's tough.
Speaker 1: --formed relationships, that it, it's really, you know, sort of, tough.
Story_ID: 13215
Speaker 1: Was your earliest memory in Columbus, Georgia, or were you not born--?
Speaker 2: I was born in Columbus, at Fort Benning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long were you there?
Speaker 2: I can recall, of course, being born in Fort Benning, attending elementary school there; going to Claflin Elementary [School, Columbus, Georgia].  Then leaving, going to Fort Hood, Texas, and staying there for a couple of years.  And then coming back, and then going back to elementary school, about--for a couple of years, at Fort--in Columbus.  And then exiting again, going to junior high school [Lawton Junior High School, Lawton, Oklahoma], in Fort Seale, Oklahoma.  And then coming back, and then--going one year in Columbus, to Spencer High School [Columbus, Georgia].  And then leaving my--after my freshman year, going to Germany, where I finished high school.  And that's a quick kind of glimpse of, of K through 12.  And the--and then, returning after graduation, and then matriculating on to Fort Valley State University [Fort Valley, Georgia], so.
Speaker 1: But I want to just, if you could share, with us, your earliest memory, though.
Speaker 2: Of school?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Claflin Elementary--first grade--king and queen of heart, I was the--I remember, I was the king of hearts, and Atlea Cannon (ph.) was the queen of heart.  And, I have a picture with us, with our crowns on, so to speak--somewhere in here, in our family's library.  And then I was very involved, very active, very hyper--very active. Let me leave it at that description.  And I loved to shoot marbles.  I think I had every marble ever invented.  And walked to school every day; lived maybe a half of a mile--we lived next to a cemetery--Linwood Cemetery [Columbus, Georgia].  And I used to walk through it.  It was a short cut.  We cut a path through it.  And, we walked to school, to Claflin, and it was a, of course, segregated school.  One of the only segregated schools I had, because the other schools were in military schools, and they were integrated at that time.  And walking to school, you--with your sister, and your--you know, your neighbors.  And, and we lived in a area of Columbus called Uptown Columbus.  And, it was a apartment, and houses--it was mixtured--a mixture of dwellings and--in Columbus, at that time.  And near a hospital, and, of course, near the railroad tracks, you know.  The railroad tracks always ran through the black community.  And this was no different, and my house--my apartment was a hundred yards from the railroad track.  And, of course this may sound, you know, simplistic, but kids play on--play on railroad ties; they play on--they balance on the iron part--we balanced, we'd walk it; we'd pick up the rocks, and we'd throw them--I mean, it was just--.  And, we had--it was our transportation route. You go to the store, you'd go up the railroad tracks, you walked down to 18th Street, you turned left, you're there.  So you spent a lot of time in the backyard.  You spent a lot of time with our games--inventive, you know. There was no playground, you know, that sort of thing.  And, elementary school was, was, was--that was basically it.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, Clafin is spelled--is it C-A-F--?
Speaker 2: C-L-A-F-I-N [sic].
Story_ID: 13216
Speaker 1: Now, also, I want to get--understand your siblings, and your birth order. Where do you fit?  Can you give their names, and--
Speaker 2: I have one sister.  I'm the oldest, I'm the oldest, and I have one sister--Gwendolyn Smyre Foster.  We are eleven months apart, we are both May babies--I'm May 17th, she's May 23rd, so it was not quite--it was almost a--well, it was a year between us.  And, that's it, just the two of us.
Speaker 1: So, you were the older child.  Was there a lot expected of you?  Did you always feel a sense of responsibility?
Speaker 2: Yes, and my father [Carter Smyre, Jr.] instilled in me the responsibility aspect in my life.  He always said that you bore responsibility, you are--you know, he always hinted to the macho--the man in charge, you know, "When I'm not here, you're in charge," you know.  And I think that's a lot of the military in him.  And my father was a very disciplined person.  He only--I only got one spanking as a kid.  He--that's the only time my father has ever whipped me.  And, mom [Mildred Bass Smyre]--every other day, I mean, not really, but--.  But my father was another man of few words--very few, very few words.
Speaker 1: Fewer, than your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Fewer!  Yes.  He was--he said, "Move."  You move.  He said, "Left."  You go left.  He was just--that was it.
Speaker 1: So was your mother, the more nurturing, or--what would--what role did your mother play within the family?
Speaker 2: My mother is--was a wonderful person.  She passed away this past June [2001].  But, she was a wonderful person.  Just to give you enough rope, just to allow you to grow, but knew how to reel you in.  And she was a very religious woman.  She was very much a very principled lady.  She has come in and gotten me from various places and she ran a pretty strict house.  And we studied, and we did this, and we did that.  The--and I think there's a lot of flexibility involved, because, I mean, you're moving so much.  And if there's anything--I used to tell her that, you know, you miss friends.  You get to know someone--I get to know you, and as--practically, it's over.  And you're able to keep up a little while.  So my mother was the family connection.  She was the one that kept up with everyone for a period of time.  She was our connectivity with the various other components of the family, and the external family.  And thank god for her, because if it were not for that, we wouldn't have any connection so to speak.  And so, she was the one that would do that, and she was the--kind of the guardian angel of the family; she watched over us.  She made sure that we were taken care of, and my--of course, my father was the other side of the equation.  He was the--he was the discipline side.
Story_ID: 13217
Speaker 1: Now sir, let's take yourself just, you know, back, still, to your childhood.  And I'm wondering what sights, sounds, or smells remind you?  And I guess, maybe, of Columbus [Georgia], or remind you of growing up--it doesn't have to be Columbus.  But, you know, just any smells, any sounds, any sights.  You mentioned the railroad track, that that was, you know, a part of--.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, sound has to be a train whistle.  I mean, I heard them all the time.  And at one time, I thought I was gonna be a train con--I mean a--work on the train--a train conductor.  And one of my best friends, we used to talk about it, walking the tracks.  And he did go into--he was a--I forget the title--but he was a--I think he called a switchman.  He worked--he went to work for the Central of Georgia Railroad, which was a main railroad; there was Southern Railway, Norfolk [Southern Railway], and another one that came to Columbus a lot.  And we used to visit the connection yard, where all the trains come in, and they go out all over the country--we were not far from that.  In fact, it was a half a mile from the elementary school--the train depot.  And we used to go to the train depot, and it was one of the few times in my life that I experienced the race question.  And one of the few times, in my life, in fact, the first time I saw a "colored" sign was in the Columbus Depot.  You know, as a kid, walking in, and wanting to go to the bathroom--and that was the first time--at that depot.  And so from a sound--you know, perspective, you know, you hear that, and then, Columbus has a tradition that the--there's a--a huge horn at a mill downtown.  Columbus was a textile town, all of the jobs in those days were--were connected to the textile industry.  We were one of the largest textile locations in America, because of the [Chattahoochee] River, and the transportation of cotton.  And Columbus was a textile--in fact, I worked at a textile mill there in Columbus.  So that sound at twelve o'clock, every day, everybody in Columbus knows when twelve o'clock comes.  Because there's a huge whistle that goes off, and I grew up with that.  And other than that, those are the only two sounds that--.  Smell--I can--you know, I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: When you saw the "colored" sign, for the first time, did you know that you were "colored"?
Speaker 2: I asked that question, that--I'm glad you asked that.  And, I don't think I asked my parents, I think, I asked my grandfather [Carter Smyre, Sr.].  And then, I think, that's the first time he ever--he told me about the Army, and that he was in the Army, that--he experienced that every day that he was, you know, in an all-black Army.  Well, at that time, it was colored.  And that's the most I remember from it, you know.  But you know, when you're in elementary school, I didn't, I didn't get the connect until a little bit later.  But I knew it was, it was not good.  Yeah, they told me that it was not good.  But that's basically it.
Story_ID: 13218
Speaker 1: You stayed in Columbus [Georgia] to what age?
Speaker 2: Born there, attended elementary school there, I think, I left around the second, I think it's the second or the third, then--then went to Fort Hood--
Speaker 1: And, Fort Hood was in--?
Speaker 2: Texas.
Speaker 1: Texas, okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember being in the--let's see, third or fourth grade--riding that third and fourth; then coming back to Columbus, and then, I think, the fifth and sixth, there at another school--Cusseta Road Elementary School [Columbus, Georgia], because that was 1955.  Because, we moved--my grandfather [Carter Smyre, Sr.]--there was a subdivision in Columbus called Washington Heights.  And it was the first major black subdivision--nice homes, out in the county, off the bus line, out of, you know, way out.  And they moved out there.  It was the first status community in Columbus.  And he moved there.  And a year later in '55 [1955]--I think my grandfather was the third family, they told me--to move into this subdivision.  And then, up on a nice hill.  And then, in '55 [1955], we moved out there.  And when we moved out there, I transferred to Cusseta Road Elementary School-that was a school out--the county had do--had built a school out there, for the outside of the county.  And, we walked there, which was about a mile, to that school.  And I know I attended there, I think, two years--the fifth and sixth grade.  And then, I went to junior high school at Marshall Junior High School [Columbus, Georgia], which is--it was so far, we road the bus to school.  And then, we left--I only went to Marshall one year.  And then, when we left there, going to Oklahoma, and I went to school there, I think, one or two years.
Speaker 1: You know, I want to ask you--in Texas, do you have any memories of that experience there?  Or going there, and was it much different?  Or do you remember it being much different from--?
Speaker 2: No, it was much different--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--and, I don't remember that much.  I--all I remember is a lot of armadillos, and low--you know, scorpions, and a lot of barren land. Texas was not one of my favorite places.  And I was ready to get out of both places--Oklahoma and Texas.
Speaker 1: Both, both places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, when you--do--are any teachers having any influence on you, between Columbus, or Texas, or, you know, Oklahoma? Anyone that stands out?
Speaker 2: That's the difficult part that I have wrestled with over the years as a Columbus-born--reared individual.  Because you then get that--I hear people talking about the influence that folk have had on their lives.  And mine was interrupted so many times.  But there were a few.  I remember my math teacher, Ms. McCoy, at school and she got me into the number game.  She got me into math, and the fascination of numbers, and she is one of the first people that inspired me to want to be a CPA [certified public accountant].  And I kind of wanted to go to school to be a math teacher, or a CPA--I became very fascinated with numbers.  And I can say she had an influence on my life, because I ended up being a banker.  And I knew that I was going to be in the financial field somewhere--I didn't know whether it would be accounting, I didn't know whether I would be teaching others, in the field.  She inspired me in terms of numbers.  So I would--I would say, she had more--she had a lot of influence on me in my mid-year life--that was around the ninth grade.  And in elementary school, there's a lady that was just a darling to me.  And you know, it was Miss Watzinger, who was a teacher at Claflin [Elementary School, Columbus, Georgia].  And she inspired me.  She was one of the ones that made me want to come to school.  I mean, you know, you have that teacher that--they just know how to handle children. They just know how to handle you.  And she was one of those.  And, and so, those are two that really, you know, just stand out.  Although I didn't have the privilege of really growing within their--you know, their myth--so to speak.  But, you know when somebody's touched you.  And both of them touched me, and in a very, very positive way.
Story_ID: 13219
Speaker 1: I was in military bases, and what you, you, you're insulated. You don't--.
Speaker 2: Right, I understand.
Speaker 1: You just don't, you don't get the same feel.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Although you know, it's what?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's there!
Speaker 2: It's there, right, right.  Right.  But it's different.
Speaker 1: But it's different, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And then, I was in Germany--.
Speaker 2: Which is totally different, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: I was in Germany from '61 [1961] through '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Oh, you missed it.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, that was--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, when I came back, in '66 [1966]--.
Speaker 2: Well there're vestiges that might--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But, you know.
Speaker 2: But, you missed it, in the South--see that's the whole--that whole point.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's the whole point.  That's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, so, when you--so when you left [Lawton] Oklahoma, you came back to--did you leave Oklahoma and come back--?
Speaker 1: Back to Columbus [Georgia]--everything was always back, and then, back out.  You know, how you do--they--Columbus was his base.  And so the way they--the--it appears, the way they operate, they send you out, then they--you report back to your base, and then you wait for your next order.  And I don't think that that happens anymore, but it was a revolving door. You come back home, and you wait for your next orders.  Because I can remember getting back from Germany in 1965, after graduating from school--from high school there.  He [Carter Smyre, Jr.] would always tell me, "Well, we don't know where we're going next.  I'm waiting to get my orders."  And then he went and got his orders, and his orders were, to either retire, or go to Vietnam.  And that's when my mother [Mildred Bass Smyre] stepped in, said, "It's over."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: "The military is over.  I mean, you've gone to Korea, Germany, every where, and, I mean, we just, it's, it's time to just see a little, little home."  And so, she put her foot down, and he retired.
Speaker 2: Well, that's good, then.  'Cause Vietnam--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mom--.
Speaker 2: --may have done--.
Speaker 1: --oh yeah!  Mom, Mom stepped in.  And, you know, and it's, it's always, you know, you look back, and I mean, he kind of wanted to go.  Because at that time, helicopter pilots were the thing, because--but they would shoot helicopters down like flies.  I mean it was during that period of time.  So--but he retired, and then went into the real estate business.
Speaker 2: Now, you--okay, I just want to track again.  So, you were at--you know, you went back to Columbus.  Then, is that when you go, and leave to go to Germany-after the, you know, after Oklahoma--?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Come from Oklahoma, I was in the, in the eighth--finished the eighth grade in Oklahoma.  Came back to Columbus, went one year of high school, to Spencer High School--it's a black high school, there.
Speaker 2: And that's where your father had gone--your father--
Speaker 1: My--my mother, yeah--
Speaker 2: --mother, your mother had gone there--
Speaker 1: --Mother, Mother had gone there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, then spent one year at Spencer, and I left Spencer, and then went to Germany.
Speaker 2: You know, I just--one question, before I ask about the Germany experience.  As a young person, then, are you sort of living inside yourself?  Are you--you know, because, you know, you're not poor--you know, you have your sister [Gwendolyn Smyre Foster].  Are your sister and you real close?
Speaker 1: We're fairly close.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But, you are--I mean, you had--being--you know, pulling up roots--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and things like that.
Story_ID: 13220
Speaker 1: So, I'm wondering what the young--you know, what the young Calvin is like.  Is he introspective, you know?  But, you said you were pretty active, you know.  And, you--.
Speaker 2: When I say active, I, I think you hit--you might have hit the, hit the nail on the head.  I, you know, you have a inner self.  And you wrestle with that, you know, there's that--always that second thought, or, you know, you talking to yourself, or you're trying to be two people because you have missed so much-so to speak.  And, so, there is that inner, that inner-you.  But when I say in elementary school I was active, iit was from a--just going all out a lot.  Just, you know, because there were, there were no scheduled, no structured activities.  You made your own recreation schedule.  I mean, it was not like today's activities, where you've got everything from tee-ball, to soccer, to skating, to--you know, whatever the case may be.  With me, I mean, you almost lived for Saturday morning.  And you get your, you know, you get your, your bottle top, and you know, from your soda pop.  And you get that dime, and you're heading to where?  To the Liberty Theater [Columbus, Georgia], to, you know--and you're trying to get there before the line gets too long.  Because it only'll serve what?  You know, four hundred people, you know.  So, and when you have a black theater in one town, one city, so your scheduled day is, I mean, it's not a lot of fun, when you're looking to go to the barbershop.  I mean, that's an activity, and I just couldn't wait to get a haircut.  I mean, because I knew my grandfather [Carter Smyre, Sr.] was gonna be picking me up.  We were gonna be in that 1954 Buick Special that he had, and--which was a big-time car in those days.  And everybody--when we got out, everybody looks at it, like it was, you know, like it was a Lamborghini, or a Mercedes Benz, or something, you know.  And that's my memory of that.  And so, as a kid, getting out of that car with your grandfather, you have that glow about you.  You have that success about you.  And that's why I go back to the point that in those days, the Army was a very notable, very noble profession.  It was a--in somewhat, my grandfather was not, but my mother [Mildred Bass Smyre] and father [Carter Smyre, Jr.] were in the sort of social elite.  They would go to the social clubs, they were a part of the bridge club.  They were--they did these kind of things where, you know, we had sitters to come and sit with us while they went out on that social scene.  I mean, you know--The Domino, you know, which--it was a private club that they had there, and named after Fats Domino.  And so, you kind of, you know--and I'm kind of--some of my best times are spent when I'm just with, it's just me.  And so, I think you might have had a point.  There's that inner part of me that's just kind of lives within me.  And then, when I'm alone, then the two of us kind of get together.
Speaker 1: And what did--was there anything you dreamed about, or anything, at that point in time?  You know, earlier it was, I want to be a conductor, sort of, you know.  And--but was there, was there anything that you, sort of, thought, or you know, anyone you admired, or you know, any, you know, anything where your mind would take you.  You know, I want to do this, or I want to--.
Speaker 2: Growing up, the only thing I loved was sports.  I mean, I had everything.  I mean I loved sports.  I loved trains.  I mean I kind of envisioned a big house one day with a train room.  You know, where you build these trains, and you know, have one of these huge tables, and--.  So, for a while there, I was fascinated with trains.  Because, I--that's what I knew, I lived a hundred yards from a train track.  I saw these trains, then when I, kind of--when, you know, go to a store, and you just dream, for getting a train set.  And I finally got one, and in, and, you know, you add to it, you add to it, and you're living in an apartment.  You know, it's just so much you can do for--with a train, when you, when you have a, you know--three rooms downstairs and then a stairway to take you upstairs, with three rooms, two rooms, and a bathroom--it's not much space for a train.  So I had to, I had to take it down, and put it up, you know.  And--but I played, I played a lot of sports, and I always dreamed of being a-everybody does--a football player.  And I dreamed of it all the time.  I loved sports.  I always used to joke with my father about being a professional sports player.  And, he always, "Yeah," you know.  So--and that carried me on.  I mean I played everything--football, baseball, basketball, soccer.
Speaker 1: Did you become really active with those--soccer--see that's the Germany coming in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --right, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had me, and then, you said, "soccer," I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I came back, and--
Speaker 1: I mean, if you were this age, then--.
Speaker 2: When I came back from Germany, and tried to find a, a soccer team, people looked at me like I was some--
Speaker 1: Martian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's something wrong with him, you know, so--.
Speaker 1: I mean it's just not--you know, now it's acceptable--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you gave yourself away when you said--.
Speaker 2: Back in those days, a black man talking about soccer, they kind of said, you know, "He's in a different world".
Story_ID: 13221
Speaker 1: So, now, you go to Germany, and what's this experience like?  'Cause it's really your first time-the first assignment out of the country.
Speaker 2: --out of the country.
Speaker 1: Right.  And this is in what year, sir? At--?
Speaker 2: 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where were--where was your--where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Hanau, Germany--Hanau.
Speaker 1: Where is that?
Speaker 2: It's not too far from Frankfurt [am Main, Germany].  It's about--it's a bus ride, but it's about a thirty, forty minute bus ride.  I have to tell you this.  Going to Germany, the even thought of it, was absolutely so frightening.  I mean I had never been out of the country.  We went over on--and I think--well, I know it was not my--it might have been my first plane ride--I'm not--I, I can't recall.  But I'm thinking it was.  Because everywhere else we went, we drove--to all of the other destinations, because they were [Lawton] Oklahoma and [Fort Hood] Texas.  And in fact, I remember driving, because Texas is so big.  We didn't realize how huge it was, 'cause we spent a day or so driving in Texas, and I said, "When are we gonna ever get out of Texas?"  And, that's, that's when I knew that Texas was a big state as a kid.  So Germany was, absolutely, an experience.  I lived on a base [U.S. Army Garrison Hessen] there.  And, went to a high school [Frankfurt American High School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany], and--in a huge city--Frankfurt, Germany.  It was absolutely a cultural shock for me.  Because, you know, I never seen a teenager take a drink of a beer.  And go to a pub, and the culture was so different, I had never seen a black man and a white woman together.  And when I first saw that, I was floored.  And it was an integrated school.  And, of course, African Americans were a very small minority.  So it was a, it was a cultural shock for me.  It was having been, having basically lived in a segregated South--Alabama, Texas, Oklahoma, Georgia.  And then going to, let's say Frankfurt, Germany, going to Europe is a transition.  And it's something you grow into, your classmates, your playmates, everything around you is white--so it was a big adjustment for me.
Speaker 1: Now, it was probably a big adjustment for both you and your parents--
Speaker 2: I think, for them, as well.
Speaker 1: --as well.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Because, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --everyone was.  Were there, were there discussions around?  Because everyone's experiencing--I mean I'm just thinking, you know, your mother [Mildred Bass Smyre], if not your father [Carter Smyre, Jr.], you know.  But, your mother is used to southern sort of, genteel--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: --society.  Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: She used to be in with the sisters.
Speaker 1: So here she is--no, I'm just saying, so, what was the, the whole--because, you know, children are experiencing what the parents are experiencing at the same time too.  And I'm--.
Speaker 2: My mother never went anywhere.  I mean every day, I got home, she was there.  And, my father started saying, "We need--", you know, it took a while.  But I can remember the first, it had to be months, getting home.  In those days, I'm sort of coming out.  But then, I think I became more--I went--I became more of an introvert, I went back in.  I went home every day after school.  Every day.  And she was there every day I got home.  And until, you know, after a while, you're in this environment.  It's not like you're gonna be here six months, or a year, you're going to be here for four years.  So you might as well get to it.  And, you know, I don't know exactly what I told myself, but eventually, it's like anything else--you evolve.  I mean, you know, you're, you're in a, you're in a, you're in a different environment--all your neighbors are white.  I mean, you're just in a different environment.  And I can remember walking to my friend's house, which is about a half a mile--my closest black friend.  I mean, there was--I mean, seriously, there was--.  So, it--and, and, and the only way you knew somebody black, you had to go somewhere and just meet them.  And because, Frankfurt High School was a collection of all of the cities around that area--because it was only one high school.  There were several, you know, elementary and junior high schools, but, you know how the Army is--the older you get, the more sparse it is.  Because when you're--most of the time, when you're getting ready to get in high school and college, the parents are retired.  But junior high school and down, mostly elementary, that's when people are in, in the active service.  So that was a transformation for me.  That was a period of--there was a period of difficulty for us.  In fact, Germany is one of the few times I remember family dinners.  I can't, I can't remember growing up, eating with my father.  I can't--it, it--and that's strange to say, but, he was gone so much.  And, I can't, I'm--I remember more TV trays than I do kitchen tables.  So Germany, from that perspective, was good.  Because for the first time, I got a chance to sit at a table--and my mother and father were at the table, and my sister [Gwendolyn Smyre Foster], and that's, that--and I know we had other times.  But that--from a visual, and from a, you know, the older you get, the more difficult it is to recollect, and have thoughts of where you were and what happened.  But, I--as I reflect back, the days in Germany were the days--especially those first six months or so, where, where we were--as a family-were kind of--other than my daddy, because he had lived this life, all his life.  But he was in the Army, and we were a what? A Army family.  And at that time, he was internal and we were external--until we got to Germany.  And then we were all, were internal.  And that made the difference.
Story_ID: 13222
Speaker 1: Now, do you--so, who--how did you get integrated within the high school [Frankfurt American High School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany]?  Cause, I mean, white people are--this is a whole new--you know.
Speaker 2: Tough.
Speaker 1: I mean they're, they're new, you, I mean you have your ideas, your--I mean about what even white people--you only know them, and--as a separate thing.  It's not that you don't see them in the South, but it's sort of, separate.  And, I'm just wondering, did you, you, you got involved in sports?
Speaker 2: Sports was my answer.  That, and that, that was the answer.  And he says, "Why don't you do sports?"  I said, "Well, I mean you--you--sports is in Frankfurt, and I'm in Hanau [Germany], which is about, like I said, forty to fifty minute drive, every day, back and forth.  So therefore, I'm, I'm--if I want to do sports, I've got a--I've got--we got to make provisions for me to do sports, I mean.  And he said, "Well, why don't you do the intramural?"  And so, the Post had, what they called intramural sports--that they had sports teams, they called the youth activity league.  And, you know, "Do that first, and then, we'll make arrangements afterwards, you know, to, to get you to Frankfurt."  So, for a while, I wrestled with that.  Because I didn't know whether I wanted to play.  You know, Post Football--I mean in the military--it was sort of like, you know, playground.  It was not the real deal.  And so, I did it.  I played football, I played basketball, and, and I played soccer on Post, and--for a year, and got to know everybody, because sports was that entire.  And then, I--he bought me a camera.  And I started photography.  I picked up photography.  They built me a studio.  And the special services there built a studio for some of us who wanted to do that.  And we had our own darkroom.  And, he bought me a rolodex-type, reflective flip-over camera. When, you know, you look down into, you know, one of those dual-reflections.  And then, I think I got my first Pentax a little bit later.  But I got so heavy into photography.  I used to lay on the ground, and take--I mean ant beds, grasshoppers, I mean whatever.  I mean I used to take pictures at night.  I became so in--I just became so fascinated with photography.  And then my whole life changed.  I wanted to go in the photography business, and open a studio.  And when I got back--back--but--back overseas.  So between sports and photography, I started meeting a lot of people.  I would take your picture.  I would catch you in an unusual situation, maybe.  And I would, I would go to the darkroom, and get a photo of you, and then send it to you.  So people started, you know, that's how I met people.  And so I started taking pictures of people, they started calling me.  So, I was--not running a business, but I was doing it as a hobby.  And, between photography and sports, I mean I became a, you know--Carter [Smyre, Jr.] and Mildred [Bass Smyre]'s son. I mean we became--.  And so, we kind of--after that, it became a flow, and I never knew I wasn't in Georgia.  I mean I just, I just got out there.  And, eventually, the next year he got me in the transportation I needed.  And I played sports at Frankfurt.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go to high school in Frankfurt?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you ended up--?
Speaker 2: But I didn't have a way to--when we first got there, there was no provision for me to go to school on the bus. Stay there, practice, whatever, and get home, at night.  So--.
Speaker 1: So, you got a car?
Speaker 2: Well, they found a way that they, they, they provided transportation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so were you going to school off camp--off base?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--.
Speaker 2: This school is--I lived in Hanau, a place called Sportsville, which is--it's not on--it's a, it's a m--it's attached to the military base, but it's, it's a--what they call Sports Concern. It's a, it's a military housing, right there at the military post.  The school, Frankfurt, is a, is about--like I said, there's a school bus.  It's a, it's about a--I can recall riding the bus forty to fifty minutes, or an hour, every morning and back.  So Frankfurt was a collection of communities from around Germany.  There were only four high schools, I think--four American high schools, in Germany--Munich [American High School], Kaiserslautern [American High School], Heidelberg [American High School], and Frankfurt.  Because I remember when I finally went to Frankfurt and made the team, my first trip to Munich--you know.  And when you know you have to drive four or five hours to a football game, you know you're in Europe--you're in Germany.  I mean you know, and you got to go to Kaiserslautern, and you got to go to Heidelberg--I mean, these are long ways away.  And so the teams that we had, you know, a game was a big deal.  But, eventually, I went out, and made the team, and played basketball, football, and soccer--I loved soccer.  I made the soccer team, and played soccer, as well.
Story_ID: 13223
Speaker 1: So this was an American school?
Speaker 2: [Frankfurt] American High School [Frankfurt am Main, Germany].
Speaker 1: So were there people from all over the world at that school?
Speaker 2: All over the world.  All over--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a one--that's a really, sort of, enriching experience, right there.
Speaker 2: Very much so.  And the culture there is different.  The school, the environment, everything was first-class facilities.  And that was new to me--being in Columbus, Georgia.  I mean it, it was just--the facilities--because everything was first-class.  In fact, I remember my quarterback, father was the commanding general.  And he went on to become Chief of the Joint Staff--Creighton Abrams--ultimately he was a four star General in the United States Army.  And, he was on the Joint Chiefs of Staff--he was the commanding General, at Fort Benning--I mean at Frankfurt, in Germany, when I was there.  His son was our quarterback, and I remember, his son leaving, and going to either Arkansas or Arizona--one of the universities, one of them.  And I kept up with him for just a--you know, again, you do it for a little while, and then, I--for some reason, Julieanna, something happens.  I don't know, whether or not it's--if we had the present age day, where I could get out my Blackberry, or my e-mail, and, it--it's so much difficult.  But when you have to get a stamp, an envelope, and a piece of paper, and a letter--it just, it just evolved that you what?  You stopped connection, and so--but it was, it was a fascinating experience.
Speaker 1: And did you--how about--how were you prepared academically?  Were you a decent enough--did you find that the, that the range--'cause those schools, over there are pretty--they're good schools, those over there, I think--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: So were you prepared?  Was it a leap?  Or were you in pretty good shape?  Or was that--or were you, really focused more on sports?
Speaker 2: Too focused on sports--and, too, too focused.  I think I got a good education.  I could have done better.  I realize it.  I recognized my difficulties when I got there.  Because I was, I was coming--and don't get me wrong, I don't want to class anything as substandard, or inadequate.  But this was a step up.  And so it required more preparation.  It required more attend to it--attentiveness.  It required a more of an in-depth studying, and so forth, and so on.  And my mother [Mildred Bass Smyre] used to get on me all the time.  You know, she, you know, she used to scold me, "You, you know, you've gone from coming home to never being at home."  I mean, and so, for a while, there, that was---it was--it got out of hand a little bit.  Because you get into sports, and then you get into other activities.  And then, you're away from home--and, all the time.  And I used to be home on the bus, at four or five, and then, I'm at home.  All right, now, I've got football practice after school.  And that's two hours, or whatever the case may be.  Now I'm getting off of this transport bus--which is a smaller vehicle--and then, you know, where do we go?  And what do we do?  Well, let's go, let's go on the base, let's go to the teen club, let's go to the pub, let's--.  And so, when I got home every night, it was ten or eleven, and then, where is the studying?  When are you going to study, or what, you know?  But I was not a bad student.  I did study, and I did make good grades--my sister [Gwendolyn Smyre Foster] was a lot better.  She was the brain in the family.  She was almost a 4.0 [grade point average] person.  So I won't say that I loaned a lot of minds to her.
Story_ID: 13224
Speaker 1: So, really the sports brought you out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, it made you very, very popular [while living in Hanau, Germany, and attending high school at Frankfurt American High School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what did--how do you think you changed, in ways, you know, that were significant, during this whole four-year period, then?
Speaker 2: Well, sports, sports always draws you to a team concept.  Sports teaches you that in order for you to achieve, then you must have some, sort of, working relationship with those that are connected to you.  And, that--the value of the chain, is almost the weakest link. In other words, you've, you have got to be able to exercise the god-given talent that you have.  But at the same time, you, you're not going to be able to display your talent--it's not going to be rewarded, unless you work with the other members of the team.  So, I think it teaches you something, in that respect, as it relates to your own individual wants, and your own individual needs.  So with that concept, I think, it taught me how to work with others, and how to be able to depend on others, in--as it relates to the various team sports that I was involved in.  So I think, that, that's one thing that I learned from that, that experience.
Speaker 1: Now it was also, probably, pretty freeing in some respects.  Because here you are, a young black man, who were able to utilize your talent.  You know, sort of unfettered.  But I'm wondering, did you have any racist experience in Germany?
Speaker 2: I can't--I can't remember.  I can't recall an outright situation.  I can--I just cannot think of an incident, that I could, that I could tell you about.  And, I know it's there, and I--and I know it happened.  But, I just cannot, for the life of me, recollect an incident that, that was, that was directly affected me, that was a racist incident.  I'm sorry, I just, I just can't do it.  I--although, I know that our experience was, was a revelation to me.  In other words, I was--I was treated with respect. I had a lot of white friends--I lived in that, in that fishbowl, for those four years.  But for the life of me, I just cannot recall.  And--which makes me understand that, if it was, it was minor.  I would have remembered something that would have been extraordinary.
Speaker 1: And were there many discussions about race, around the--you know, at, at home?
Speaker 2: Very little.
Speaker 1: Very little.
Speaker 2: Very little.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother [Mildred Bass Smyre] get out?  Did she start experiencing?
Speaker 2: Finally, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did get out, and, realized that there was some connectivity there, for her, as well.  And really found, found out that the things that white folks like, black like.  And, you know, whites play bridge and pinochle just like we play bridge or pinochle, or, or bid whist, or whatever--so, and bingo.  You know, military posts are known for their bingo games.  And my mother would run me off this program, if she heard me talk about it.  But she was an avid bingo player.  And so--and I forgot, it was Tuesday or Thursdays, and, and Saturday--it was two days a week--that became her thing--bingo.  And she never worked.  So she was a housewife.  And when I tell people that they--I get this, you know, funny look.  I mean, because of the fact that it's, in--during that era, the word housewife did not exist in, in black families.  But my mother--I mean, she might have had odds and ends job, but she never had a job--where she worked ten or twelve, fifteen years, and got retirement.  She worked at various places, where my father [Carter Smyre, Jr.] had some sort of relationship with that, with the individual.  And so based on that, she slowly got out, and she slowly started to meeting people, and she started to doing things.  And, and then, of course, they came to my sports activities--so, that was another outlet for the family.  And that was about it.
Speaker 1: Did you win any championships, while you--during your four years, when you were--?
Speaker 2: We, we never won.  The way it's--the make-up, over there, is--there's no league play.  There's no conferences there, yeah.  So, you know, you--the joy is, is the event.  But now, on the various military posts, they did have the accolades, the trophies, the banquets, the things of--that you experience, that is a reflection of, of what you accomplished, during that particular sporting season.  But at the high school--because of the fact, that it was a--in--it, it was a campus.  See, we had--it's the first high school, I've ever known, to have dormitories--see, we had dorms.  Because if you lived four or five hours away, you could--you know, you went home on the weekends.  So therefore, we had dormitories for various students.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn to appreciate about German culture and society?  Do you--?
Speaker 2: I would say the German society it appears to be more open.  It, it appears to be more--let me put this the right way it--freer.  It appears--when I used to walk the German streets, it seemed to be so, so neighborly, neighborly.  And, it seemed to be more community--neighborhoods, communities.  And I think that I felt the small-town atmosphere.  Because, I did not live in a very large metropolitan area.  When I went to New York, to fly to Germany, I was just, you know, that first time seeing New York.  It just, absolutely just, I couldn't believe my eyes.  I know that sounds, kind of, country.  But--and then, when I--when we were--got to Germany, it was going from this sea of financial, global--to a small town country, where it's very peaceful; very--it's a lot of tranquility--just very peaceful; just, just, no hustle and bustle.  And so, it's, to me, it's, kind of open.  And then when you--the flip side of it, is when you do go to the city, and, the--Frankfurt would be the city, so to speak.  Then you--then this other side of the coin, and, you know, I don't know whether you know it, or not.  But Germany, and the autobahns--that they--I don't even think they have speed limits.  And it's amazing how they have this, and there are very few accidents.  And I don't know about now, but I know about then, that when we first got on the autobahn, I thought we were gonna get run over.  But it's, it's a new--new, new year--a unique situation.  And basically, there was a lot of cultures there, and it was very open.  I, you know, I was, I was surprised to see young people drinking.  I mean, I was just surprised.  If I had had a drink, when I was, you know, if I had been back Stateside, I--my father would have probably just chewed me out.  But over there, beer at the table, or wine at the table--it's, it's just a part of the culture, so.
Story_ID: 13225
Speaker 1: Now, it--do you graduate high school, from there [Frankfurt American High School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you come back.  Your tour of duty, your family has changed, in some profound ways.  I mean the experience has changed. But, you come back, and you come back to Columbus, right?  Columbus, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Right.  Come back.
Speaker 1: And then, the thought is that you're going to--what--how is it decided that you're going to Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It was by, it was by accident.  I had taken my SAT scores, and Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Clark-Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], and Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland].  My father [Carter Smyre, Jr.] had made contact with Morgan State, because, he had it in his mind that I was going to be a military officer.  His dad [Carter Smyre, Sr.] was a military, he was military, his son was going to be military.  And I had never said, "No."  But he knew, that I just did not want that.  But that didn't stop him.  So he was arranging for an ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] Scholarship for me to Morgan State University--which had an excellent ROTC program.  And I said, "Well, can I add two more?"  And I always wanted to come to Atlanta and Clark-Atlanta University, at that time; it was Clark, Clark University.  But now it's Clark-Atlanta University.  At that time--and, and Tuskegee; and so, therefore, I took the SATs, etcetera.  Didn't hear anything, and we became puzzled.  And in Germany, a week or two is, is nothing for correspondence.  Because, I remember when Stevie Wonder made 'Fingertips', it was out four months before we heard it in Germany.  That shows you how, back in those days, how the water was--you know, now, everything is at the--at the, at the, at the tip of a finger instantly.  But those days, for you and I to get in touch with each other, within a two-week period, was just kind of historic.  I mean it was--that was fast.  So we were trying to get the information, and writing back and forth.  And it was very prohibitive, and we never heard anything.  And when we got back, of course, we immediately started to contacting institutions, and none of them had gotten my SAT scores, and that's why we had not heard.  And we were scrambling--what to do, and how to do it.  And there was a gentleman that lived in Columbus that my father knew--Dr. Robert Threatt, who was a--had been President of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], and had taught at Fort Valley.  And my father knew him.  And he called him, and told him to bring me to Fort Valley--he was at Fort Valley at that time.  And asked me to bring him to Fort Valley.  So he, he took me down to Fort Valley.  And the thing was, just to get me in college, you know, just right now.  And then, we'll be able to do the other activities.  And I took some of my tapes with me--sports tapes.  And so they told me that if you play football and baseball, we would, we would let you in school.  And, I consented to--yes.  I--and, I told them that I was not a good--I mean I played football, but, I was not a good football player.  But, I knew I could--I felt I could compete, on the collegiate level, in baseball.  But, I didn't--I never thought I could in football.  And I told my father that.  So they said, "Well, no, we'll, we'll, we want to do this."  And, I said, "Okay."  And, I came back, and I went, I went down to spring training--I mean, you know, the spring football.  And it's not a good point in my life right here.  I went down, and, I, you know, went through the training, etcetera.  And I think, the first day--it might have been the first day, or the second day of full contact--I think I caught a pass, and was, kind of coming across the middle of the field.  And the lights went out--and--on me.  And I laid there, I guess, and then, finally, they got me smelling salt or whatever they used to awake me.  And so I think I went back the next day, and, I went back to the dorm.  And for some reason, you know, I packed.  And, I called a cab, and I caught a bus home.  And I called my father, and told him to pick me up--I was at the Trailway Bus Station.  And he said, "What, what, what are you doing home?"  And I said, "Dad, I--I'm not a--I mean I'm not a, I'm not a football player."  I mean I--and ultimately, I was going to--I'm, I would have been cut.  And, I was slow--I ran about ten five, somewhere there about.  And so they called my father the next day, they told him that, because of that, they were not going to admit me until January.  So I had to stay home.  And so I didn't go to Fort Valley until that January, and they didn't cut the scholarship.  But they put me on a work-study program where, you know, you have to work, and, you know.  So I worked in the recreation center as well.  And went on and stayed there, after that one year.  And finally, I heard from Tuskegee and Morgan State.  But I told my father I just, I--you know, we bit the bullet, and I stayed at Fort Valley.  And that's where I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--when you were back for that short time, in Columbus, you were working at the textiles-right?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: No, I, no, I--that was after I finished college.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see, okay, okay.  So, what was Fort Valley, what was that experience like, for you?  Not good?
Speaker 2: Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Oh, good?
Speaker 2: No, no--I mean, I'm saying, it was good.  But, it was a really, a--it was a small rural town.  And I had, I think I--I liked it, because of the fact that, I was with my people.  I was on a black campus;  I felt very much welcomed.  But I had that experience of--that a first initial experience of the neat guy, you know, the best dressed.  You know, and that's when I had to make that transformation.  And to me, that--it was like shaking it off.  I mean, it was a wonderful feeling after it happened.  Because I didn't know what it was to wear flip-flops.  You know, jeans, and tee shirts, because when I went out of the house, they always said, "Which, where, where you going with that?"  I mean, you know, they kind of give you a "fly-spec", before you go out.  So with that in mind, Fort Valley was a, was a very rural city.  And I felt like that's what I wanted.  I made a quick adjustment, and, for some reason, I lost the aura of wanting to come to Atlanta.  I lost the big town--I felt I wanted some normalcy; I felt I wanted to be in a smaller school, where I could just be me, in a way--just be me.  And I--it's something I wanted to do.  I--you know, I--it's something that, you know, my parents wanted me to do otherwise.  But it's something that I wanted to do.  And they consented, and it was a, a good experience, and a bad experience.  I--when you, when you do these kind of things, and, and you, you're--you find yourself in this position, you, you get a little too loose--a little too familiar.  And, you know, as to what you're for--what you're there for, and why you are there.  And so, from that perspective, I needed, I needed to be more disciplined, and more focused.  And I did not do that.
Story_ID: 13226
Speaker 1: Now the other thing though, is that, we have to consider the times, too.  Because were you active at all, in any civil rights activities at that time?  Because, it wasn't--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: That's it.  So, so--.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: So, when I went to Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], I can remember, vividly, meeting Hosea Williams.  And I think it might have been in Sandersville [Georgia]--I forgot what city, but it was a city, and it was 1960--at my--at--it was my, either my--I think it was my sophomore year, '67 [1967].  And it was some sort of protest or something.  And that was my first knowledge, or first for--other than reading, in books, and what have you.  But that's the first feel, and that's the first touch I had.  And that is another reason that I wanted a small black school, is to feel that.  Although Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I think, would have fit the same bill now that I know it.  But in those days, Tuskegee was--it was not elite, but, to me, it was a different type of--it was, it was a--and Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] was a--both were schools that, one, I know that Morgan wasn't going to be for me--ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], and I didn't want that.  And then Tuskegee was in Alabama, I didn't want that.  And I just, I wanted Georgia, so I could--I might have done Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. You know, Clark University.  But I wanted Georgia--I wanted to say I had finished at a Georgia school.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--were you majoring in math?  What were you doing?
Speaker 2: I went there and majored--wanting to major in math--wanting to.  And then I did it for a little while, and I changed it.  And then I'd say, "Well, I'm going to be a CPA [certified public accountant]."  So I went into accounting.  And after doing a twenty-five column trial and balance sheet, and factoring on the profit loss of a major corporation then, I knew I didn't want to be a technician.  I said, "I want something that's broader"--that is a--that a little--that's a little bit more--although, this is people-connected, I wanted something a little broader.  And then, I talked to one of my counselors at Fort Valley, and he said, "You ought to, you ought to be an economist.  You ought to go into the, you know, get--if you want a broad, just study the economy."  And that seemed so generic, it seemed so--a little too broad.  And then, I just blurted out one day, "I think I want to be a banker.  I want to go into the banking business.  I want to work at a financial institution."  Then, he said, "You ought to be a business administration major, and with a little accounting, a little economics, you know, just a little of everything.  So that, that's what you want to do?"  I said, "I'd like to go in--I'd like to be in--I'd like to work at a bank."  And after about--I guess a year and a half, I finally got on track, you know.  As to what I wanted to do.  And it was a little difficult, because first of all, I'm starting--my class is already started, and I'm coming into one a quarter.  So I'm right in the middle of everything, and so it was an adjustment from that perspective.  And you're coming to school in winter, so you don't get that college life--you're there, but, you don't get that campus life.  Because you're going to classes, and you're trying to get, you're trying to get somewhere, because it's cold.  So you know, and then spring comes.  And then, I get my real first taste of black college experience, in my opinion.
Speaker 1: And you were, you were immersing yourself back in a black culture that you hadn't really experienced for four years.
Speaker 2: For four years-that's, that--.
Speaker 1: So, you learned all about black--.
Speaker 2: That, that--it's ice cold, then hot, then back cold.  And coming from Germany, you know, coming from Georgia, going to Germany, you know, that's, that's transformation.  Then coming back to Georgia from Germany--and, it's, and I guess the first time I got there, you might have had this experience.  And I started talking, and people started looking around, "Is he black, or what?"  I mean, and--because, I, I'm just coming; I spoke German, just a little bit.  And in German, you have to hold your tongue back.  You know, you know.  'Cause everything has that (guttural noise) to it.  And from that perspective, you--it takes you a while to get back.  And then you have that--the Southern and the German together, it makes for a--I don't know what tone or what language you call it, but it makes it for a different type of sound.
Speaker 1: But, your transition--you said you transitioned though.
Speaker 2: Well, I tried to.  I--you know--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tried to.
Story_ID: 13227
Speaker 1: Did--were there any teachers [at Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] there that were influential or that had impact on you?  I mean what--when you said you decided you wanted to go into banking then, and you got--you know, you got into the, the business administration program.  Then what--what were your thoughts after that point, then?  To do--you know, oh I know, it's time to change tapes?
Speaker 2: One minute left.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, what are your--so we can just get through--you graduate, and then--?
Speaker 2: Well, the guy that really had the most influence on me was a guy named--two of them--William Johnson, who was in the school of business, and Galen Jowers (ph.), who was my biggest critic.  I mean, he--but I learned to respect him, because he was about as stiff as an individual that I have ever met in my life.  He was so straight-laced, I mean, if somebody told a joke, he would--I mean, he was just straight-laced, he--.  And I remember one day, he and I were alone, and he laughed.  We were talking--and he started laughing, and I looked at him, and I said, "Wow," I said, "I've never seen you laugh."  He says, "First time you and I have been alone."  He said, "In life, you'll know that you are two people. And, and I am a strict disciplinarian.  I mean, I'm here to make sure you learn."  And so, we had a conversation about that.  And I had a bad experience in Fort Valley that was all my fault.  I was only taking eight [credit] hours the last quarter--physical science, and an accounting course--it was a course that I had missed that first part, principles of accounting.  And I was in the administration building; I had already ordered my cap and gown--ready to graduate.  And I was walking by the graduation lists that they used to post, and I just looked at it.  And I noticed my name was not there.  And I was just terrified.  And I ran to the college of business--I mean--college of science where I was taking a science class, and the--Dr. Steele told me had a B.  And so he said he didn't understand what the problem was, so I went to the college of business administration, and asked Mrs. Fields, who I was taking one from her, that cost accounting--she said, "I want to tell you something. You know, you've got such potential. You've got so much potential, but you know--"
Story_ID: 13228
Speaker 1: Well, Sally Fields--when I went to the--I went up to the administration building [of Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], after leaving the science building.  And I said, "Miss Fields, I'm--something must be wrong.  You know, my name is not on the graduation list, and I'm scheduled to graduate."  She said, "Well," she said, "I, I want to talk with you.  And, because, you've got so much potential, you can really be what you want to be in life.  But until you get some attention as to what you want to do, then you're not going to be able to achieve that.  And somebody's got to stop you in your tracks, and get your attention."  And, she says, "I'm that person.  And, maybe, you know, while you're here during summer school,you will recognize that."  And, you know, "You put nothing in, you get nothing out; and you put nothing in to my class.  And you reap what you sow.  And hopefully you will get it, and you will do what you need to do."  And I said, you know, "Miss Fields, I, you know--I'm not--it's time to get out of here.  I need to, I need to--what can I do to make it up, or what have you."  And, she said, "Nothing."  She said, "Summer school."  So I left, and I went outside, and I sat on the bench, and I just--bad shape, first really heartbreak of my life.  So a good buddy of mine came by--Kelly Dawson, who is a now, is a minister from Perry, Georgia--came by, and he asked me what the problem was.  And I told him.  And he says, "Come on, I know her pretty well.  Let's go back."  And we both left crying, I mean, it was not a good experience.  So what I did, I went to my advisor, and he told me that I needed to take this during summer school and graduate in August.  And I went to--applied, and found out it was not going to be offered that summer.  And so that was another setback, and I went back to him.  And said, "Well, let me see what I can do."  And then he found out, this course was--this summer was going to be offered at the University of Wisconsin, in Madison.  And I said, "Well, you know."  He said, "Let me see if I can't get you--will they allow you to take a--correspondently.  You know, take it through the mail, and we'll monitor you.  You stay here for the summer, and we'll allow it to be taken correspondently."  And they--he called the School of Business at the University of Wisconsin, and they approved me taking it correspondently--back and forth everyday, via the mail.  And I did that for the summer, and took the test, and passed with a B+, I mean, correspondently.  So, naturally, if I had applied myself, I could have made a A, if, you know, doing it in the regular classroom.  And that taught me a dire lesson about disappointments in life.  Because naturally, you got to be disappointed where  you're not finishing with your, with your class.  Although I came a quarter late, I was really pushing it to try to finish that June, you know.  But I did finish that August.  And it was a, it was a dire lesson, but it's one that I talk to a lot of young people about--that when opportunity knocks, be ready to open the door, because it may never ever knock again.  And that you reap what you sow--you put nothing in, you get nothing out--and that's the way our system is.  That's the way education is.  Education is that escalator to upward mobility.  And I try to instill that in a--in a lot of young people.  And I ran across a poem that summer in--at Fort Valley, called 'The Guy in the Glass'--says, "When you get what you want in your struggle for self, and the world makes you king for a day; then go to a mirror, and look at yourself, and see what that guy has to say.  It isn't your mother, wife or husband, whose judgment upon you must pass.  The guy who counts most in your life, is the one staring back from the glass.  You can fool the whole world, down the pathway of years, to get pats on the back as you pass.  But your final reward will be heartache and tears, if you cheat the guy in the glass."  When I saw that poem, and knew what I was enduring at that time, I told myself right then that I would never cheat myself again--that I would allow myself--or give myself all the opportunities, and all of the advancements in life.  And so the biggest turning point in my life was that summer--right there in Fort Valley.  And had it not have been for adversity, had not have been for this teacher telling me to stop then, then I don't know, I don't know what the next chapter might have been.  But--and then I graduated from Fort Valley, and then went out into the real world.
Story_ID: 13229
Speaker 1: Now what did you do when you graduated, sir?
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: You were twenty-one?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the other side of the dilemma--all the jobs now are what?  Gone.  Because the classes are out in June, and they're at work in July, August, etcetera--I'm finishing at the end of August, going out into the field in September.  So everything is gone.  So I ended up teaching school.  I was a substitute teacher.  And I substitute for almost six months or so.  And then I met some people that I--that knew my father.  And ultimately went to work for a--for the Ford Motor Credit Company.  And ultimately, from there, on to Swift Textiles [Inc.], which is a text--major textile company there, in Columbus [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And you worked there--did you--did, didn't you spend time in the service, too?
Speaker 2: Went to the Army.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, 'cause I was just--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that part I forget--maybe intentionally.  But nonetheless, when I graduated, that's right, I was drafted.  And they gave me this deferment until I finished school.  And so when I did get my degree, I went into the United States Army in 1970 and, tried to make it.  But because of my hip, it would--during that grueling time of the training, it was, it was just too physically grueling.  Because the condition, the deterioration, was occurring that--we were unaware, we just kept going to many--my father [Carter Smyre, Jr.] took me to so many doctors.  And what had happened, during my--probably my junior year, and in my senior year, we noticed sharp pains every now and then--not, not often.  But, you know, I could be in the bed and I'd hit it, and then sharp pains would come about.  And even during college, after I had a rigorous day, I felt pain in my hip at the end of the day.  And then it would subside, and it would come back.  And then, finally, it didn't, it didn't--was not really recognized, until I went into the Army.  And they gave me a, just a--I spent about two weeks in the hospital; they gave me a massive medical review.  And then, that's when they subscribed that they told me what the diagnostics was, and told me what the--what they had discovered.  And that I had a--they, they told me that, really, and, as far as my health was concerned, I needed to be discharged.  And I was discharged.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, did--?
Speaker 2: That was a tough phone call--toughest phone call, other than graduation from college--that was a tough phone call.  My second toughest phone call was to call my father, to tell him that--because his dream had been fulfilled--his father, then himself, and then his son, now was in the Army.  And--but it was not to be.  And it was, sort of like a backdoor way, but he accepted the backdoor way.  Because he had in mind that after I do my two years of regular--he thought, if I stayed two years, OCS--the Officer Candidate School would hit me.  And that I would want to do this, and he might have had a point, because, once I get into an environment, I kind of--get into it and I transform, and I--that might have been, that might have been it.
Story_ID: 13230
Speaker 1: Okay, you get back out, you substitute teach at that point.  And then, you go work for the textile company [Swift Textiles, Inc].
Speaker 2: When--after, after, putting in a lot of applications, I went to work for the Ford Motor Company as a--an account executive, with Ford Motor Credit.  And then stayed there for a year or two--it's now, '72 [1972], then I work--I went to work for the textile company--Swift Textile, there in Columbus [Georgia]--as, as director of employee relations--first African American member of the--officer of the company.  And I went there for a year, and John Bowlen (ph.), who was the president at that time, and I served on the board of the YMCA [Young Mens Christian Association].  Prior to going to work for Ford Motor Company, I formed a organization in Columbus, called LOTT--L-O-T-T--Leaders of Today and Tomorrow.  And I assembled approximately twenty, twenty-five young people, and the older leadership that were connected to my father [Carter Smyre, Jr.].  And we met monthly, or every two months, to talk about Columbus, what we could do to assist Columbus, and that's that public service that was, that was coming out of me.  I wanted to be involved in the community.  My father had a friend named Albert Thompson--I had worked in his campaigns before, as a--you know, as a--during my college days.  And Albert and I were talking one day and he was talking about young people getting involved.  And I took him up on it, and formed this group, and he formed about six or seven of the top black leaders in town, and members of the city council, himself--a state legislator--and I met with them and, with our group, and we, and we got involved in every activity--YMCA, The Urban League, United Way, you can name it, we were involved in it.  And I was on the YMCA Board, and the gentleman that was sitting next to me, we got into a conversation one day, and he asked me what I was doing.  And, he said, "I'm looking for someone to run our employee relations division."  And he hired me; he was the chairman and CEO [chief executive officer] at that time.  And I went to work for them, and eventually, went to see him about running for public office.  And he finally consented after he knew it was something that I wanted to do--he thought it was something that the older leadership were trying to get me to do.  But I informed him that I started this organization called LOTT. I went to them, reapportionment came up, this seat became available, and everybody says, you know, "Why don't you, why don't you consider running?"  And, and, that's when I got into politics, when I was at Swift Textiles.
Speaker 1: Now what made you interested?  What was percolating?  You became very civically involved, but--and, you were, you know, you met this older, you know, you recruited or met this other mentor by this other group.  But that's still a leap to running for office--and, at a very young age, may I--might I--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--I didn't mention this, but I'm proud of going to work for Ford Motor Company--I missed the major connection here.  I was getting ready to leave Columbus, because I had--here I am with a degree, can't find a job, substitute teaching, making $12.00 a day.  And I went to see A. J. McClung, who, at that time, was the--on the city council, you know, and was, a Mayor pro temp of our city--the number two person, and, as an African American, very established, and I said, "A. J., I've got to leave town.  I cannot find a job."  And his first notion was, "Let me do this, I want to put you on our board"--he was the executive director of the YMCA.  And he said, "Let me make some calls."  And he called me one day, and he said, "Meet me at the Department of Labor."  And I met him at the Department of Labor, and they called Atlanta [Georgia], and they got the Commissioner of Labor on the phone, and they told him about me--they had already subsequently talking about me.  And he asked me to raise my right hand.  And I raised my right hand.  And he gave me, you know, this oath, and he swore me in as a Peace Corps director.  And I said, "What about the state merit exam, and what about the tests you're supposed to take."  He said, "Son," he said, "Don't ask so many questions.  You are now in politics."  And, I mean, I'm twenty-something years, so what do I say?  Well, I say, "Thank you, Commissioner."  And that was the end of the conversation.  And that, that thought lived with me--it hit me just, (snaps fingers) just like that.  And I had already been involved with the public service aspect with these young people.  And--but, it was not for politics, nor political service.  I saw public service as something that you ought to do, that you ought to give back, that you ought to be a part of.  And that was the most troubling time in my life.  Because here I am, wanting to do the public service side of it, but could not get a job in my own hometown, that I grew up in, and that I was born in.  And through the assistance of Mr. McClung, I went to work for the Department of Labor, for the Peace Corps.  And I stayed there for almost a year, before I go--I got a, a real job.  That's when I went to the Ford Motor Company, and ultimately, meeting Mr. Bowlen at the YMCA, doing my public service work, and then went to work for the Neighborhood Service Centers for a short period of time.  And that was another, further extension of my public service--working at the Neighborhood Service Centers.  And so working in labor, and then working in the Neighborhood Service Centers, where I did a little more public service, it got me out there, it got me involved in terms of the neighborhood--working with the housing projects, working with the poverty program--all of these things just kept living--giving itself to public service, public service.
Speaker 1: Now, did--but, what brought--what--you decided to run, did you consult with A. J. McClung?  I mean, did you--you just up, and decide--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, what happened was, it was reapportionment, you know.  We are under the Census, you have to--every ten years, you have to go through reapportionment.  So at this time, Albert Thompson, he was an African American, and the Georgia--the Columbus population rose so much that there was another black seat that was created--a minority--a majority seat.  And we were at one of our meetings, one day, of LOTT, and, Albert says, "Look here, we've got this new seat, we ought to--we need to identify someone to run for the state legislature."  Said, "We, we've got this extra, I'm already there, but we got, we got, we got another opportunity for an African American to run for the state legislature."  And we started kicking around, and so one of my friends got up, and he said "That's, what's, what we looking for?  We got the person in this room!"  And, everybody looked around, and says, "Who?"  Says, "Calvin!"  Said, "He ought to run."  And, I said, "Oh, no, no, no, no--no, no."  I said, "No, I enjoy what I'm doing.  I, you know, where is the legislature?  What, what is it all about?"  I mean, you know, I had only been here--I think I had been to the Capitol one time.  And Albert said, "I think that's a good idea."  Said, "I think, I'm gonna take Calvin to Atlanta and show him around, and he ought to, he ought to run.  And you ought to run, Calvin."  And I said, "All right."  And we ran, and there were five people in the race, and we won, without a run-off--it was remarkable.  To this day, I don't--if you think about it was a college student, a disc jockey for a black radio station, a school teacher, a dentist, and myself.
Story_ID: 13231
Speaker 1: And you ran [for Georgia state legislator] with--you won without a run-off?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Without a run-off, I won without a run-off.  Got almost 60 percent--a little--about 60 percent of the vote.  But we had a network that we had established, and did not know what we were going to do with it.  We did it for the good of the order.  And once this came--I mean, it was--and we were everywhere.  And you're talking about grassroot--we had it.  Because we were in the projects, we were in the business sector, you know.  And all of those people, all twenty-plus of us, now--if you go to Columbus [Georgia], they're all in positions, every one of them.  It's amazing that we started that early, and now you look at all of them, all of them are very productive citizens, in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is--I mean, you win, and that must be really exciting.  Okay, the whole--right?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's major.
Speaker 1: It's major.
Speaker 2: It's big.
Speaker 1: It's major.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, and you're--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Twenty-six years old.
Speaker 1: You're young.
Speaker 2: Youngest member of the General--House of Representatives in Georgia, youngest in the history of Georgia.  I mean it's big news.  It's, it's major.  It's right after Watergate, where people say, "We're going to try something new."  They elected a young man, from Columbus, who had never held office before.  It was big.
Speaker 1: So--and, within the context of the times also, are more blacks getting elected, around that time, or not?  It's, I mean, 'cause the South is, you know, still in--the whole country is in the midst of trying to change too still, right?
Speaker 2: At that juncture, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, this juncture.
Speaker 2: It--I think that, I think the pendulum was swinging back.  I think that opportunities were beginning to open up.  And, you know, we had just--feeling the impact of the Voting Rights Act of the '60s [1960s], and, and, and the Civil Rights Movement.  In fact, I consider myself as standing on the shoulders of the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]s, and the Hosea Williams, and the [Rev.] Ralph Abernathys, and those that had fought the fight, who had, who had been in the struggle, who had made it--availed themselves to have a--for people like me to have an opportunity to run for public office.  So with that in mind, I knew that my responsibility would be awesome, that it would not be something that I would take lightly, that I would put my knees to the grindstone, and really get in here, and try to, to take what I had learned, and to apply it accordingly, and try to forge a philosophy or some sort of means by which that I could come to Atlanta, and try to extract something from government, to fight for those programs, that I been talking about.  And have a conduit by which I said, "Well now, I've got a--what?  I've got a conduit.  I've got a way to meet your needs, and, and to try to, you know, to, to get funds, or whatever the resources to--what?  To take care of the various programs that I had been participating in."
Story_ID: 13232
Speaker 1: And you went on with that life [of being a Georgia state legislator], that you understood that?
Speaker 2: I already knew it.
Speaker 1: You knew that?
Speaker 2: I--the first time if met Speaker [Thomas] Murphy, and Albert Thompson brought me to Atlanta [Georgia], the second time--the first time he brought me here to show me around, so that I wouldn't be so ignorant running for office.  I at least knew what the Capitol was about.  And the second time I ever entered the Capitol, I was going to the Speaker of the House office, with Albert Thompson, to see what did I--what committee did I want to serve on.  And he asked me that question.  And I told him, "The budget writing--I want to serve on the Appropriations Committee.  I'm a--I want to be a banker, and Mr. Speaker, that's what I want to do."  He looked at me like I was crazy.  He said, "No, no, no, no, no."  He said, "Freshman," he said, "You have to be up here a long time, before you serve on the Appropriations Committees--that, that's one of the plums."  Said, "You need to think about something a little lower than that."  And so, I finally got on some other committees.
Speaker 1: But, it took you--and--but you did--you got on that committee, after--.
Speaker 2: Quickly!
Speaker 1: Quickly.  Now, that's what I want to know.  Why were things so quick for you?
Speaker 2: I've thought about that.  And I have, I can't put my finger on one, one item.  But I think I became--got into the trust of the Speaker.  He was running for--he had opposition my freshman year--Tom Murphy--he had opposition my first year.  And I can almost remember to this day, that I called him, and told him that--the Speaker, "I'm, I'm supporting you for Speaker.  I want you to know."  I said, "I don't know, I don't know much about you, but the people that I have talked to tell me that you are a person that is straightforward, and you speak your piece, and--but when people want to do something that's contrary to what you think, or believe, if they tell you that, then you have no problems with it.  And so there may be times that I'm going to have to tell you, but I'm telling you now, I'm with you.  And, you can go to bed knowing that you've got my vote."  And after he was elected, he and I sat down, and we just talked.  And I met a guy by the name of Marcus Collins, who at that time was, I think Chair of the Ways and Means Committee, and then, a few others--Joe Frank Harris, that was Chair of the Appropriations Committee, and, I just got to talking with them, and became friends, I would assume.  And went on the Banks and Banking Committee--first African American, and then, to the Ways and Means Committee--I think, my sixth year, my third term.  And then, ultimately, two terms there, and then on to Appropriations.  So, Joe Frank Harris, who is on the wall there, when he was running for governor, sat behind me.  And I think it was my third or fourth year, he asked me, "What are you doing Sunday?"  And I told him I was, I was just going to be at home.  He said, "I want you to come to my house, in Cartersville [Georgia]."  I said, "What, what's going?"  He said, "I'm going to have the Speaker and a few others up there."  He said, "I'm running for Governor."  And I kind of looked at him, and I turned around, and I hit--my--see me, and I said, "Joe Frank Harris is running for Governor."  He says, "No, you're kidding me."  I said, "Yeah, that's what he just told me."  And I also went, and I was the only black there.  And I had met Joe Frank Harris, but I was Chair of the Black Caucus in 1980.  And they were doing a major story on him.  See, I was Chair of the Black Caucus, my fourth--
Speaker 1: Year.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--year.
Speaker 1: And, that's the same year you went on the Budget--.
Speaker 2: The Ways and Means.
Speaker 1: Ways and Means.
Story_ID: 13233
Speaker 1: And--but, as Chair of the [Georgia Legislative] Black Caucus, I--that was quick.  Because after my second term, the black legislators were electing me as the chair, of their, of the Black Caucus.
Speaker 2: Sir, how many black legislators--how large is your--your state legislature?
Speaker 1: 180 in the House [of Representatives], and fifty-six in the [state] Senate--we have forty-six blacks.
Speaker 2: And--forty-six, between--
Speaker 1: Both houses.
Speaker 2: --both houses.  Okay.  And so, are all--so, how do you wind up emerging?  I mean, the--?
Speaker 1: I just--I mean--I was--I was surprised, because I thought it was before my time.  I mean, I know I had some leadership capabilities, but, I was thrust in it kind of, very quickly.  And Bobby [Robert] Hill, who was one of the most articulate lawyers I have ever met in my lifetime, he and Ben [Benjamin] Brown, who was a, he was the closest African American to Jimmy Carter, when he ran for President, in the early '70s [1970s]--I got to become friends with both of them.  In fact, I went on a couple of campaign trips for--to, to--for Carter, when he ran for [U.S.] President.  And those two kind of brought me into the fold.  And when Bobby Hill was Chair, I was his Vice Chair.  And when--and Bobby Hill was the African American that argued the--he was the one that argued the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] side of the death penalty, before the Georgia Supreme Court.  I think one of the most learned--as quick on his feet as any man I've ever met, and I mean keen intellect.  And, and Bob--Ben Brown, being a political operative.  So I had intellect, on one hand--operative, on the other.  And both of them kind of took me in.  And when it was time for the position, they said, "Why don't you run?  We need to get some young people in here."  So I ran, and I was elected.  And, they were doing a story on--you know, you're sort of like being in the right place at the right time--they were doing a story on Joe Frank Harris, the Chair of the Appropriations Committee, and how conservative he was.  And this is my first time learning about the art of interviewing at the Capitol [Atlanta, Georgia].  This reporter talked to me and never pulled out a pencil or a pad, he had a tape on.  And I did not know it.  And so he started asking me questions about Joe Frank Harris.  And I talked to him about him, and how accessible he was, he's always been fair, you know.  He may be conservative, but when it comes to money, conservativism is not bad.  Any time you're in a fiduciary capacity, and you're spending other folks' money, you need to be conservative.  And then, the next morning, the front page of the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution'--my picture, Joe Frank Harris' picture.  "Leader of Black Caucus assails Joe Frank Harris and talks about him in a very positive fashion--."  That's what lead Joe Frank me--to inviting me to his home--that article.  So I went to his house, and the rest, he was elected Governor, and I got the phone call from him that he had talked to the Speaker [Thomas Murphy]--and we never had a, a black floor leader, and we're getting ready to have one, and you're it.
Story_ID: 13234
Speaker 1: Somebody had put you there.  And I always have been a partnership in that type of philosophy.  I always reached back, and I always try to connect.  I make it a point of--I don't just do it in passing--I do it structurally, schedule it religiously.  Because once you allow that to get away from you, you pass the same hands going up that you do going down--but coming down, you pass them faster.  And whenever I come down, I want them hands to be extended.  I want the same hands that helped me get up; I want them to shake my hand coming down.  Because I want them to say that Calvin Smyre, although he was a lot of firsts, he never got away--he always stayed connected, and always had his head on right, always, you know, knew what the role was and within that confinement.  And so I've dealt with that a lot.  Sometime it hurts.  It's a lot of pain.  People see the external part of you, they see the outer part, they don't see the inner part--that, that's painful, when you get, you know, when you--any time you, you're a first to survive, you get these type of remarks.  But I take it, and I'm l--I go on, I mean.
Speaker 2: But those, those two men that put you as--with the black--I mean as, you know--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --sponsored you for head of the Black Caucus [of the Georgia state legislature].  They, they had a pool in amongst themselves, and was--were able to do that.  I mean--.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, they're very, very--they were, they were very influential, very influential--very--they were, they were the two most powerful men [Thomas Murphy and Joe Frank Harris], at that time, in the [Georgia] House [of Representatives].  'Cause Julian Bond was, was in the [Georgia state] Senate, and--at that juncture.  And I got to, I got to meet Julian, and that was an attachment there.  In fact, I was Chair of the Urban League, at that time, in Columbus [Georgia], and I had Julian to come down to be my keynote speaker.  And in fact, I can remember the conversation that my mother [Mildred Bass Smyre] and I and Julian had together backstage--she came to that, because she admired Julian Bond.  Well, my family--well, all did at those days--Julian was what?  One of the firsts, and he was that symbol, at that juncture, at that time.  And he came to Columbus and did that for me.  And so I had an attachment there.  I mean, it doesn't take much, I mean I'm a young man.  I'm twenty-something years old.  I mean I come to the State--to the House of Representatives--it's almost naturally, in fact, the Speaker [Thomas Murphy] used to--I mean, he called me "son", because--I mean everybody--I mean, I'm a kid--I'm twenty-six years old, going to the--to the House of Representatives.  So we have young people now that are doing it at twenty-two, and twenty-three.  But, I mean, when you start talking about in the '70s [1970s], going to the House of Representatives, at twenty-something years of age is kind of past your imagination, you know, it's kind of past your thought pattern.  You just don't do that.  You just don't run for the House of Representatives in your twenties.
Speaker 2: Right, but see, that's one thing--running and winning.  But then, also being able to have this meteoric rise--that's what you don't do, you know, a lot of times.  It takes time to work your way up, and that's what I, that's what I find most fascinating, is the--but, let me ask you.  What were the--some of the early lessons that you learned?  You know, when--here?  That, you know, put you in good stead?
Speaker 1: Two, two things, I think.  Number one--loyalty; number two would be a person of your word.  Never go back on a promise.  Never, never have to say, "I'm sorry," and "I can't do it."  I mean if I tell you I'm going to do something, then I learned that, in this environment, where you are, you are living in a very structured environment, you are living in a very deliberate, debatative body.  And regardless of your philosophical ideology, what your political leaning may be, your word is key.  And then having some loyalty, and then, then there is a third leg that's through relationships. Up here relationships--they, they matter.  And how you work the relationships, how you transform, how you apply yourself in the relationships--if I'm a friend of yours, and you have a enemy, and if I'm a friend of your enemy, I'm still your friend.  And that's how I operate.  I don't allow other relationships to dictate my relationship with you.  Because my relationships with you is not with your environment, it's with you.  And I have carried myself that way here.  And recognize the differences here.  And have tried to be a--the glue, I have tried to be the person that, early on, to hold it together.  I do a lot of negotiating.  I do a lot of mediating.  Because this is a very diverse area, this is a--like a land mine up here, you have to know where to step and where not to step.  And early on in a career, you know, a land mine can take you out.  So you have to, you have to, you have to know how this operates.  And I credit those people for teaching me, early, you know, the ABCs of the political process--where the power levers are, when to pull them, when not to pull them.  You know, legislatively, how do you get your--how do you advance an idea into statutory law?  You know, things that in the rustle and bustle now, of the legislative body, you may not have that mentor, you may not have somebody that would pick you up when you fall.  So, you know, so I credit a lot of people with any success that I may have.
Story_ID: 13235
Speaker 1: Now, the Georgia Dome, or, it goes back to--what?  Denmark--?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: Groover (chuckles).
Speaker 1: Groover, I've got it now.
Speaker 2: Denmark--.
Speaker 1: I'm not a Georgian, it's obvious, (chuckles) but Denmark Groover, he'd talk about that.  Because, he--it--that whole thing went back to 1956?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With the Confederate flag, okay.
Speaker 2: With the--yeah, yeah.  Denmark Groover is one of the most gifted men I've ever met.  He served five decades [in the Georgia House of Representatives], the only person that I've ever known to serve--and been in and out of office five times, and served five--I mean served there five--you think about that--serving in five different decades, starting in the '50s [1950s].  And he was part of the '60s [1960s], when they changed--I mean, when they, when they--in the '50s [1950s], when they changed the flag, I mean.  And to see him come to my committee, and to speak on the changing of the flag, is absolutely--if you would see the tape of it, it's absolutely a remarkable feat, if you would look at both eras.  And he came to see me privately, and said that under the times that we live, and in the atmosphere that we live in, and the manner about which you are undertaking, the changing of the flag, he says, "I'm with you.  You're not doing it by force, nor cajoling, you are using--you are doing it by using the system--the power that you have, that you have been entrusted with.  And going through the process methodically and not threatening, and not being offensive."  He says, "I want to join your effort."  He came and told me that privately.  And I said, "Would you do this publicly?"  He said, "I'll do it."  He says, "You just wait until the appropriate time, and you call me, and I'll be there."  And, I'll never forget this, in July, at the Democratic Convention in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], we assembled, maybe, twelve, thirteen people at the, at the hotel there.  And, and--in L.A., the [Hotel] Nikko.  And we went through this process, and told the Governor, at that time the only way we could do it is have a plan by which we used the system by which we had, and as Chair of the Rules Committee, to allow my committee to be the conduit, and to be the kind of, a flag commission--if you will--to carry out the process. And we didn't know how to do it, we didn't know whether we could do it or not.  And we left there with a mixed bag, we, you know, we all thought this was fruitless.  And so that we left there with no plan of action other than the fact that we were going to attempt to do it.  And we got back here, and a few of us met and put a plan in place.  And, never forget this neither, as long as I ever live--he sent a helicopter.  I was in Milledgeville [Georgia], at the 250th anniversary of the state of Georgia.  He said, "What a great significance this is"--we're on the 250th anniversary of the state of Georgia--he said, "Today ought to be the day we ought to do it.  We ought to change history with history."  And we talked about it, and I don't know whether he talked me out of it, or I talked him out of it.  But we decided not to do it, but that we would do it the day after.  And--because he was the keynote speaker in Milledgeville, at the old--at the old State Capitol--and we all went down there, and we're transport--we wanted to do it right there.  But we felt like it was not the thing to do.  Because some members are going to be missing, and just some--just--and then, the moment was not--you know--let that, let that moment have its day in history and time.  But he flew us back that night to the governor's mansion--we landed on the lawn of the governor's mansion, went in to see him and a few other business people--the four of us--Tyrone Brooks, Larry Walker, and Austin Scott.  And went into his library, and the next morning--"Do it, Representative Smyre.  Let's go."  And I called a meeting of my committee, and we alerted the press at 7:30 a.m. to be at the Rules Committee, and didn't tell them what the subject matter was, just to be there, something historical was going to happen.  Well everybody knew it was going to be the flag vote.  And called Denmark Groover, he was there, I called on him, he testified, told us the real reason the flag was changed.  And I called for a vote.  And passed out, I filed a Committee Report, I told the Speaker, "I want to take it up today," waived the rules, he said, "I'm not"--he said, "I'm going--I'm going to work with you, give you an opportunity."  And, took the bill up--passed, end of story.
Speaker 1: Now, how had it come about, that you wanted to do this?  What, what was the--'cause this is very, very important, and symbolic.  It's--.
Speaker 2: Well, I've changed.  When I was Floor Leader to the Governor, Tyrone Brooks was trying to change the flag--that was in the '80s [1980s], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], somewhere right in there.  And the press, there was a lot of tattered flags around my office, on the first floor.  And every session, this controversy--"When you going to change the flag?"--come up.  And they would have the--hoards of them, right there, in front of my office, and, all these flags around me.  And they said, "How do you feel about the flag?"  I said, "Well, first of all, it doesn't vote, nor does it appropriate money.  So, it doesn't bother me."  Because I saw the flag as being symbolic, and sometimes, I'd tell myself, "If we were to--as a people--get as hyped up about substantive issues, as we do about symbolic issues, our economic state would be a lot different."  I mean, I have--the flag--I mean we protest, I mean it was--it's a, it's a, it's a symbolic issue, it has nothing to do with the lives of our people.  But as time went on, I felt the need (pause--ambulance sirens in background)--you would pick that up. But as--but as time went on, I felt the need to do this.  And I felt the need to do it because I think that, when it first approached me, I was powerless in getting it done--if I could put it that way.  And I told myself privately, "Now, I have been trusted with this power, and I cannot turn my back on it."  I just could not turn my back on it.  And I had a governor that was willing to step out there; and then, I'm chairman of the committee, and I don't step out there--something's wrong with that picture.  So within that era, I changed overnight.  Although, I despised, or did not want the old state flag, because I knew what it represented, and I knew that I didn't want that.  I wanted something different.  And I knew the real reason as to why it was changed, it was to defy the courts, it was to defy the system, it was, it was to keep that part of us that we despise--which is slavery.  So with that in mind, now, I'm in a position, and I met with Tyrone Brooks, privately and quietly.  And for one year, I made visits, quietly--no publicity, I didn't tell anyone--to CEOs [chief executive officers], religious leaders, different sectors of the spectrum--quietly.  And we sat in this room with the leadership--Martin Luther King the Third, Joe Lowery--Reverend [Joseph] Lowery, members of labor--and we did it.  I mean it was, it was a broad coalition.  But I wanted them to assist me.  If they would assist me, I had told them, "Within the environment we have over here, I think we can get it done.  But the only way you can assist me is downplay the rhetoric.  I can't pass it with you standing on top of the dome."  I mean, you, you know, I'm not into feel-good politics.  I mean, when you're at--sometimes we're at these press conferences, we feel real good.  You know, they go, they go into these TVs for these twenty-second sound bites, it's over.  I wanted to extract a deal that would pass the test of time that we would see a new flag.  And they agreed with that strategy, they--we scripted to the--to that point, and it worked.
Story_ID: 13236
Speaker 1: And--but it was a--it was a great moment.  It was a great moment.  I had tears in my eyes when Tyrone [Brooks] called me, and we went downstairs, and watched the flag raised.  And I'll never forget this day, I was in Washington, D.C., and we were at a--event, and Maynard Jackson was at a Tavis Smiley event, and he says, "I'm so proud to be here, because I with the man that changed the flag--I'm with the flagman in Georgia."  And he said, "The first thing I do, when I get back to Georgia, is that Valerie and I are going to go by the State Capitol."  And when he came by, he called me, you know, and told me, "I just saw my flag."  And he was so proud.  So I imagined, if the Maynard Jackson felt that way, then John Doe felt good about it, so--.
Speaker 2: There are a lot of thoughts I--now, who designed the new flag?  How did that--?
Speaker 1: Cecil Alexander.  He--it was in 1993, he presented it when we attempted to change the flag the first time, when, when then Governor Zell Miller tried to change it.  And it did not, did not work.  And so we kicked it around in the Governor's office as to what design--would we go back to pre-'56 [1956], or would we have some sort of contest?  And one day, they called me down and say, "Got to show you something."  He pulled his drawer out, he said, "This is--take a look at this."  And I looked at it, and I said, "I can live with it."  He said, "You're the first person to have seen it."  He said, "Let's get Representative Brooks down here."  And Representative Brooks said he could live with it.  And, it--we had to go through that process, you know.  Because they had the faction that wanted 1956, who fought for that flag; and then, you had the group that fought to keep the Confederate Flag.  So, we had two groups:  Pre-'56 [1956] Confederate--we had to put something new on the table, so that we didn't appear to be what?  Leaning to either side so to speak.  And therefore the new design and he had already put it on the table in 1993.  But people do not remember it, because it was such a quick debate on it.  But he had designed it back then, and the Governor, they--we all knew about it, but--so we decided to go with it.  And then put "In God We Trust" on it.  And we knew that was the motto--it's on our money, etcetera--but we were told not to put wording on the flag.  You know, you don't see wordings, you know.  And so we opposed it--I opposed it, on the floor of the [Georgia] House [of Representatives], and I was defeated, and thank God for it--it passed it.  I picked up five votes--five legislators came to me and told me, "When you put 'In God We Trust' on it, I voted for it, so I could not vote against our motto."  So things work for the good of the order.  So then we sent it to the [Georgia state] Senate, and they did a wonderful job as well--Senator [Charles] Walker, and others over there, who worked--Lieutenant Governor [Mark] Taylor; they all--it was--they did a yeoman's job.
Story_ID: 13237
Speaker 1: Now, you've had two case--well, I read--that were like the sales tax for education, and the Georgia Dome [Atlanta Georgia]--that those were two that they said that you had gotten your stripes, or you had gotten your marks or scars.
Speaker 2: That's a better word.
Speaker 1: Scars, I heard.  Right, right.  I think it was scars--battle wounds, and all.  Can you just describe those, sort of briefly, just briefly?
Speaker 2: Which ones, the Dome?
Speaker 1: Right, the Dome.
Speaker 2: Well, the Dome is unusual because, we--I--we could never get out of the point that people said we were building it for the [Atlanta] Falcons.  And the Falcons--you don't know much about Georgia football--but the Falcons were not, you know, once a team is winning, and it's got a lot of support, then it's easy to build a stadium. Your team does not win, and you can't fill up the whole--.  Why are you building a new stadium?  And then the other part of that--I come from a city [Columbus, Georgia] that was trying to build a civic center, and we could not--we could not get the political resources to do it, and it was--I mean the Miss Georgia Pageant is held there.  And this year these--unfortunately, they had to use umbrellas on the stage--it rained.  And can you imagine it raining on a pageant?  This thing leaked that bad.  And here I am, building a--carrying the legislation to build a dome stadium for Atlanta.  And I felt very strongly about this, because, I said that this is not for the Falcons.  Although the Falcons will be what?  Using it.  But it's a part of our tourism; it's a part of an extension of our cultural activities.  And--but I was beat up pretty badly.  It took me two years--took us two years to pass it.  I was doing it on behalf of the Governor [Zell Miller], it was not my legislation.  But it was a--it was the vision of the governor, to have the World Congress Center, the Georgia Dome, and all of this connected to our trade shows--so that the dome could be used for exhibit space, etcetera.  People can't understand that.  The--your citizens, the everyday people just could not understand it.  So, it took--it was--it was quite a haul.  And eventually it passed.  But it was a very, very difficult process--had a lot of opposition.  Rural Georgia was opposed to it, because it's for Atlanta.  And so it took a lot of meetings; it took a lot of browbeating; it took a lot of going to legislators; it took a lot of horse-trading; and just a lot was involved--and we finally passed it, the Governor signed it.  And I used to walk over there during the construction, and just to see it.  And one day I was over there, and the architect came up to me and says, "Isn't this something?"  I said, "This is remarkable."  He says, "I'll tell you," he says, "You know, I'm going to have a suit in this dome.  And you know who's going to be my guest at the Super Bowl?"  He said--I said, "You think we'll get the Super Bowl?"  He said, "You bet we will.  You just watch it."  He said, "You're going to be my guest at the Super Bowl."  And I thought nothing of that, other than the fact that that would be great.  And we finally had the grand opening, etcetera, and, and I felt very good, in 1994 [sic, 1992] or something, when it--when it opened up.  And the rest is history.  And soon as we got the [1996 Summer] Olympics, the governor and I, you know, got a little credit.  Had it not been for the Georgia Dome, there would not have been an Olympics.  That's what the IOC [International Olympic Committee] said, we didn't say it--the IOC said it, said, "That was the nucleus of the--all of the venues," the fact that we had the dome.  Because we couldn't have--we wouldn't have even had time to--what?  To build a dome because of the time period, you know, when you, when you finally get--decide that you're going to get it.  And that was the turning point.  And then, when Atlanta got the Olympics, and then, now, it--everybody is just saying, "It's one of the best decisions that government ever made"--was to build the Georgia Dome.  So I got a little credit for that.  And took a lot of heat for it, but the governor had a lot of vision.  And, with that vision, and with the leadership that he and I tried to display on it--we finally got it to pass.  And, I have the pen that he used to sign it with--that's one of my treasures, you know.
Story_ID: 13238
Speaker 1: Now, what about the sales tax for education?
Speaker 2: Well, not sales tax--.
Speaker 1: What's that?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, it's--it was the only other major was the--was the educational package that we passed--QBE [Quality Basic Education Act, 1986]--the reform on education.  Although we had a lottery that was attached to it, for higher ed, the Governor [Joe Frank Harris] wanted to reform education.  And, of course, again, as his Floor Leader, I introduced the bill.  And got a lot of the brunt, you know, from it.  But again, education is the key, in my opinion, it's the cornerstone to any community--is--if you got a--a better educated workforce, and a better educated public, all benchmarks tell you, you will have higher economic benefits from it.  So that was a--that was a landmark piece of legislation--the QBE--Quality Basic Education bill--where the only tax we had, we had a--to pay for the dome, we had a tax on hotel/motels.  And that, that allowed us to have the Hotel/Motel tax, and we took the Hotel/Motel tax, after that, and put it over onto the--to help pay for the--to one cent of it to help pay for the Democratic [National] Convention when it was held here.  And then, the only other major tax we had is when we eliminated the sales tax on food, which was another major event.
Story_ID: 13239
Speaker 1: The lead person from a major party in a state, you know.  And I was just ecstatic.  And, I said, "Well, boy, how am I going to be able to do this, Governor?  I got so much on my plate."  He said, "But you've got a lot of help."  And I consented to do it [become Chairman of the Georgia House of Representatives Rules Committee], but--and now, there're only two, you know.  Because the one in Indiana resigned, recently, to go into private business.  So, you know, two black chairman in the country.  I mean that's--yes, it's a lot of work, but I enjoy it.
Speaker 2: So, you, in many ways, sir, represent, sort of a new type of black leadership.  Don't you--?  I mean, if you--if you have a chance to step outside yourself, a little bit.
Speaker 1: That's hard to talk about.  Isn't it?
Speaker 2: Okay, I know, but, let me just set some background.  I mean, you know, we were talking earlier about--well, a little bit, you know, about the Civil Rights Movement, and how you, sort of missed that part.  And, and that was one type of leadership, you know, in many ways--we were new, you know, to that.  People got elected, but it was new, we--not talking about Reconstruction, but, you know, this--.  So you appear, to me, as a person who has been very able, not to, sort of, throw bombs.  Like, it, it was fascinating--the story you told about the, the flag.  Because, you said, you know, "We can do this."  But, you did it--you did it--we can do it, but it has to be done my way. In many respects.  But it was a way that was very civil, but, using relationships, around, but respecting the different communities that were, sort of, involved.  And, I'm just saying that--appears, as someone listening to this story, as if there a more sophisticated approach, you know, to the political structure, from a black perspective.  That's all that I'm saying. So my question for you--that's, I guess, a commentary, since I'm commenting.  But do you have any comment on that?  If you don't--do you have a comment on that?
Speaker 1: I might be missing it, but if my style is different, and I think it's different because, I think I am a product of the Civil Rights Movement. I'm what the Civil Rights Movement produced.  I am--I am not the picture of it--so to speak--I am a product thereof.  I am not from it.  And I think there's the--there's, there is a transformation that is slowly revolving.  That--the era, when I first got elected, those that were in office were of the Civil Rights Movement, and I've seen it revolve.  Because now, that was in the '60s [1960s], and if you remember, most of the black elected officials at that time, were connected to the Civil Rights Movement, and were actively involved in it, and especially in the '70s [1970s].  And most were activists, you know--Bobby and Ben Brown, both were what?  Act--they were activists in the Movement.  Both of them had worked at SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], they had worked at NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so they were from the core, where the, the ones you see now, they couldn't have served, because age wouldn't allow them to serve.  Because you get a newer type elected official--you get a newer black elected official.  You get one now,  that is business oriented; you're getting one that has a certain of independence; you're getting one that has intellect that will assist us, in grabbing--in grasping these public policy issues.  So slowly, we're going from the Civil Rights Movement, almost into the "Silver Rights Movement"--it's gone from our basic rights, now, to our economic, you know.  How can we create wealth?  How can we be a self-generated community?  How can we create jobs?  How do we deal with the economic ladder?  And this empowerment, you know, now, when I talk to young people, now, they don't want to talk Republican nor Democrat.  They want to talk economics.  And so it's a different breed out there now.  Whether it's business, or hip-hop, they are talking about economics.  And we're having a very difficult time reaching them in terms of voting and participatory politics.  And we've got to continue our effort to do that, because it--right now the percentages are very, very low when it comes to community, and when it comes to voting in that category of youth.  So I think that's the next movement--is an economic one.  Whereas we always have to be vigilant and protect our civil--you know, our rights, and the gains that we made over the years.  But that--to me, there's--there's been anything; it's been a transformation from that period.  Being that Atlanta [Georgia] is the bedrock, to a large degree, of the Civil Rights Movement--that's what I was trying to relate to them during the flag vote--that you can't use '60 [1960] methodology and method for what? A 21st century issue.  I mean, it--there's a change.  And, to their credit, they saw that.  So it's, you know, methodology is important and how you deal with all of these things.  So I can never forget--like I say, I am a product of, of the Civil Rights Movement--had not have been for the Civil Rights Movement, I don't think I'd have been elected--in fact, I know I wouldn't have been elected in 1974, you know.  Because that paved the way for me to get there.  But in any situation, the clock is running and the eras and the time is changing.  And I think we are--we are moving into a new era in America, and that era is, is--I think, the next is going to be economic empowerment.
Story_ID: 13240
Speaker 1: Now, you've had eighteen, it seems to me a eighteen year career, here, right?
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight.
Speaker 1: Twenty-eight, twenty-eight.  I did that wrong, oh my God.
Speaker 2: It's a long time.
Speaker 1: Right, so long.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: So, what are your thoughts about the future, and what you want to do?  Because, there have been some discussion about you going to [Washington] D.C., and you were like, "No," you know.  And, and, I've talked to people who've left state government and gone, and they were like, regretting it--some of them. Because they felt they couldn't, you know, do--.  But, what are your thoughts?  I mean, what do you want to, you know, do?  Or, are you just happy?
Speaker 2: I'm happy, I really am.  I'm, I'm a business person; I'm a banker; I'm Executive Vice President of Corporate Affairs for Synovus Financial Corp;. and I'm Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Synovus Foundation, which is our philanthropy arm of our--the charitable side of our company that I--that I mean--have the responsibility for.  Coupled with that, I'm able to serve in the [Georgia] state legislature.  And, serving in the state legislature as Chair of the Rules Committee, and Chair of the House of Democratic Caucus, and Chair of the Democratic Party of Georgia--it gives me the--I think, the best of two worlds.  I'm able to hold down a full-time job that I'm rewarded for doing.  And then, being involved in public policy, and public service, and, if I had--if there was a crystal ball, it would be something that I would try to do statewide.  But I--that's not even there, but, you know, I'm mentioned times for a statewide position, I'm rumored, you know, sometimes for Speaker of the House.  And those things may be in the future.  I don't aspire to be that--so to speak.  I had said that the next thing I probably would do, would run for Speaker Pro Temp of the [Georgia] House of Representatives, and, maybe, one day, ascend to the, the position of Speaker.  So you know, I would never say, never, but I'm happy; I am content; I'm being able to exercise a power within the confinements of the General Assembly and state politics, and dabble in national politics from time to time.  So I love public service; I love politics--it's now a part of me.  And I'm looking forward to continue to serve.  After twenty-eight years in the House of Representatives, I've had a lot of highs, and a lot of lows.  But I get up every morning, I'm challenged to come to the State Capitol, to do what I can for quality of life--I do that every day.  I don't have a problem with it.  I mean, I eagerly get up, and I eagerly come here.  I don't--I come here excited and motivated that I can make a difference, that one person can make a difference.  And, that's--it's a very simplistic philosophy, but that's just the way I am.  I'm results-oriented.  I measure when I leave here, "What did I do?  What did I get accomplished?"  And I go home with the--with--content that I gave it all I had in trying to make a difference in the quality of life for all Georgians.
Story_ID: 13241
Speaker 1: Now, with being as involved in the Democratic Party [of Georgia], as you've been, what are your--what are your hopes for that party?  'Cause the party has been through a lot of, sort of, issues--identification issues, in some respects.
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I had it asked to me yesterday, there was a fraternity in, in the--in the [Georgia State] Capitol, and the question was, "Sometimes the Republicans act like they don't care, and y'all act like y'all take us for granted."  And it's a valid question.  But at the same time, you know, we work every day to try to dispel that.  Because I see the Democratic Party as the big tent party, as the party of inclusion--in other words, I don't suffer from the illusion of inclusion.  I feel like that I'm included and that I have a vital role to play.  Now when you--when you--when you take that from the state parties and you put it into national part--politics, you get a--you get a bigger picture, and therefore the message, sometime, is not as crystal clear as you would want it to be.  Because you're--you got so many parties--fifty parties involved in the what? In the National Party.  So it's something very hard to hold on to.  And the more constituencies you get, the more the diversity, the more the extent of the debate, and the dialogue within that confinement.  So it's a very difficult posture to be--to have a big tent, and have everybody thinking, and singing, and saying the same thing.  But I consider the Democratic Party the party of inclusion, where, if you have an idea, and if you have a belief, then you can advance it and get substitutive data on it.  And I think that's all we--you know, we're all not--it's not monolithic.  I mean, we all have our difference of opinion, and of our difference of--on various issues.  And--but that's, that's how I envision the National Party.  When you come to Georgia politics, if--it narrows, somewhat because of the basic of our constituencies--it's identifiable, it's something that you have to measure almost daily.  Because it's so competitive, because the Democrats and Republicans have almost 35, 38 percent of the--of the vote, and it's that 25 percent out there that are undecided that really determines state politics in Georgia.  So the message has to be more refined, it has to be more focused; it has to be narrowed to a large degree.  And you have to--in this crystal ball--determined what the populace--what's the order of the day?  What's--well, what is on your mind, as an individual?  And what fits within that parameter?  Is it health care?  Is it--is it crime?  Is it education?  Is it jobs?  Job quality, you know?  So, that's the difference between the state and the national, and--but to me, the key word is inclusion.
Story_ID: 13242
Speaker 1: Now what about those people who call you non-racial?
Speaker 2: What does that mean?
Speaker 1: (laughs)
Speaker 2: (Laughs) They say, "You're non-racial," meaning that, you know, when people usually say that about--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They, they say that about Bill Cosby, and, you know, Michael--they say that then--some people say that's because you're acceptable to white folks (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Well, I don't know.  It, it's--I cross lines, I do.  I have been, you know, I've Chaired the [Georgia Legislative] Black Caucus for four years.  I was President of the Georgia Association of Black Elected Officials--statewide organization, made of all the elected officials in the state, for eight years.  And, I was born African American, born black, and joined the Democratic Party [of Georgia]--I'm going to die black, and I'm going to die a Democrat.  So--but I am--I am considered one that crosses racial lines.  You know, all you have to do is look at my resume.  I mean, there are a lot of firsts there.  And I don't know if it's--whether it's--whether it was the--whether it was the timing, and maybe the era I was coming along, whereas at that timing, that it just so happened that an African American had never held that position.  And--but, as Chair of the [Democratic] Party [of Georgia], now, I mean, I wear a multitude of hats.  And meet with a myriad of constituency groups.  And, it, it's something that I have to work within the confinements of race and gender, and all of the other parameters, and benchmarks that are out there.
Story_ID: 13243
Speaker 1: And sir, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know there--there are two dates on your tombstone--the day that you were born, and the day you die.  The day you were born, they--we celebrate--that's your birthday.  The day you die, that's the day that people mourn.  But I always read, and I always been told that it's not your birthday, and it's not your death day--it's the dash.  What did you do while you were here?  The dash.  And I would hope my dash would say that I was a very fair person.  I hope it will say that I did all I could to help man and womankind.  I know my record will say that I was a public servant; that I believed in servant leadership; that, for whatever many years, I gave of my time and energy, every day, to serving a people; and that, whether it was through government or whether it was through some sort of agency or entity, that--I want it to say that, "Calvin Smyre was a public servant; that he gave his all in all to serve man and womankind to do one thing--to produce a better quality of life," end of story--exclamation point, period.
