Story_ID: 641812
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Steven Wayne Smith, Sr. [HistoryMaker Steve Smith], and that's S-T-E-V-E-N, W-A-Y-N-E, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born July 19th, 1964 in Albany, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I neglected to ask you, but is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: You know, the story behind my name is that my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] tells me a nurse in the hospital named me when I was born.  She did not have a, a particular name for me and a nurse named me in the hospital.  And I guess, you know, interestingly enough I am one of eight children and I am number seven in the order, so I guess by then my momma figured anybody could name me.  So yeah, so a nurse in the hospital named me.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good story.  So did, did she include the Wayne, is that her idea too?
Speaker 2: Yes, full name.
Speaker 1: All right. And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am the associate superintendent with Atlanta Public Schools.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Monday, December 17th.  Nine--oh I'm sorry, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right. In the, in the offices of?
Speaker 2: In the offices of the Atlanta Public Schools headquarters, and we're sitting in the superintendent's conference room.
Story_ID: 641813
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite, yes I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: The--my favorite food is my mother's [Lois Smith Rushin] home cooked biscuits.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can't lose with that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color would be navy blue.  I like navy blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like blue as a, as a color and the different hues of blue I could be satisfied with, but probably navy blue is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I prefer spring and summer.  You know, one of the things that I guess you ask that question and I answered in the reverse, I do not care for winter because I just have never liked being cold at all.  So I prefer spring and summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, West Coast.  I like the, for obvious reasons, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and the climate that is out west.  I have had to go for business and personal travel out west and I tend to like the West Coast atmosphere, the climate, the culture as well, all that it, it takes.  But primarily the culture in terms of, of the climate and what it offers.
Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  One of the--one of my favorites is stay flexible so you don't get bent out of shape, and I think that works well in life just in terms of, especially the workplace such that one can stay flexible with regard to how things happen in the workplace because it's quite easily one could get bent out of shape if you are--if one tends to be rigid in a matter.  So I, I like to stay flexible.
Story_ID: 641814
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family separate from your father's [John Warren] side, and then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lois Rushin, R-U-S-H-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she actually uses a lot--often she uses her maiden name, Lois Smith Rushin.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Leesburg, Georgia, in 1934, and she was born January 1st, 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, what are the stories about them?
Speaker 2: I can trace it as far back as, as her parents.  I know some of the history on, on her side with, with her parents because quite honestly when we were small, we lived with my grandparents for a short time and I, I don't know a lot past them, but I do know that my mother's siblings, I know a lot about them, my uncles and aunts.  I was, I was very familiar with them growing up and into adulthood.  And I do know that my grandmother and my grandfather, George Smith and Dorothea Smith [Dorothy Smith], her maiden name was Davis [ph.].  I happen to have married a young lady [Debra Smith] whose maiden name is Davis so I often remember--I can remember that pretty easily.  But my grandmother and my grandfather had, I guess there were, I was trying to count how many children they had.  I think it was nine of them, I think they had--I think my mother had nine brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so large family?
Speaker 2: Yes, a very large family.
Speaker 1: And, okay. Now are there any--now what did your mother's people do in Georgia?  Did she grow up in Leesburg?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She did grow up in Leesburg.  Leesburg is a small rural town about ten minutes north of Albany [Georgia].  Albany is the major city in southwest Georgia, and Leesburg is about ten minutes north of Albany.  It's a small rural town.  And my family--my mother's family and my mother worked doing domestic work primarily growing up and into adulthood.  She has told stories about how they used to work in the fields and how as an adult she did domestic work, and she also later in adult life wound up going to nursing school and was a licensed practice--licensed practicing nurse for some time as well.  So she had the nursing training and the nursing assistant training as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's good, so she was able to--do you know where she went to nursing school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to nursing school at Albany Technical College [Albany Technical Institute; Albany Technical College, Albany, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is where she got her nursing, nursing training.  And as she--you know, as she tells the stories, we have had the opportunity to learn from her about, you know, her struggles as a single parent growing--raising a family and she--I'm not sure if I responded to this earlier or not, but she raised us as a single parent and she has talked with us often about the struggles that went along with being a single parent and what, you know, what that meant back during the time, as I indicated I was born in 1964, and I was, you know, the, the seventh of eight children.  And we actually, I should say, my mother actually had nine children.  We had one--we had a sister who was--who died shortly after birth, her name was Marva.  And Marva, if I recall correctly, was one year older than I am and died of pneumonia as I understand it to be, and I think Marva lived to be maybe thirteen, fourteen months old, I think.  So we--there were actually nine of us.
Story_ID: 641815
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you to name them later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I just wanted to get your mother's history down here.  Now did--do you know what high school your mother [Lois Smith Rushin] attended in Albany [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: She went to Lee County Training School [Leesburg, Georgia].  And interestingly enough, she has--my mother has a report card from back, I forget the year she graduated high school, but she has her high school diploma and they graduated after eleven years.  So they--she graduated from, what essentially would be the eleventh grade.  So I'm, I'm not sure at what point school, K-12 [kindergarten to twelfth grade], started to be a twelfth grade graduation, but she graduated from high school at the appropriate time, which was eleven years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm tempted to think after hearing a lot of these stories about southern high schools--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that many of them topped out at eleventh grade--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --simply so you wouldn't have the equivalent degree.  You know, I--that's what I'm tempted to believe, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really?
Speaker 1: Then there were others--there were special high schools that you could go to maybe in the region if you could afford to get to it that would give you that last year.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So they would, you know, let you out at eleventh--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --so you couldn't get to twelve.
Speaker 2: Yeah I di- I never thought about it from that perspective.  And I, I do know that part of the history that she has shared with us as well has been that the boys in the family weren't necessarily encouraged to go to school because they were encouraged to stay home and help papa with the crops.  So the girls had the advantage of going to school and the males, and my sibling--my mother's siblings who were male had to stay home and help papa, we called my granddaddy [George Smith] papa, and they had to help papa in the fields.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lee County Training School, the, just the term training school was another--is kind of a word that really means a black school.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: A training school.  Train- the idea of manual training instead of education, not really education that's what the implication is, though the curriculum in Lee County [Georgia] might have been, you know, as good as the curriculum anywhere else.  But the idea that the state supported schools then to train black men (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.  Oh, okay, I did not know that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--
Speaker 2: --segment of history.
Story_ID: 641816
Speaker 1: At any rate, so she was able to finish a program to be a practical nurse and--now is there a story, any stories your mother [Lois Smith Rushin] tells about--now this--she lived before the Albany, and during, she was an adult in the prime of life during the Albany Movement, right?
Speaker 2: Right, she was.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Did she have any stories about the civil rights struggle there and what was going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from her perspective, you know, she may not have been, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, my wife [Debra Smith] and I have talked about that and I don't recall my mother sharing any specific stories from the turbulent '60s [1960s].  I do recall her sharing just the stories of struggle and how it was in terms of--while she didn't have specific stories related to the struggle, and I don't think she was involved in any of the marches or the movement that was actually going on at the time.  What she has primarily described to us through oral history has been the, the environment in which she lived and which black people had to survive.  For instance, not looking at white people in the eye.  She--she's often told that story about how, you know, she could not and was not allowed to look white people in the eye.  She shared about, you know, the overt racism that was occurring during that timeframe.  And one of the things too that--that is, you know, we smile at it at, you know, my generation and people who are younger, I vividly remember mother telling me about having to take a string to the shoe store when they would go shopping.  Because as black people they couldn't try on shoes, and what they would do, is they would take a string and measure, I guess measure their foot and you would--they would have to take the string into the store and get a shoe the length of the string, was the way that they bought their shoes.  I had not thought about that in some time until just now thinking about mother sharing that story with me.
Speaker 1: That's a story about a different world than we have today, certainly.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And why a movement was necessary in Albany [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.  And, and one of the things too that I would--that I do recall mother sharing with me and with us as, as kids, and me as an adult is fo- for, for some reason I remember her sharing with me that even though she was, you know, poor in the rural South, she had white friends.  And she had, I think, friends who were quite frankly instrumental in her life growing up and that has helped to shape, just like any other, I guess, kid growing up in an environment.  It certainly helped to shape my values and my thoughts about people of, of opposite race, which were very positive views.  But she has, she has shared, you know, interestingly enough I thought about that story specifically--about taking a string to the store to buy shoes.
Story_ID: 641817
Speaker 1: Is there a story about--well I'm going to save--I'm going to go to your father's side, then we'll come back to how they met.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is John Warren, W-A-R-R-E-N, first name John, J-O-H-N.
Speaker 1: John Warren, okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Union Springs, Alabama, and he was born in nineteen twenty- I think he was born 1927, I think it was 1927.
Speaker 1: All right. Union Springs, 1927.  Union Springs is really close to the Georgia line, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Close to Columbus, Georgia, I guess sort of around there?
Speaker 2: Right, it is close to the Georgia line.  I've never been there and as I indicated earlier, my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] raised us by herself, so I, you know, didn't really know a whole lot about my father or his family.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's the birth place of John Henrik Clarke, the historian--the short story writer, you know, too.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Union Springs.  Now, so what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  I take it he wasn't around much, so or--
Speaker 2: No he wasn't.
Speaker 1: So did he basically leave, did he just, did he abandon the family at some point or?
Speaker 2: I guess that's a pretty harsh characterization, but it's also, I guess, a very real--realistic characterization.  He--my father never lived with us.  My mother and father were never married.  So he never lived with us.  So I don't know that when you say he abandoned, I don't know that he was ever there to leave quite honestly.  And we--growing up, he was around occasionally, so we got to know him a little bit, but really by the time I became a teenager and into adulthood, had very limited contact with him.  And you know, he would not necessarily be someone who was instrumental in my life growing up.
Speaker 1: So did he live in Albany [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he lived in Lee County [Georgia].  That was--yeah we--again, Albany was the big city, as it were, and so that was the place we were born and we lived in Albany for probably, as I understand our history, probably three--the first three years of my life and then we moved out to Lee County and we--Lee County is--the county seat is Leesburg [Georgia] and we lived there the rest of my growing up years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was--
Speaker 2: And he lived in Lee County, I guess is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess--
Speaker 2: --the rest of that story is he lived in Lee County.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I guess I should still ask, how much do you know about his side of the family, you might still know about his family?
Speaker 2: Not very much at all.  I know his birth place and that's about it.  I, I recall mother mentioning that he has or had a brother and maybe a sister, but I could not tell you very much at all about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now what did they do for a living where they farmers or did they have a trade, or what?
Speaker 2: They were primarily farmers, you know, the proverbial second generation sharecroppers I would guess, if that, but primarily farmers.
Speaker 1: So they're sharecroppers, they didn't own their own land in other words?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Now did your dad have much education?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.  He did not and I don't know the exact formal level, but I would venture to guess that he was not as fortunate to go through eleventh grade, again being a male.  My understanding is that they were required to help in the fields, and I'm pretty certain that he would've had, you know, a few years of formal education, but not very much.
Story_ID: 641818
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Lois Smith Rushin] or your father [John Warren] or any of the relatives discuss the pressure on black farmers to have their male children in the fields at certain times?  'Cause I know a lot of places, school only would--they couldn't go to school at certain times of the year when the seeds were planted and when the harvest was coming up, and they were--many were encouraged to drop out of school early?
Speaker 2: Right.  My, my mother talked about that primarily from the vantage point of her male siblings, you know, who would be my uncles.  Not very much at all do I recall her sharing anything related to my father and his having to, you know, him having to work in the field.  It was primarily from the vantage point of my uncles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I think it would apply to all males in that during those days pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yes, it would.
Speaker 1: You could generalize on some level, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I would venture to generalize and say that he certainly fit the mold and fit that same mold and he would be an individual who would have to work in the fields and would be required to do so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And be expected to do so.
Speaker 1: What was the major crop in those days, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's peanuts.  I mean peanuts a lot, (cough) grown in that area.  Cotton was another crop, and you know, vegetables like peas and butter beans, even watermelons.  There's a city not too far, about forty-five minutes from Leesburg [Georgia] called Cordele, Georgia, and Cordele is the watermelon, watermelon capital of the world.  And I can remember as a teenager actually loading watermelons in the field and you know, I--a very dear cousin of ours who was the major influence, male influence, in my life growing up was an older cousin, we called him daddy-o because he would pick up my brother who's one, two years older than I am, Andy [Anthony (ph.)], and my brother who's one year younger, Darryl [ph.], he would pick up the three of us and we would often go as, as really teenagers and, and just before we turned teens, we would go with him to the fields to help load watermelons and take them to Cordele to sell.  And he was the first one who recognized, may not have been, I guess he was the first one to recognize, he liked to tell the story that I did not like getting my hands dirty working in the fields.  So he would always say that, "That boy there, he's going to college.  He's gonna be a college boy 'cause he does not like to get his hands dirty."  He was right.  I enjoyed it and I appreciate the lessons that I learned growing up and working, but I knew very early on that that was not something I wanted to do long term.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was, I was eager and blessed to have enough motivation and support at home and support at school to do well academically.  And that was my goal all along was to not be loading watermelons (laughter) for, for much longer.
Story_ID: 641819
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: You know, if there is I don't know it.  I--I'm sure there, I'm sure there is a story, but I don't recall what that story is.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Some of your questions, Larry [Larry Crowe], you're gonna prompt me to ask my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] so that I'll know that.
Speaker 1: Now, there is a story there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know there's a story.  Now, I'm thinking they got together in the early '50s [1950s], does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, would have to be, would have to be.  Mid-'50s [1950s], I'm trying to think, we have.  Yes, it would've been mid-'50s [1950s], would've been early to mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: You were born in '64 [1964] and you're number seven, right?
Speaker 2: Correct, I'm number seven.  And for my father, that's why I was trying to think it had to be mid-'50s [1950s].  I have a--my sister, one brother, actually two brothers and myself.  So yeah, with my sister, Sarah [ph.], Andy [ph.], me and Darryl [ph.], he had--my mother had four of us from John Warren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there's four of my eight siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so in the mid-'50s [1950s] then.  And the other four or the other five were already--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --there?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: When they met.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So did you know anything about your--the father of the other five?
Speaker 2: No.  I know that he lived in Lee County [Georgia], but I don't know a whole lot about--don't know anything about him in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you don't know what kind of relationship they had either?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I've not asked that question and you know, one of the things too, Larry, that my wife [Debra Smith] and I have had these type of conversations about, you know, just at some point being a little curious.  And she has had the same response that she has said to me about, you know, in terms of asking my mother, and that is some of that history might be very painful for them.  And when I say them, meaning some questions that I think Debbie has for her mother and questions that now that you're posing to me that I think about as I sit here and I think, you know, some of it might be more painful than she's willing to revisit.  So for that reason, I haven't asked and I guess after today I'm, you know, will probably be more curious based on, on doing this project.
Speaker 1: But there's still some risk involved, I know.  Black families, you know, the children, no matter how old they are they can't dip too far and you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean it depends on what their parents are willing to tell them--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and to discuss with them, and it all--it is all steeped in morass of the South and the country and all that.  And you, just, it's hard to--you know, children just don't, you know, ask a lot of questions.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, and as you probably well know in your other interviews and, and your own history in terms of how you come through this process, and that has been often in the rural South, which is where I was raised, children aren't expected to ask a lot of questions.  In fact, you're, you're essent- and you know, it wasn't as much with my growing up, I think that sentiment had, had, had waned a little bit, but it was the proverbial be seen and not heard as a kid growing up, it was pretty prevalent to--that that was the expectation is that you should be seen and not heard as a child.
Story_ID: 641820
Speaker 1: Can you go back to what--the beginning of what you were saying off camera?
Speaker 2: Yes, off camera we were talking about, you know, children understanding--being seen and not heard.  And then sometimes children asking or as a teen getting to the point of asking, you know, you know, "Who's my father?" Or, "Is that really my father?"  But the one thing that--that mother [Lois Smith Rushin] has over time been really conscientious about and has said is that, you know, people should be honest with their children about who their father is.  And from what I gather, growing up and, and somewhat prevalent in our community, in the black community, there was, sometimes there was a tendency not to necessarily divulge if there were a child out of wedlock.  It might not be known who the child's father really is.  Now the reality of it is, sometimes in the neighborhood, others would know and, and I think, you're smiling, because that seems to be pretty prevalent that, you know, others would know if that were the real father in the house or not.  But mother was pretty, pretty adamant that people should tell their kids, for obvious reasons, lineage and other reasons, health reasons even, who their real father is.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, I'm smiling because I've heard--seen so many sit- I've seen situations where everybody knew except the person that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and then the whole neighborhood kept the secret (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --from that person, the only one who didn't know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is--it can be, you know, a sticky situation later on too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, if you don't know really who the right one is.
Story_ID: 641821
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We always ask this question and I don't know how, how, if you saw enough of your father [John Warren] to really give it a good answer, but when you consider your parents' personalities and their interests and their hobbies, their temperament, their looks, how they walked and talked--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who do you think you really take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lois Smith Rushin], my mother primarily.  I saw enough of my father, but not a whole lot, but I'm told that I look like my mother.  My wife [Debra Smith] tells me I have a lot of her mannerisms and a lot of her habits that are good.  So that's pretty refreshing.  So I, I would think that I have a lot of, a lot of my mother's mannerisms.
Speaker 1: Okay. She seems to be from just a, what I've heard so far, a person with a lot of perseverance?
Speaker 2: Yes, perseverance and you know, you know, ability to overcome.  I mean she, you know, she lived her life during some very difficult times and had, as she described, a struggle.  But the really good thing and the really neat thing that, that we feel really blessed about, she'll turn seventy-nine years old on January 1st of 2013.  One of the things that she has consistently said is that, you know, she had good kids.  I mean, she had of the eight of us that she raised, all of us with very disparate interests and, and professions if you will.  She was always proud that, that she raised good kids and we were, for the most part, none of whom were in trouble at any point, the usual, you know, stuff growing up.  But for the most part, she was always very pleased that she raised good kids, and, and quite frankly was I guess applauded in the community for having raised, especially boys, the last three of us were boys and she, she, with help of the community, I think raised us really well.
Story_ID: 641822
Speaker 1: Did your father [John Warren] have another family at all, or did he--was he just kind of--was he a single guy just, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did have another family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did have another family.  And interestingly enough, we, we have, especially in adulthood, but probably by late teens into my early twenties--late teens into my early twenties or so there was, there was a knowing during my teen years of the, of the other family.  And there has been quite a--how would I describe it, quite a, a--not necessarily a familiarization, but certainly a friendliness toward the other family.  There are, in fact, just this past weekend I was talking to my sister and there was a, a funeral in my hometown.  And she was telling me that there was an individual--she, you know, was telling me who all she had seen at the funeral.  And she was telling me two of the--two of my father's children, one of whom was adopted and the other I think was his biological child if I'm not mistaken.  But anyway, so there had become and has become over time a, a real friendliness toward that--those particular individuals who at that time were, were his family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You said that you were in Albany [Georgia] until you were about three years old?
Speaker 2: Correct.  We--as I understand it, we lived there until I was probably three years old, and then we moved out to, to Lee County [Georgia] at that time.
Story_ID: 641823
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: What's my earliest childhood memory?  I have no memories from living in, in Albany [Georgia].  My earliest childhood memory is from living in Lee County [Georgia] and I probably was five, maybe six years old, and I remember us living in this red house.  Excuse me, I remember us living in a red house that was just off the road a piece--that's real southern and rural, off the road a piece.  I remember living in that red house and I remember that lady and husband and wife who lived across the street from us was Ms. Bell and Jerry Russell.  And I remember them because they had a little food store and you know, I re- I have fond memories of growing up in that particular house and going across the street because Ms. Bell, her name was Bell Russell, and we called her Ms. Bell.  And Ms. Bell used to keep us at times, babysat for my mother [Lois Smith Rushin], and I must've been five, six years old, and those are probably the earliest memories that I have.
Story_ID: 641824
Speaker 1: Your siblings now, you--I think you, you ran through, but you--we didn't name all of them, so you wanna go back through--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --your siblings?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My oldest is a sister named Bonnie [ph.], next is Ben- Benjamin [ph.], then there are twins, Donald [ph.] and Ronald [ph.].  Then there's my sister, Sarah [ph.], then there's Anthony [ph.], then me, then Darryl [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then you will recall that I mentioned we had a sister named Marva, M-A-R-V-A, who died, thirteen, fourteen months.
Story_ID: 641825
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: can you describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights, I would say, small dirt road with a little bit of grass in the middle whereby the, I think the, the--what really at that time--interestingly enough I would think that the, the vehicles traveling over the road really made the road, almost like a path that became a road.  And the little road that led to our house growing up that I recall had the grass in the middle and the tire tracks on the immediate side of it because of vehicles traveling.  So it was one of those situations where my, my guess is it probably was not a carved out road, per se, but became a path that was worn and became a road.  So, that becomes an immediate memory as you ask that question.  I also can think of music.  My, my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] enjoyed music playing in the house, rhythm and blues.  And also I remember as a kid too the sound of, of, of water splashing in the tub, and I forget what you call there're, there're plenty of people who would know right away what you call them, the--they were silver, the round tubs that were silver.
Speaker 1: Those galvanized tubs, called--yeah I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those round tubs I remember having to take a bath in those.  And they were--I remember them being, being yay so big and round and silver, and hearing the water splash in those tubs.  And I remember, I would guess back in the '60s [1960s], I often remember, my sister reminds me of this too, that she would--she would have my younger brother Darryl [ph.] and I, we call him Dal.  She would have Dal and I in the same tub.  She would clean us and bathe us.  It was--I guess her job to get us clean and I just remember from childhood taking a bath and my sister giving us a bath in that big silver tub.  So yeah, those are, those are memories that I have right away.
Story_ID: 641826
Speaker 1: What were you drawn to as a child, as a little kid growing up; what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: As a kid growing up I, I really liked to read and I liked sports.  I was drawn heavily to sports and drawn heavily to reading.  I get that I think--not I think, I know I get that from my mother [Lois Smith Rushin].  To this day, she reads the local paper, probably two local papers cover to cover, every section.  And that's a, that's a wonderful habit that I picked up.  I will read several newspapers cover to cover, and what, what gets my wife [Debra Smith] sometimes is that--and others who know me well, they will know that I will read every section of the paper.  Normally I'll tend to gravitate towards the sports, but I'll read the sports section first often.  But most importantly and I guess most of the time, I'll read the headlines in the local section, but I will read every section of the paper, including the living section, although--you know it, just, whatever, the complete paper, I tend to read it all.  So I was drawn as a kid to reading and drawn heavily into sports as a kid.
Speaker 1: What aspect of sports did you like the most?
Speaker 2: What aspect?  I, I--
Speaker 1: Football, baseball or?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually was a, was a better football player, but I enjoyed playing basketball more.  And during that time of growing up, I participated in the four major sports that existed in, in South Georgia.  And when you say four major sports, that was track, baseball, football, and basketball.  And I participated in all four of those throughout high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, it's interesting now that as, as, as I'm older and I see other sports and other interests like, for instance, lacrosse or field hockey, and even golf, those were not sports that were--I don't think I even knew about lacrosse or field hockey.  I did know a little bit that golf existed growing up, but again it wasn't something that I was exposed to as a kid growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the other sports were, and I thoroughly enjoyed participating.
Story_ID: 641827
Speaker 1: When I saw your name and we were gonna interview you, I thought about two Steve Smith sports figures--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --the basketball guard and great guard with the Miami Heat and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the wide receiver Steve Smith [Steve Smith, Sr.] of the Carolina Panthers, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There's probably some more, but (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, probably a few more with that name.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a role model in terms of sports when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: As a--during that timeframe, I don't know that I had a specific role model, but I remember vividly some of the big names in football in the NFL [National Football League].  Was--I remember my sister liked the Pittsburgh Steelers, so of course, you know, it was Terry Bradshaw and Franco Harris, Mercury Morris with the Miami Dolphins.  About that time, obviously O.J. Simpson, you know, in the early '70s [1970s] was quite prevalent.  And by the time I got to high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia], Michael Jordan had come on the scene and he was, you know, the icon that he is.  I guess Michael and I--Michael probably is a year, maybe two older than I am I think.  But by that time he was, you know, not as iconic as he is now of course.  But back when I was growing up as a young teenager, it was the Franco Harris and Terry Bradshaw and Kurt Stabler [sic.] with the Raiders [Oakland Raiders].  And I remember a good friend of mine growing up, he loved the Raiders, you know, and he, he would--yeah it was Kenny Stabler [Ken Stabler], and that whole crowd of the Raiders when they were really the bad boys back in the '70s [1970s] I guess.  So those would be ones that come to mind.
Story_ID: 641828
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: I started at Lee County primary school, I think was the official name.  Or it may have been Lee County Elementary School [Leesburg, Georgia] might have been the official name.
Speaker 1: When you came along to school, this would've been 1969 or so, or '60 [1960] or '70 [1970]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I would've started in '70 [1970], yeah 1970 or so.
Speaker 1: Did you go to kindergarten at all or?
Speaker 2: I, I think I did.  I think I recall going to kindergarten.  I, I remember that because that was about the time of integration that occurred in the South and specifically in my hometown.  So when I went to school, schools were integrated and I think I started kindergarten, I'm not sure if I started kindergarten or first grade.  But I do know that we were integrated at that time.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have to be bused to school or was it within walking distance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to be bused.  We lived out in the country and so we were--we were miles away from the school so we rode the bus to school.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did the city or did the county close down the Lee County Training School [Leesburg, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, at some point the Lee County Training School closed and, you know, my guess is during that time it closed during the point where integration occurred and then Lee County Elementary School opened.  I think it's, it's probably the--that would be my guess as to how it happened.  And then, I started at Lee County Elementary School.  I don't think it was primary at that time because we, we went from elementary to the upper elementary school [Lee County Upper Elementary School, Leesburg, Georgia] and I think that at that point what we now know as middle school, I think we called it upper elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Today, I think it's what we know as middle school today.
Speaker 1: So Lee County went, like from first to eighth grade or kindergarten to eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: Did you gravitate to a certain subject?
Speaker 2: English, yeah I was, I was always, always found myself gravitating toward English and the language arts, and that was an area in which I did really well in and had a lot of interest and as a result, gravitated toward that--that specific area.
Speaker 1: Now you say you read a lot, did you go, have access to a good library?
Speaker 2: I had access to a decent library.  I don't know that it was good.  We had--and we had some books in the home, but not, not many.  I just remember that I always enjoyed school, always liked being in school and being in school and I liked the environment of being in a learning environment if you will.  That was something that--that was always fun for me.  My--my brother Andy [Anthony (ph.)] who's next older, he has a very different story that he likes to tell about how he couldn't care less about going to school.  He just, you know, did not like it.  He went, but he's, you know, he often talks to his son about, you know, how, you know, growing up he didn't like the school and you know, went, but he didn't like it.  But I on the other hand always enjoyed school, and really enjoyed the academic pursuit.
Story_ID: 641829
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in elementary school [Lee County Elementary School, Leesburg, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I had a favorite teacher.  One of the, one of the things I remember about first grade is a teacher named Mrs. Ethyl [ph.].  And I remember I always liked Mrs. Ethyl, but Mrs. Ethyl really made me--I really liked her a lot more because she, she was one of the first people to tell me I was smart.  I remember her telling me I was smart.  I remember spelling, I forget what the word was I spelled, but I remember having to spell a word in first grade and she just thought I was the smartest thing yet.  And I remember liking Miss Ethyl and she took a real liking to me, and you know, was my favorite teacher at that primary stage.  Then by the time I got to elementary school I had, had a--had several who were, who were favorites of mine.  I had an English teacher named Ms. Chambliss [ph.] who was really nice and I really enjoyed her class and she was a favorite.  And she had a brother who was an English teacher in eighth grade.  I think we had her in seventh grade and her brother was the English teacher in eighth grade. And I really enjoyed Mr. Willis [ph.] getting to, to go to his class and I can still remember he was big on diagraming sentences and that was his, that was his big thing of breaking down the sentences and diagraming the parts of speech.  So I remember that vividly.  And then into high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia], I was very fortunate in high school, I have a favorite teacher from high school who I still keep in contact with to this day.  In fact, she and one of my high school coaches I still keep in contact with to this day.  And this past weekend there was a ceremony for my former high school basketball coach, he was my basketball and baseball coach.  He actually, his team--basketball team won the state championship three years after I graduated.  Then they had a reception and a ring ceremony for that '85 [1985] championship team this past weekend.  We had planned to go, we made a contribution to the--they were raising funds to buy rings for that '85 [1985] team.  So we made a contribution and were planning to attend, and then my son [Steven Smith, Jr.] got sick and was--we weren't able to go because he had a pretty severe allergic reaction to a drug actually.  So we weren't able to go this past weekend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah to answer your question.  You know, specifically in high school, Mrs. Ruckel [Elaine Ruckel] was my high school English teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my high school coach, Coach Watts [Hugh "Butch" Watts], they were by far my favorite and as I indicated almost thirty years later or so, I still keep in contact with them.
Story_ID: 641830
Speaker 1: In your grade school days, now when you were a kid growing up, was, was church very important?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, church was very central to my upbringing.  We, we had, you know, we had the, I don't know, I guess you would call it the quintessential small black Baptist church located in the rural South where most of my uncles were the deacons in the church, and you know, out of maybe one hundred people who were members, I, you know, I'd had to say ninety of them were related to me in some way.  So we went to that kind of church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: New Piney Grove Baptist Church [Leesburg, Georgia].
Speaker 1: New Piney Grove.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the quintessential small church in the country.  And grew up and was raised Baptist and you know, religion was very central to my upbringing and remains very central to me in adulthood.  But I have very fond memories of growing up and my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] taking us to church and being in church with my uncles and other family members.  Yeah, I have very fond memories of growing up and being a part of New Piney Grove Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Did the church--did the reverend or the other church leaders identify you as a youth as a leader?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did and specifically, specifically my Uncle Buddy, now we sh- his name was Tom Smith.  But my Uncle Buddy was the head of the deacon board.  And I remember that Uncle Buddy would always call on me to either read scripture or to take up money in the church and or to make announcements.  So he and others, in the church, recognized and quite frankly encouraged and helped to, I think, as I reflect on it, I think really empower me to be a leader and to be not only a leader, but I, I got the message from them whether it was direct or indirect, I got the message from them that being smart was okay.  They were--they were always proud of me for being smart.  And I remember getting that message probably indirectly and they may have meant it directly, but I remember getting that message indirectly from my--from my church family and my, my extended family that being smart was okay, and they were pretty proud of me.
Story_ID: 641831
Speaker 1: Was that generally true when you were growing up--that if somebody was smart they were admired or held up?  Or, you know, 'cause you hear it said today that, you know, kid gets to, you know, shows too much ability or something the other kids say you're acting like a white person and all this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I, I didn't--I don't think I necessarily had the whole acting white, you know, that part that sometimes come with it, comes with being bright.  But I will tell you, Larry [Larry Crowe], one of the things that I had to deal with growing up through school as an African American male, sometimes it's different for African American females, but I vividly remember being what, what we would call in sections.  There was--oh there was--there's another word I'm looking for that that happened during the '60s [1960s] and during integration, where there were, there were schools within schools and we were, we were segregated based--tracking, that's the word--
Speaker 1: Right, tracking, right.
Speaker 2: --tracking is well throughout the education system in terms of history.  There is a, there's a fairly well documented system of tracking.  Now the, the one thing that I'm very vivid about in terms of my memory of growing up through school, is that, you know, we had six sections and you know, the smartest kids were in section one, two and three.  And as we knew it, the kids who weren't as bright were in sections four, five and six.  Now, the reality of that is I, you know, from what history shows us and what I experienced, the reality of that is that the kids who were white in a segregated area sometimes got the benefit of the doubt and they were placed in sections one, two and three regardless of ability.  And kids if you--who were black were placed in the lower sections, four, five and six.
Speaker 1: So were the--
Speaker 2: I was--I'm sorry go ahead.
Speaker 1: No I was going to say were the lower sections populated almost entirely by black students?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, absolutely, absolutely that was the case.  And I remember early on, there was--there was one other black kid in section one with me, his name was Jeff Bryant [ph.].  I remember Jeff, he still lives in Lee County [Georgia] now.  But I remember being--I often talk about how that was for me being the only black kid in the class.  And for a long time, throughout grade school and growing up, I was either the only black kid in the class or there were maybe one, maybe two other black kids.  I remember by third grade, Jeff--I think it's about third or fourth grade, Jeff was no longer in section one with me, and I wound up being the only kid at--only black kid in the class for several years after that.
Story_ID: 641832
Speaker 1: You were interested primarily in English, right, you were saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you work growing up, did you have any jobs, you know?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I recall I said that we used to go with daddy-o on a truck loading watermelons and picking peas.  So that was my job in my early teens and just before I turned teenage years.  We would always go with him and you know, he would give us--at the end of the day, we worked early in the morning and through lunch and to the evening, and I'm sure he, he paid us twenty bucks [dollars], I'm sure, every time we went to help him, whatever portion he sold he would always pay us at the end of the day.  And then once I got to be a teenager, I worked during the summer at my high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia].  The last, I think my junior and sophomore year I worked in the CETA program.  So I was assigned to the high school and we helped the custodian clean the high school during the summer.  You know, we were moving desks and cleaning the hallways.  I actually learned to run a buffer during that program where I worked for the CETA program, and I forget what CETA stands for but I understand it's a federal program.
Speaker 1: Comprehensive Employment and Training, I think, yeah it was a program that came out of Ni- the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration I'm saying.  Part of revenue sharing or something that was--yeah.
Speaker 2: I recall, yeah, I recall having that job for two summers and I think that was my sophomore and junior year in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Comprehensive Employment and Training Act [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973] is what it was.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: And provided like jobs for youth and there was money for young adults too that weren't gainfully employed that, you know, couldn't get their first real good job yet.  So you could get a job with a city or school district or something like that too.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, well I worked in my sophomore and junior year at my high school in the CETA program.  And then by my senior year in high school, I was actually writing for the local sports section of the local paper.  I was a sports--I was a beat reporter by the time I was a senior.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was your local paper?
Speaker 2: It was the Lee County Ledger.  I was sports reporter for the Lee County Ledger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was, I was a sports beat reporter.
Story_ID: 641833
Speaker 1: In terms of playing sports, did, now you said you were a pretty good football player (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or you played that was your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --best sport.  So how did--so what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played fullback and tight end my senior year, and leading up to that I played cornerback and running back as well.  And had aspirations of going on to, to play at the collegiate level, had a pretty severe injury where I injured my knee and my--broke, I actually broke my ankle and broke a bone in my leg during my senior year, October of my senior year and that slowed the recruiting tremendously.  So I--I've stayed involved with sports, but I at that point had played sports all four--through my senior year and was able to come back.  I missed the later part of my senior year in football, but was able to come back for a good portion of my senior year in basketball and still play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were on a team in basketball too?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And you enjoyed that more than football you said, it was--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I enjoyed that.  Probably because of my coach, who I said is to this day remains my favorite, Coach Watts [Hugh "Butch" Watts].  He was--he remains quite the character.  But he was very supportive of me as an individual, as he was with, with all kids.  But we have a, a special relationship and he was my baseball coach as well.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So we developed a really good rapport and that friendship remains to this day.
Speaker 1: Now is he any relation to Slick Watts, the NBA [National Basketball Association] player?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No he wasn't.  We would, we would refer to him as Slick Watts.  He, he played up at--he's white, and he played at Georgia Southwestern [Georgia Southwestern College; Georgia Southwestern State University, Americus, Georgia] and was a really good shooter.  And so I mean, he just flat out could shoot the basketball.  And he's quite colorful and you know, likes to tell stories and likes to talk a lot.  But you know, was just a real caring individual and he, you know, he had that caring and concern for, you know, a lot of the athletes who came up under his program and a lot of the kids who came through school, quite frankly, he was that kind of coach whereby he was so colorful and such a character that he knew a lot of the siblings.  I mean, he would know all the siblings in the community.  He would be familiar with all of our families and had been a real staple in the high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia] for some time until his retirement back early 2000s, I guess he retired.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting, that just ten years after segregation, you know, you have this great relationship with a white coach [Hugh "Butch" Watts] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which kind of shows that, you know, things that were in, seemed like they were in stone at one point really then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --didn't have to stay that way.
Speaker 2: No they did not and, and you know, you know the other piece too is that, you know, I, I talk to--my wife [Debra Smith] and I, we have one child [Steven Smith, Jr.].  And I, I talk to him about, you know, how critical relationships are and how you have to judge people for who they are as an individual and not as a group of individuals.  You know, so we're, we're pretty, we're pretty intentional about teaching our son to accept people for who they are and to be really proud of, of who he is as an individual and to be proud of, of his race.  And I think what that does, is that gives him the ability to be accepting of other people who are diverse and who are different, yet genuinely good people, and taking them for the character--the content of their character and not generalizing.  And, and we've been pretty specific about raising our child to be that way.  Because for, for me personally, I have had very positive relationships and some very meaningful and deep relationships with individuals who are white.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, your high school is Lee County High School [Leesburg, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Lee County High School.  Lee County High School Trojans.  They are my--I smile because I, my sister is married to a guy who, he went to high school down in Albany [Georgia], Dougherty County [Dougherty County High School; Dougherty Comprehensive High School] and he--they are the Dougherty--and my wife also went to this high school and they are the Dougherty High School Trojans.  And we have this family rivalry that, you know, we're the real Trojans; they're just, they're just the fake Trojans.
Story_ID: 641834
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in high school activities like, you know, clubs and that sort of thing?  Now you were a writer, did you write for the school newspaper (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  I was--you know, I did the proverbial, you know, it was high school journalism class, I was in Beta Club [National Beta Club].  I did National Honor Society, I was member of National Honor Society.  I was on the newspaper staff and as I mentioned, the journalism staff which we did the annual, I think it's called a yearbook.  So I was in the yearbook club, I participated in that.  And student government, I was president of my class, my freshman, sophomore and junior year, I was president of my class.  And then my senior year, I lost the race for president and wound up being--I think I was president of National Honor Society my senior year [at Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that was my senior year.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, so, you were taking the college prep course I would imagine, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you took chemistry and physics and that sort of thing then?
Speaker 2: Right, to be prepared for college.  And the high school English teacher I told you about, who was my favorite, Mrs. Ruckel [Elaine Ruckel], you know I tell people often I share that between she and my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] I always knew I was going to college.  I didn't necessarily know, you know, what I was going to major in or didn't know, you know, the specifics, but I knew I was going to college.  And she, excuse me, Mrs. Ruckel was the one who, you know, was encouraging to me about going to college and I would always listen to my mother and my mother would consistently tell me, you know, "You better do what them teachers say."  And you know, with that admonition, you know, I, I--there was never any doubt that I was going to be going to college.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you have good counseling about what college to choose?
Speaker 2: You know, interesting question you ask.  I don't know that I had good counseling, but I had Mrs. Ruckel who told me I was going to college, and I don't know that there were a lot of different choices at that time, the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] was--it was where she told me I would go and you know, it seemed fine, I liked the football program, I liked the sports program overall and it was the, you know, the flagship college in the state.  And so I knew eventually that that's where I would go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--this is--you graduated from high school in 19--?
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982].
Story_ID: 641835
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty two [1982], and so you started at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  Now is there anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I actually, I actually started at--I spent two years at Albany Junior College [Albany, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then went to University of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, we- okay, we'll get to that.  But was--is there anything special about graduation?
Speaker 2: Graduating high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, high school.  Did you, did you get a chance to make a presentation or anything or?
Speaker 2: No, I remember wearing the gold cord for Beta Club [National Beta Club] or National Honor Society.  I remember being--I remember feeling special because I was--I had the gold cord on and the cords, I guess, for Beta and National Honor Society and that wa- that goes back to what I was sharing earlier about, quite honestly my community recognizing me for being smart.  And I remember, I remember vividly there were two individuals, one of whom I remember specifically, I remember him saying something to the effect in--in his own vernacular, saying that, "Boy that's the way to do it, you wearing that gold cord, make us all proud."  And I just remember that and remember feeling a sense of pride at having accomplished that honor.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1982 you graduated from high school and you went to Albany State--I mean I'm sorry it was?
Speaker 2: It's Albany Junior College.
Speaker 1: Albany Junior College.
Speaker 2: It's since renamed Darton College [Darton State College].
Speaker 1: Albany.  So that's near home?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So did you live at home and commute?
Speaker 2: (Cough) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I did.
Story_ID: 641836
Speaker 1: Now were there any--now you, you had good grades at--you were a good stu- National Honor Society member, who suggested you go to junior college [Albany Junior College, Darton State College, Albany, Georgia] first or was it more affordable, or what was the issue?
Speaker 2: You know it--it's interesting.  I don't, I don't know and it may be as you ask that question, it really gets back to what kind of guidance I had at the time.  You know, I, I don't know the answer, I don't remember how that occurred, but I, you know, it's, it's interesting you ask that question because, you know, one would think I would've gotten a different, a different set of, set of advice and I just don't know.  It may have been, I don't know, it may have been financial, it may have been--you know, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can't think of any reason, I mean somebody with your kind of grades and your being a black student, the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and all that sort of thing would've been, would love to have shepherd you through to some place.  Or you know, but if you're not getting, you know, counseling--if the counselors don't have a stake in you, you know.  Now, Mrs. Ruckel [Elaine Ruckel], was she a white teacher or a black teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah she was white, is white, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: White teacher, and you know, you got Coach Watts [Hugh "Butch" Watts] there.  Did you, but you can't remember who the counselor actually was in the, the school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's interesting.  I don't remember my counselor's name.  I can see her face.  I think at the time I had Ms. Betty Davis, may have been our counselor.  But I, I, I don't recall any specific conversations, or general conversations for that matter, about, about college.
Story_ID: 641837
Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers at Lee County [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A few.  A few.  Very little.  I remember that there were in, in round numbers out of a staff of maybe fifty, there were probably three, maybe four black teachers.
Speaker 1: Yeah I know a lot of people complained when integration actually took place, the black schools were disbanded.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And only really the top black teachers or the ones that had the highest academic credentials were brought over into the system or could be other criteria that brought them over.  But a lot of people were left behind, you know, they weren't brought over to--almost like it's a continuation of segregation, only a few black teachers went into these newly integrated schools.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: I just wonder about that.  But, yeah 'cause it would seem like any good, you know, in the old days the black, you know, faculty would've pushed you right into a four year, you know, school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Well I, I did not have, did not have a--I was trying to think of, of a black teacher who was in an academic area.  There was, I remember Mr. Walker [ph.] who was in the--he was in the vocational division of what, what was referred to as vocational ed [vocational education] at the time.
Speaker 1: Wood shop--
Speaker 2: Wood shop, that whole genre.  I--we did have a Mrs. Rand [ph.] who was an history teacher, she was black.  And then at one point, we had a typing teacher who was black.  And I can't think--and I had one--I remember having one coach who I think taught P.E. [physical education] who was black, but he was only there maybe two of the four years of my high school, may have been just one year, but I know he was there one, maybe two years.  Outside of that, none of my other teachers were black.
Story_ID: 641838
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in a county where--I mean the school population was what percentage black would you say?
Speaker 2: Probably 20 percent I would guess, maybe 30 percent black.  And in the rural South, as Lee County [Georgia] is, it was, you know, I tell people all the time, it's, you know, it was black and white, there was no other, you know.  And it was Wednesday night Bible study and Friday night football, and that was the happening in town.  And the, you know, the diversity was nonexistent.  It was primarily black people and white people.  I knew very little about anyone Hispanic or Asian.  I didn't know anything about anyone being Jewish, I didn't know what that meant growing up, wasn't exposed to that until later in life.  So it was, you know, it was my growing up was--it was black people and white people.  And as my mama [Lois Smith Rushin] likes to tell it, everybody was Baptist and you know, if you weren't Baptist there was something wrong with you.  That's just kind of the, the region of the, of the nation that we grew up in.  It was black and white and Baptist.
Speaker 1: Now was there a Methodist church, a black Methodist church around?
Speaker 2: No, if it were, if it were (laughter), if I were I didn't know--we didn't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And to this day, you know, to this day we are currently members of a Methodist church that's an African American population Methodist.  But you know, I don't know that I could--I don't know that I knew any diversity of religion.  I, you know, the way I grew up and the way I was raised, you know, I thought everybody was Baptist.  I thought everybody was Baptist, didn't know a whole lot about other religions at all.
Story_ID: 641839
Speaker 1: Now you were going to Albany community college right there in--in the same area.  Did, did you have a chance to travel any as a teenager, or before, to any other part of the country--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or see anything else?
Speaker 2: No, no not very much at all.  I did not have the opportunity to travel very much at all.  And as a re- as a result I think that's probably why I take such great pleasure today in being able to, to travel and to see other parts of the U.S. and other parts of the world.  Because, you know, as a, as a kid, as a teen, we didn't have the ability to travel.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well at Albany community--Albany Junior College [Darton State College, Albany, Georgia] rather, what did you decide to major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a journalism, journalism major there and might have been journalism, English.
Speaker 1: And, and, what did you--so you had envisioned yourself as becoming a newspaper writer or sports writer, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was part of the plan and by the time I got to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], it had morphed into English and my plans were to teach and coach.  And I was going to teach English and be a coach, and that was the career path that I had chosen.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything significant about Albany Junior College in terms of--were there any special teachers there or programs that you found out about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there was a professor there named Dr. Saville, James Saville.  I haven't kept up with him, but he was--
Speaker 1: It's S-A?
Speaker 2: S-A-V-I-L-L-E.  Dr. James Saville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was, he was essentially the guru in the journalism department and I gravitated toward him and he toward me.  And we had a, had a very special relationship.  And in fact, I think he was responsible, he was responsible if I recall correctly for getting me an opportunity to work at a local radio station [WGPC Radio, Albany, Georgia].  I'm pretty sure he was the one who made me aware that there was a need at a local classical music station or--it wasn't classical, it was easy listening that was just down the street from the college.  And I remember working in that job and enjoying it.  And he was instrumental in helping me get that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he stands out as an individual who was, who was very, who was very instrumental during that time period in my life.
Story_ID: 641840
Speaker 1: Was your job to spin records on the radio show?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were, we were spinning records and announcing the weather would be the--I mean that was the big thing on, on WGPC [WGPC Radio, Albany, Georgia].  I think it's since gone out of business, but it was an easy listening station at Albany [Georgia].  And my job was to cue up the records and to read the weather.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a radio voice that you always used for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a little sample?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was, it was, it was, "Welcome to WGPC your easy listening station here in Albany."  And then I would read the weather and you know, "Today's weather is going to be partly cloudy today with a high in the seventies [degrees] and going to be," you know, we'd read the weather and I enjoyed doing that.  I enjoyed that job.  And was probably in that job two years probably, two if not three years because I worked at that job and when I went off to University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], I also then was a sportswriter for the Albany Herald, which was the largest paper, newspaper in southwest Georgia.  I wrote sports for that paper during the time, so I really had the job at the radio station and the job as a sportswriter with the Albany Herald, and maintained that job when I went away to Athens [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those were, yeah those were very fond memories in fact, very fond memories.
Story_ID: 641841
Speaker 1: So University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia.  Now where is Athens in relation to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It's about an hour northeast of Atlanta, Athens is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so how did you like the University of Georgia?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  I had a, had a really positive experience at the University of Georgia.  It was, you know, it was a large city, large campus, and I had the opportunity to grow and thrive, and felt like it was a very good fit for me at that stage in my life.  And generated some very dear friends, lifelong friends while in college, and have stayed connected to the University of Georgia since graduating.  I have been very fond of it and have served on several alumni boards and stayed active and currently serve on the board of trustees for the University of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now you didn't play any sports at the University of Georgia did you?
Speaker 2: No, no I did not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that the football team, if I'm not wrong, when Herschel Walker was there?
Speaker 2: Herschel had just left by the time I got there.  I think and most people fail to remember that Herschel left after three years.  He signed with the, what's that team, New Jersey Generals in the USFL [United State Football League].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: He signed, yeah, he signed I think if I recall correctly, it was an illegal signing at the time, you could not sign as a junior and he did.  And once it was discovered that he had signed, he had to leave, because he was ineligible for undergraduate competition at that point.  So that would've been I think in 1983 maybe?
Speaker 1: Okay. USFL, yeah that's right, that's a league that is gone.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By the wayside, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, USFL.
Speaker 1: I remember they had the World Football League at one time and that didn't last either.  Somebody created something like the X--some kind of X football league [XFL] or something like that.  Double X or triple X football league and that didn't last either.  Yeah, at any rate.  So Herschel Walker, yeah he was a big star--made me realize there were black students at the University of Georgia now--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, we saw him on TV, said wait a minute, this is (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, exactly (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 641842
Speaker 1: So they had integrated, I guess what in the '70s [1970s], the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Sixty- early '60s [1960s].  [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault and Hamilton Holmes--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --helped to integrate the University of Georgia, 19--see here I am on camera Larry [Larry Crowe], I think it was sixty- was that 1961?
Speaker 1: I think you're right.
Speaker 2: I think it was 1961.
Speaker 1: I think you're right and I didn't really think about.  I know that they were there, but I really don't--you don't really think of it in terms of having a proliferation of black students.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You didn't really get that for a long time, even after they struggled to--
Speaker 2: Right.  I think we were into the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When they were there, yeah.
Speaker 2: --before there was a real push--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in terms of increasing the percentage of black students who were at the University of Georgia, who were able to attend.
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, you know, people always cite the introduction of ath-black athletes as the real introd- integration of the school in a lot of ways.  Because that's when people think okay, it's okay to go here now.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.  And there's actually two--the first black graduate from the University of Georgia, who is Mary Francis [Mary Francis Early], I think is her--is her correct name.  But often, over the last few years, she has now been integrated and intertwined into the historical perspective because people will automatically respond with Hamilton Holmes and Charlayne Hunter-Gault, but when in reality Mary Francis I think was the first black graduate from the University of Georgia and she had, she had taken courses at another school, I forget where, but wound up transferring to the University of Georgia, and was the first black graduate--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from the University of Georgia.
Story_ID: 641843
Speaker 1: --Started University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] in 1983, is that correct, or '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Would have been fall of '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay, so you said Herschel Walker left in '83 [1983] then I guess to go to the USFL [United States Football League], or the fall, spring of '84 [1984] I guess, to go then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it would have been--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --likely spring of '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Likely would have been spring of '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1984, now, I've neglected to mention that during the time that you were growing up from age ten to age fourteen, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president and a different kind of Georgia from the kind, I mean, the public were used to seeing on TV in those days.  And so do you have any reflections on what that meant to black people in the State of Georgia or to you, to see people like [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and others, you know, brought to the forefront that were from right here?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't have, I don't have any specific memories or I don't know that it made a, made a difference with me.  I, you know, I just don't recall having that exposure or it being pointed out as being important.  I don't, I don't have any of those memories.  Now they could very well exist and it could very well have been, it's just not something that is poignant for me at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. And likewise, I mean the legacy of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I think it was--I think it was in the early '80s [1980s] that Stevie Wonder started pushing to have the holiday celebrated--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King's birthday [Martin Luther King, Jr. Day].  When you were in school, did the administration take you all over to Atlanta [Georgia] through The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] or did anybody ever do that when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: No.  And I think that Stevie Wonder's celebration for Dr. King, that movement I think started 1986 [sic. 1980]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was about 1986.  I have--I know that during my--one of my courses during my stay at the University of Georgia undergrad involved an African American studies course that was taught by [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax.  Most people knew him then as the Fulton County commission chair [Fulton County Board of Commissioners] and he eventually, as you know, ran for mayor of Atlanta and he was known as a politician, but he is quite the scholar.  And in fact, if I'm not mistaken, his Ph.D. is actually in black studies or literature.  But anyway, I remember the campus being--I remember having an advisor who said to me that there's this bigwig coming from Atlanta and he was going to be teaching an African American studies course and I should take it.  So I did.  I signed up for the course and took it, and thoroughly enjoyed it, and thoroughly enjoyed getting to know, he's Dr. Lomax at the time, and of course now he's president and CEO of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and I have seen him subsequent in my professional life and have had very meaningful interactions with him as a, as a professional and as an adult.  And I have very vivid memories of that course that he taught at the University of Georgia in African American studies.
Story_ID: 641844
Speaker 1: Is there any particular aspect of his [HistoryMaker Michael Lomax] class that you enjoyed the most [at the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I, I remember when we talked about W.E.B. Du Bois, we, we read 'The Souls of Black Folk' and I remember him--I remember us having a real focus on, on lifting and a real focus in class and in conversation about lifting the veil and lifting the veil of, of really of, of being informed and lifting--Du Bois talked about lifting the veil of ignorance for, for black people to be involved in learning a trade.  And there was a whole debate--I remember we had a series of books we read in that class and I remember also there was the debate with Du Bois and was it Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays] who said or Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 1: Booker T., yeah.
Speaker 2: It was Booker T. who had the, you know, the, the legendary debate about whether blacks should learn a trade or whether they should be academic scholars.  And I remember having rich discussion in class about Booker T. who said, you know, you should learn a trade and you know, learn a skill and have that skill, and that's how we would pull ourselves up as a race and Du Bois was, on the other hand, saying we should be scholars and academi- academicians and that was going to be our route to prosperity.  And I remember from Dr. Lomax's class having very rich discussion about that topic.  That's, that's one thing that I do remember.
Speaker 1: Did you fall on one side of the argument or the other?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if you'll think about what I shared earlier, you know, I was certainly of the academic pursuit.  (Laughter) I was not interested in the skills or the field or learning any of that stuff.  I was--so my, my leaning was toward the academic side.
Story_ID: 641845
Speaker 1: What was your major at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I majored in English education.
Speaker 1: So, English education.  So with the idea of becoming a teacher?
Speaker 2: Correct.  I was going to be a teacher and a coach.  I was going to teach English and coach, and that was going to be my career path.
Speaker 1: Okay, other than (unclear), Dr. Lomax [HistoryMaker Michael Lomax], was there any other special teachers on campus?
Speaker 2: I had a, a teacher named Dan Kirby.  He was Dr. Kirby, and he was my advisor, as well as he was a professor of English education and writing.  So he stands out as a, as a professor of note who I remember very vividly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anybody else?
Speaker 2: I was trying to think if there were any other professors who I--none with whom I had a real relationship or I have memories of a few professors in college, but none that--none that I had a relationship with like I did Dr. Kirby.  He was, as I said he was my advisor and I took him for at least two classes, I think I had two courses from him, and then he was my advisor.  So, he--he would--he remains a standout for me.
Speaker 1: Was there a black student organization on campus that, or were you a member of a black student organization (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not.  And I was trying to think if there were a black student union [Black Affairs Council].  I remember on campus there being a black student union.  I was a member of a fraternity, Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] was the fraternity I was a member of and we, primarily on campus the Sigmas were the--that was the fraternity that had the athletes in it.  And I had one friend of mine who--actually two, who were on the football team who I knew pretty closely before getting to the University of Georgia.  One I had met at Boys State [American Legion Boys State] back when we were in, I guess between the eleventh and twelfth grade, and he wound up being my roommate and that was Calvin [Calvin Ruff].  And then Victor Perry was from a small town near me called Fitzgerald [Georgia] and we had--we used to play them in football.  So I knew Vic from playing against him in football.  So the two of them were primarily instrumental in me joining Phi Beta Sigma as a fraternity.  And I, I thought about that and I gravitated toward responding to that question because for me, that was the, that was the group whereby as an African American male where I was able to bond and have a kindred spirit--several kindred spirits if you will.  So for me, that became the place where I could go and would be very comfortable in my surrounding with people who were of like mind, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because as I said, there, there were two people there I already knew and they were primarily athletes.  So for that reason I gravitated to that group.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, so you were involved in some journalistic activities in school, and you had the radio show [WGPC Radio, Albany, Georgia].  So did you take any business courses at all?
Speaker 2: None.  I did not take any business courses during my undergraduate years.  I don't, yeah, I don't recall that I did, I don't think I took any business courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you--in your mind you were going to teach high school and be a coach?  That was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Cough) That was the plan.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was going to teach high school English and be a coach.
Story_ID: 641846
Speaker 1: When did you graduate?  In--?
Speaker 2: Graduated 1986--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and one of the--one of the things that, that led me to a track of administration right away was that I was very fortunate to get a job right out of college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].  And the job that I got right out of college involved teaching high school English part time, and the other half of the day I was at the superintendent's office handling public relations and community relations for a small district right outside of Athens [Georgia], it was Barrow County [Barrow County School System] in Winder, Georgia just about thirty minutes outside of Athens.  So I started my career teaching half day English and then the second half I was handling public relations for the small district.  And in handling the public relations, I got to work closely alongside the superintendent because in a small district, the superintendent is involved in, you know, essentially every aspect of operations of a small district.  So I was involved in working alongside Dr. Hight, who became a friend and a mentor from that job that I started back in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell the Hight?
Speaker 2: H-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don Hight.  He was quite, quite a little pistol.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were, so this is the--what school district is this, this is the?
Speaker 2: Barrow County, B-A-R-R-O-W.  Barrow County and the county seat is Winder, W-I-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so, Winder, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, I know you went over to the Fulton County school system [Fulton County Schools] at one point and became a principal before you left education--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --I mean in your early days.  So what was going on in Barrow County and how, what was the transition to Fulton?
Speaker 2: To Fulton, yeah.  I spent from 1986 until 1991 in Winder in Barrow County, and during that timeframe I was teaching English half time, handling public relations, the other half of my responsibilities, working out of the superintendent's office.  And during that timeframe, one of the things that, that became pretty prevalent for me is that I knew I enjoyed being in the community.  I enjoyed being--having the flexibility of going to different events and being involved with elected officials.  That was my first taste of being involved with the mayor of the city.  You know, again in a small town like that, the superintendent is, you know, a bigwig in town.  So I got to travel around the small district with him a lot.  And as a result, he encouraged me to start, to start a program, if I were going to be in education, he said, "You should go to graduate school and get an educational administration degree."  Because if you're gonna be in education you want to be a leader and you should--in order to do that to be an assistant principal and to move to a principalship you gotta have a master's [degree] in educational administration, which is what I--what I subsequently pursued.  But that time period, the five years that I spent in Winder were very--it was very--I guess it was an enjoyable time in my life and was a very successful time for me professionally.  I got married in 1989, and my wife [Debra Smith] and I worked in Winder for those next two years or three years I guess, before we moved to Atlanta [Georgia].  And I have--
Story_ID: 641847
Speaker 1: Tell us how you met your wife and what those circumstances were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife and I are both from the same hometown, and we met, I like to tell the story that my, my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] and her mother when, when we lived in Albany [Georgia], and they lived a couple of houses down from each other.  And my mother and my wife's mother [Ann Davis (ph.)] swapped out keeping the two of us together at times so that I must--the story--as the story goes, I was two and Debbie [Debra Smith] was one, my wife is Debbie.  I was two and Debbie was one and our mothers kept us together as babies for a while.  And then, of course, we moved away to Lee County [Georgia].  And then we reunited back I guess in high school [Lee County High School, Leesburg, Georgia] is when I saw her.  I think I saw her, Debbie was working at McDonald's and then we started talking on the telephone and then her mother asked, you know, who was this guy calling the house or.  So anyway Debbie told her who it was and subsequently we found out our families knew each other.  And that's how we--I mean we started dating soon after that.  So I, I kid her and tell her she's loved me since diapers.  So we--she gets a kick out of that one.  So yeah, so we--we've been together ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Been together ever since.
Story_ID: 641848
Speaker 1: So you're married in 1989.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And now--now when did you--okay so, in '91 [1991] when you finished in Barrow County [Barrow County School System] did you go, did you go right on, you went on to, to Fulton County [Fulton County Schools] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and I started with Fulton County as an assistant principal at the elementary school, Randolph Elementary School [A. Philip Randolph Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And--
Speaker 1: Now let me pause let's go back a little bit.  So you got a master's [degree] though in edu-
Speaker 2: Educational administration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now you got that, that's at Troy State, right or was that at Troy State [Troy State University; Troy University, Troy, Alabama] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Oh University of Georgia, okay.
Speaker 2: University of Georgia for the master's.  And then what's referred to as a specialist degree or a six year degree I got at Troy State.  And that was 1996 I think for the specialist.
Speaker 1: So the master's at the University of Georgia was in 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety- I think I finished that degree in spring of 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1990--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the degree from Troy State was a special--
Speaker 2: Yeah, educational specialist,
Speaker 1: Educational special- okay.
Speaker 2: --and that one was 1996 I think when I completed that degree.
Story_ID: 641849
Speaker 1: So in Fulton County, Georgia, now you're an assistant principal, and what's the name of your school?
Speaker 2: A. Philip Randolph [A. Philip Randolph Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  It was named for Asa Philip Randolph [A. Philip Randolph].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the--that was a one year stint as an assistant principal and then I was named principal the following year.  So I spent one year as an assistant principal and then took over as principal that following school year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you're really in charge of something here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now I'm running things.
Speaker 1: Running something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a, what did you, what was your task as laid out before--I mean, what did circumstances have you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as principal of that school, of A. Philip Randolph at the time, my task was to, you know, I did everything from help with curriculum to--I mean, it was ma- it was what you would think of managing a building.  It was everything from being involved with curriculum, supervising teachers, supervising custodial staff, food service, as well as all aspects of the building or the plant as it was referred to.  So it was, it was, you know, site based management at the time.  And we had a real diverse, economically diverse group of students.  That school is located in Southwest Atlanta [Georgia] outside of the perimeter.  And we had a housing project, and when I say diverse economically, we had a housing project that was Boat Rock housing project [Atlanta, Georgia] that the school served.  Those kids came--kids came directly from Boat Rock to Randolph.  And we also had the up and coming, what would be declared or described as upwardly middle class African American families who also had their kids coming to Randolph.  So it was, you know, real--a real, I guess, task to be able to manage in an environment where there was, you know, such economic disparities, yet the goal was to be able to educate every child who showed up.  And by the time we left, by the time I left and at the end of the '97 [1997] school year, 1997 school year, we had done, what I thought and by all accounts, was an excellent job of making it an environment where kids could come and learn and we were, we were really making a difference in the kids and their lives during the time that they came to us at Randolph Elementary School.  And we, you know, we, we were very proud by the time I left that school.  I had, I had done my work at central office and had been an assistant principal and coaching at the high school level when we were in Winder [Georgia] and then that was my first entree into elementary school when I took the job as the assistant principal at Randolph Elementary.  And it, it became a real growth spurt for me.  You mention how that was really running things, I really learned a lot about leadership and a lot about managing people and leading people during that job.  I was, I was probably the youngest principal or one of the youngest at the time.  I don't think it's as big a deal now as it was back then, but I was twenty seven years old as a principal.  And I got a lot of hard knock lessons about leadership.  And really to this day, remain very fond of the school and the staff who are at Randolph because for me it was a growing up period in terms of, of leadership and management development.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, 1991 from, okay--no, okay from '91 [1991] to--you were there from '91 [1991] until 1997, is that, that right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 641850
Speaker 1: Then you went over to Georgia Public Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Now did you go initially as a educational consultant, or did you--were you introduced to them that way or?
Speaker 2: No, I was introduced to them by way of, remember I had worked for Dr. Don Hight as a superintendent in Winder [Georgia].  He was--the gentleman who was running Georgia Public Broadcasting at that time, was a mentor and colleague as well.  His, he was a former state school superintendent, Dr. Werner Rogers.  And at the time, Dr. Rogers was interested in having someone come and run, at the time I was director of administrative services.  And the way I like to describe that job, it was attractive to me because I was looking for my next career move and that job had all of the--not all, but very similar to what I had been doing as a principal with the exception of children.  It was administration, I had procurement, I was in charge of facilities, in charge, the, and at the time we were transitioning into the new facility that the building--new building that's up on 14th Street now.  So we had a number of aspects that were very similar to leadership and management which is what attracted me to the job and the job, you know, them to me and me to them, as well.  And then as I indicated, having the common mentor in Dr. Hight, that the gentleman who was running Public Broadcasting at the time, he, Dr. Rogers had the same mentor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a, yet another connection.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were at Georgia Public Broadcasting from 1997 to 2005, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No? Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there from '97 [1997] until 2000.  And I went to Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] after leaving Georgia Public Broadcasting, and that would've been July of 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So tell us about how that transition was made.  You, I know you'd written it was hard to leave the school [A. Philip Randolph Elementary, Atlanta, Georgia].  You said, I wrote, I remember a sentence where the children are crying, you were crying, everybody so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I remember when, vividly, leaving when I left in 1997.  I, I think that was the point I was making earlier about--about being at an elementary school, the kids, you know, at a elementary level they were--they tended to cling, literally cling to me as a, as a male in the building.  There were very few males at the elementary level.  So when I left the kids cried, the faculty cried, I cried, but it was a, it was a joyous thing for me to be moving on, but I had a very positive experience during that timeframe--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of leaving.  So, when I left there I went to Georgia Public Broadcasting, spent the three years there.  So I was in a broadcasting, journalism environment.  And then when I left Georgia Public Broadcasting and went to Turner Broadcasting, again, I was in an environment that's journalism and broadcasting, all of which I'm very familiar with.  And you know, it was at, you know, it continues to be that--that pull of, you know, having an interest in journalism and an interest in broadcasting.  I continued to have that interest and always, while I started out wanting to be a teacher and a coach, growing up in south Georgia, I also wanted to work downtown Atlanta [Georgia].  I mean that was--as a kid growing up in the South, in the rural south of Georgia, the big thing was to get to Atlanta and to work in, I remember thinking that and telling my mother [Lois Smith Rushin] that I wanted to work in one of those big downtown buildings in Atlanta.  As a kid I do remember telling her that.  So that was a transition over to Turner Broadcasting and CNN, which was a phenomenal opportunity for me.
Story_ID: 641851
Speaker 1: Now was there any, any story about Geor- Georgia Public Broadcasting?  Does Georgia Public Broadcasting, I think they produce some national show, don't they, or?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What--?
Speaker 2: --we--they may produce some national show now, but at the time it's a, you know, it's an affiliate of PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So the national programming came through PBS, and I don't think during the time we were there--during the time I was there, I don't think we were producing any national programming.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think we were.  It was primarily state and local programming that was being produced and we would take all of the PBS feeds is really what we would--what we would take.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But I had a tremendous opportunity to work with some wonderful people at Georgia Public Broadcasting.  Because of my educational background, I was able to have some input into the educational component of public broadcasting and was helpful, with Dr. Rogers [Werner Rogers], who was the executive director, was helpful to him in terms of actually executing our business plan and executing on how the station ran.  We had, you know, radio affiliates, as well as the TV state wide affiliate as well.  So it was, again, an opportunity for me to learn more about management and more about leadership in a very broad based way.  And I have very--have very, very fond memories of working at public broadcasting.
Story_ID: 641852
Speaker 1: All right, Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.], now you were--now this is a pretty good--you're vice president of corporate responsibility--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --for Turner Broadcasting, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.  I joined the company in 2000 as, what did I come over as, as director of--or actually I started as a project manager in 2000--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in the facilities and I was in the facilities area.  But primarily what, what I relate that job to is really a lot of what I did in my job when I was in Winder [Georgia] in terms of public relations, community relations.  That job as project manager was really a job that involved being--helping Turner Broadcasting get engaged with the community.  There was a proposed building plan at the time that eventually did not pan out.  But the company wanted to engage itself more in the Atlanta [Georgia] market.  So when I joined the company that's a lot of what I was doing, was the community engagement, public relations, representing the company, et cetera.  That morphed into a director's job shortly after, I think within that same year I was on, early in 2001, I was named director of--I forget what I was director of, but it was more of the same and then subsequently was promoted to vice president over the entire area, which was some public relations, some communications and a lot of community engagement and social responsibility.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well tell us about some of the things you did at Turner?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You were there from 2000 to 2009, is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, correct.  And I left in--actually started graduate school, started the business school program [University of Georgia Terry College of Business, Athens, Georgia] in fall of 2008.  So the, so the time span that I was there involved what I think is critical to me or has been critical for me in this current role because in the role that I had at Turner, Turner Broadcasting provided quite a platform for me to have leadership opportunities in this market.  I was the individual who represented the dis- I almost said represented the district, but represented the company at that time at events.  I also was a lobbyist for the company and the--we had a lobbying firm who at--we subsequently hired a lobbying firm, so I managed the firm who lobbied for us.  We had primarily local interest.  We had some state--
Speaker 1: Lobbied with local politicians?
Speaker 2: With local politicians.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To some degree state level, and at the federal level, our, our parent company, Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], had a full contingent of lobbyists.  So that was part of my responsibility was government relations, the social responsibilities, and to some degree communications and public relations was part of my responsibility.  So a lot of, lot of the philanthropic giving that Turner, as a company, that we did from probably 2005 or so up through 2008 or '9 [2009] that was a--that was a vital part of my job was handling the appropriate, I guess, we were dispensing funds to the community.  We had a real push, the CEO, Phil Kent [Philip I. Kent], at the time when he came aboard as CEO wanted to have a real push to broaden the Turner Broadcasting brand in Atlanta.  And as a result, our group was given the task of really broadening and deepening that brand in the Atlanta market.  And as a result that involved philanthropic giving, as well as being involved on the political side for the company.  So that was the area that I, that I led.
Story_ID: 641853
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to try to link some things that aren't necessarily linked together in this outline, just correct me if I'm wrong.  I know at one point, at what juncture did you go to Leadership Atlanta, and Leadership Georgia [Atlanta, Georgia], and those kinds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leadership Atlanta was 2002--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was 2002, that I completed Leadership Atlanta, which was a--just a phenomenal opportunity to, to really gain an understanding of Atlanta [Georgia], a better understanding of Atlanta and to create friendships and relationships.  So that was a very special time.  During the--and what I, what I relate that to is the experiences that I had during the Leadership Atlanta, that's a one year development period, whereby a group of fifty to sixty individuals are really exposed to different segments of Atlanta.  It was very critical for me in terms of my role and my job at the time, because having the ability to represent Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] in different areas around the city, I was exposed to and had, quite frankly, created relationships through Leadership Atlanta--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --and it made it easier to navigate.
Speaker 1: Now, kind of explain what--correct me if I'm wrong, this is what I understand on leadership programs, 'cause there is a Leadership Chicago [Leadership Greater Chicago, Illinois], I think leadership programming in Dayton, Ohio where I'm from, where they take young people, young executives and sh- really give them the inside track on the history of the city, you know, how it works, what you know, they meet the leadership, the business leaders and the educational leaders and, and kind of get involved on how all this stuff is networked together, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.  The Leadership Atlanta program has been around since the early 1970s as I understand.  And what it does, is it provides exposure for young executives to be exposed to different areas of a market or a city that one lives in, and that includes the religious community, the political community, and the business community.  Those--it's not limited to those three, but those are three main entities that one gets exposure to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I think maybe the cultural community too in terms of--
Speaker 2: Cultural, yes.
Speaker 1: --major arts efforts in the city.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  And in fact, the classes for each year are chosen based on diversity of need, in terms of making sure that there is a mix of corporate, nonprofit and to some degree governmental or educational individuals represented.  There is a age range, in terms of racial makeup, their--the goal is to try to have a diverse group each year, such that those individuals can learn as much about the city as possible, and all aspects of the city, and then make a real difference in leadership roles within the city.
Story_ID: 641854
Speaker 1: Now correct me if I'm wrong, again, but I think--I mean and it just, just occurred to me just now, I think these leadership programs popped up, or were created during the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] years I think, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think--
Speaker 2: --if that is the case or not Larry [Larry Crowe], I don't know if that's the case or not.
Speaker 1: They seem to have a flavor of a lot of things that President Clinton initiated in those days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now did your class, you know, was your class encouraged to stay in contact with each after the program was over?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, absolutely (background noise).  We were encouraged to stay in contact with each other--
Speaker 1: We may have to pause here for a second, that's pretty loud.
Speaker 2: Getting sirens.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, something bad's going on, boy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, yes, we were talking about Leadership Atlanta, and did you go through Leadership Georgia [Atlanta, Georgia] around the same time?
Speaker 2: I went through Leadership Georgia I think a couple of years later.  I think I finished Leadership Georgia in 2005--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did Leadership Atlanta first and then subsequent to that, Leadership Georgia.  And I think I completed Leadership Georgia in 2005.  But th- those programs are set up to cultivate leadership skills and to cultivate a network of individuals and we are encouraged to keep in contact with members of our respective classes during that timeframe.  And especially, Leadership Atlanta, I've been able to keep in contact with a number of the individuals who completed the class of 2002 with me.  And Leadership Georgia, not as much, but there are a few individuals who I still have professional interactions with by virtue of their roles in either their company or non-profit that I still have the interactions with.
Speaker 1: Were there any presentations in Leadership Atlanta that really, you know, just kind of opened your eyes, and said oh I didn't know this, you know, informed you about something that you had taken for granted?
Speaker 2: I was trying to think during Leadership Atlanta if anything really was, was just eye opening.  I didn't have--we had a, we had a session or a segment over a two day period on race relations that I thought was pretty provocative.  It, it was led by C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] and his son, I can't think--can't recall his son's name, it may be--may be C.T., Jr. [C.T. Vivian, Jr.], but I do recall that we had a pretty, we had a pretty frank discussion about race relations in Atlanta and how that--how race relations can sometimes impact decisions that are made within companies or within the city, the broader community of Atlanta.  And I remember that it was eye opening to have the very candid conversations that we had during that two-day period.  We started in the afternoon and finished up the next morning with regard to going through the racial sensitivities and having the race relations conversations that we had.  So that was, was provocative I would think.
Story_ID: 641855
Speaker 1: You're getting into the swing of the whole civic thing here, I think, I don't--was it--did, did the position at Turner [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] kind of really get you involved in all the civic activities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause you were involved in a lot of civic activities.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that job, I guess, would've necessitated you?
Speaker 2: That job--yeah, very much necessitated being involved in the civic activities of--
Speaker 1: Yes. --of the city [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Now I've got, I've got a list here, I'm just gonna run down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --just tell me if I'm out of the era here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of this era.  Atlantic Capital Bank [Atlanta, Georgia], that's a development bank, you're on the board of that?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Now was this in the early 2002s did you get involved?
Speaker 1: No, we started that bank in 19--I'm sorry, 19--we started that bank in spring of 2007.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We started development in 2006 and we opened for business in spring of 2007.
Speaker 2: This is a special development bank from what I understand, not a regular bank.
Speaker 1: No, yes, it is a corporate bank and we focus on midsize companies, as well as the individuals who own those firms, anywhere from about--revenues from about 5 million up to $250 million in revenue.  And as a corporate bank we focus on those small to mid-size businesses and the, managing the wealth of the individuals who own some of those small businesses and mid-size businesses.
Speaker 2: Okay. You've got the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau.  Did you start doing that when you were with Turner?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.  I served as chair of that organization.  Had been a member since early 2000, I guess, and then actually served as chair of that--of the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau from 2008 through 2010, which was really a, an opportunity to get even more deeply involved in civic activities because quite frankly that, that organization is, has a task of bringing shows--I say shows, bringing large conventions to town.  And I was very involved there and continue to be involved with the ACVB.
Speaker 2: Okay, we've got the Georgia Chamber of Commerce.
Speaker 1: Georgia Chamber of Commerce, not as involved with them now as I was, but that job at the time being at Turner was very central to being involved with the Georgia Chamber of Commerce, as well as the Atlanta metro chamber of commerce [Metro Atlanta Chamber, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, yeah I had tremendous involvement in both those organizations.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, 100 Black Men?
Speaker 1: 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.].  I'm still very actively involved with the 100 Black Men of Atlanta, and in fact being in this role as associate superintendent, we've got a very strong relationship with several of our students who are members of, of the 100 Black Men, what we refer to as our project success students, are primarily Atlanta public school students and we have a very defined relationship with B.E.S.T. Academy [The B.E.S.T. Academy 6-12, Atlanta, Georgia], which is a middle and a high school that we have in Atlanta Public Schools that is supported primarily by the 100 Black Men of Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Okay. There are a lot things here.  The Georgia Partnership for Excellence in Education [Atlanta, Georgia], Metro Atlantic--Atlanta Arts and Culture Coalition [Metropolitan Atlanta Arts and Culture Coalition, Atlanta, Georgia], Metro Atlanta YMCA [YMCA of Metro Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], the 191 Club [The Commerce Club, Atlanta, Georgia], the Atlanta Business League [Atlanta, Georgia], the go- you know, the Atlanta Arts and Cultural Funding Task Force.  So it goes on and on and on, all these different--there's probably more even I would guess then that.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  And I--in this current role, I've had to scale back some of those activities, but still involved with the United Way [United Way Worldwide].  I serve on the United Way board.  And also have started a, a--really I've been at the Andrew and Walter Young YMCA [Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], it used to be the Southwest YMCA, I had a long service on that board and eventually the Metro YMCA.  A strong believer in what the Y offers for children and I have a desire to be even more involved than I am.  They have--they meaning the executive director at the Andrew and Walter Young YMCA--they're trying to get me to come back to, to continue serving.  I think they never took my name off the board of directors list and we're members there and we go and enjoy the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and we support it financially and I want to continue to have an involvement there, and we'll continue to figure out a way for me to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --continue to have that involvement.
Story_ID: 641856
Speaker 1: Now did I skip over you going for your M.B.A. [University of Georgia Terry College of Business, Athens, Georgia]?  Now, did I skip that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that was about--
Speaker 1: That was--?
Speaker 2: --that was the time that I left Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which would've been 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started the program in 2008 and completed the program in 2010.  And I left Turner Broadcasting with the understanding and the blessings of the leadership at Turner Broadcasting because I wanted to move more into operational opportunities.  I wanted to have the ability to really lead a unit of Turner Broadcasting or some other, some other organization in terms of taking what I thought and what I saw as my next level of leadership.  And one of the ways that I was advised that I could do that was to be--was to complete the M.B.A., which would make me more competitive and more attractive as a candidate.  And during the timeframe of completing the M.B.A., I really did have, in my mind, the opportunity I thought would present itself in that I would go back to Turner Broadcasting or CNN in some capacity.  And at about the time when all of that was coming to fruition, is the time when Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.] called as superintendent of Atlanta Public Schools and asked if I would consider joining him in the Atlanta Public School system.  He knew of my background in education and at the time, it was not something that I had considered, but what--once I came over and talked to him about the opportunity, it certainly presented a number of things that were very attractive to me and here I am.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I want to take you, my job to take you back even when we think you're there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But can you tell us when you're pursuing your M.B.A., you actually--is this correct--you actually traveled to Vietnam and China?
Speaker 2: Correct.  That was part of our program.  We went during, I guess, the second year of the M.B.A. program, we went to Hong Kong, we were in Hong Kong, Vietnam and we went to--we traveled to two other major cities in China.  Where were the Olympics [2008 Summer Olympics], Beijing [China], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Beijing, yeah.
Speaker 2: Beijing was the other leg of our trip (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's all mainland--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Beijing was the other leg of our trip in China.  And that was--that was eye opening.  I had not been to Asia before and that was quite eye opening as a, as an experience.  We got to see businesses and how they were operated in China and we got to, a large part, to see culture and how people lived in China.  I mean it was a controlled trip in terms of, control meaning we had tour guides and we were--we had designated places to go.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We were very fortunate in that we also had free time to really explore the cities that we were in, and it was quite educational, it was quite educational.
Story_ID: 641857
Speaker 1: So you finished your, your M.B.A. [at the University of Georgia Terry College of Business, Athens, Georgia] in 2010, and then, you know, then you just described how you came to Atlanta Public Schools.  And so, so you knew the superintendent before?
Speaker 2: Yes, when, when Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.] came as--as chancellor of the University System of Georgia, through the 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.], we met.  And we had actually a specific function, I think, to welcome him to town.  And so we met at that timeframe, and then subsequent to that, we were--my family and I were on a trip and I forget exactly where we were headed, but he and his wife, Elaine [Elaine Davis], were on the same flight that we had out.  So we spent some time getting to know them during that timeframe.  And then subsequent to that, being in the role that he was as chancellor and being in my role at Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.] our paths crossed at different social functions, as well as some of the civic and community engagement, our paths continued to cross.  So he was familiar with me and I was familiar with him obviously.  So when he took the role here as superintendent and asked if I would come aboard and join him, I was more than happy to do so after learning what the role was.  And, and quite frankly, it fit what I was looking to do, what I thought and what I still today think of as strengths for me professionally.  The role that I took involved being involved with him, executing and running the entire district because it, you know, this particular role requires a real understanding of personnel, it requires some understanding of finance, operations, legal, curriculum, all of which I had background in.  And so I thought it was a great fit and sure enough for me it has been a great fit and I think hopefully for, for the superintendent as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I think about, you know, you're a person who has a M.B.A., but you also were a principal--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --in the school system [Barrow County School System].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So, you know, I would imagine it would be difficult to find that combination?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Correct.  It--it's not a traditional combination and as a result, I think that--I think that it is, you know, it provides a certain level of credibility, but at the end of the day, people tend to want to know can you do the job.  Can you get things done.  And it's been tremendously helpful for me to find in the Atlanta Public School system that there are some very bright and talented people who are here in the district and you know, whatever growth that I could add to my own growth and development has been really--I've appreciated that, and hopefully along the way have added to the growth and development of the people with whom I come in contact with.
Story_ID: 641858
Speaker 1: As we were interviewing him, we discovered that he stepped right into a crisis as soon as (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --he was hired, basically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The big cheating scandal.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, you know, what your duties were during the--or what you all were trying to do during the cheating scandal?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: What it was first and then what you tried to do about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the cheating scandal had been uncovered just--Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.] came--I was here four weeks or so after Erroll started as superintendent and that was on the heels of the large, what has been described as the largest cheating scandal in the U.S.  And it was a cheating scandal that involved, you know, cheating on the criteria and reference tests, criteria, it was CRCT, criteria, reference and competency test [Criterion-References Competency Tests].  And what that state standardized test was--there were essentially 180 individuals, 180 individuals who were implicated in that--in that charge, the charge of cheating. So we had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These were staff members of Atlanta Public Schools?
Speaker 2: These were administrators, principals and to some degree central office administrators and to some degree as well, teachers and or test administrators at the school level.  So there was a mixture within that 180 group of employees.  So our task was to sort through that 180 group to be able to have the proper administration for whatever was appropriately called for in the judicial system and/or the legal system for those individuals.  So we had to deal with that cheating scandal, had to deal with, really I would guess, would describe as really helping to restore stability and to really have some impact on really setting a strategic plan for the district and creating from what was a very tarnished image to be able to create the kind of ethical values that should be in an organization.  All of that was at the forefront of what we were given a task of, of doing when we got here.  And that was in, I guess July, August, July, August of 2011.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the cleaning up of that process is still going on I think on some level, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah on some level.  We, we actually are, if I'm not mistaken, we actually have all of those individuals who were implicated in the cheating scandal are no longer on our payroll, so that's first and foremost.  And I think we have seven to, seven to ten cases remaining, if--and I think it's more, closer to the number seven than we have ten, but anywhere seven to ten cases that are still pending.  All the other cases have been resolved.
Story_ID: 641859
Speaker 1: Now there's another crisis I think that you were, you kind of took the point on, and that was the carbon monoxide crisis, it was?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That occurred December 3rd, we had a carbon monoxide leak at one of our elementary schools, Finch Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].  And as a result, we have an ongoing investigation into that leak that, that as I said is ongoing and as a result of it being an ongoing investigation, it probably would be inappropriate for me to comment any further on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to pause here anyway. You can--
Speaker 2: It's five o'clock.
Speaker 1: Yeah. You were saying off camera you think it's more human error then mechanical error?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at this point, it does appear to be human error involved and we have said that publically that it likely is more human error than it is mechanical.  But as the investigation is ongoing, we should have a conclusion of the investigation, and be able to report out specifically what we're able to find.
Story_ID: 641860
Speaker 1: You were saying before it was human error, you know, the gas leak [at Finch Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]--you suspect it was more human error then mechanical?
Speaker 2: Correct.  We have indicated publically that we suspect, that we have reason to suspect that it was human error involved.  And as we get to a conclusion of the investigation we'll have a very comprehensive look at what occurred and we'll be able to, to then share after we concluded the investigation.
Speaker 1: Okay. Let me ask you your pres- in your present position as assistant superintendent, are your personal and professional goals to become the superintendent one day here or somewhere else?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I've been asked that question a lot lately and I would respond by saying, you know, it's a lesson I learned some years ago when I worked for Dr. Hight [Don Hight] and he said to me, the way you get your next opportunity is to do the one you have well.  So my goal right now is to be the best associate superintendent that I can be.  And as I work in that capacity and as I grow in that capacity of an associate superintendent, my goal is to be able to help Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.] as the superintendent move our plan forward and to really help our boys and girls in the Atlanta Public Schools.  And after that timeframe, whenever that ends, I hope to have continued to grow and learn and get much better in my job.  And at that point, Larry [Larry Crowe], we would then make a decision, or I could make a decision about what would be next in my career.
Story_ID: 641861
Speaker 1: What advice would you give, you just kind of quoted someone that sounded like pretty good advice--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about doing the job you already have, you know, to the best of your ability, but what advice would you give or would you advise young M.B.A.s or people aspiring to serve their community, you know, what advice would you give them in terms of big government and this, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: My, my advice would be, you know, to take relationships to a level of, of understanding how critical relationships are, and not necessarily, you know, what I describe as--Larry [Larry Crowe], what I describe as networking, most people think that networking is, is going to events passing out cards.  Well, you know, that's not very effective networking.  What I've learned and what advice I would share is that people, when you develop past that cordial passing a card relationship, when one develops a deeper relationship and individuals understand that you can, and you have the ability to work well as a team member, you have the ability to say what you, say what it is you intend to do and then actually do it.  Erroll [HistoryMaker Erroll Davis, Jr.] refers to it as a say do index.  Meaning that you actually do what you promised to individuals you're going to do.  That goes a long ways in terms of being considered for other opportunities when other opportunities are made available and individuals are looking for people to fill specific roles.  I had a conversation earlier today with an individual who we were talking about the M.B.A. degree itself, and any other degree for that matter.  And my point was to the individual I was having the conversation with, it's, you know, you will be competitive with individuals, or you will be competing with individuals, who have same credentials.  And the question becomes, what's going to differentiate you from those other individuals.  That becomes a real differentiator.  And that is what, what will set you apart from the group.  And that is, my understanding and my experience has been, that's the ability to get things done.  And I have prided myself on the ability to learn that and to get things done and to cultivate meaningful relationships.  And I think the combination of having the ability to get things done and having meaningful relationships really help to catapult one in a work setting and also in a social and a civic setting as well.  Because people tend to respect and have a great deal of respect for individuals who get things done.
Story_ID: 641862
Speaker 1: In 2009, you founded Steve Smith Consulting, LLC [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?  It's sort of a family business, right?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, it was a consulting, it was, while I was in school [University of Georgia Terry College of Business, Athens, Georgia] it was a way for me to quite frankly, generate income.  I was linked with another group as well who had contracts for lobbying and for providing representation to firms and local individuals in the Atlanta [Georgia] market.  So it was a way for me to have some activity; and to stay active, quite frankly, while I was in business school.
Story_ID: 641863
Speaker 1: There's an article that appeared in the Atlanta Business Chronicle about your, your family's leadership qualities (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it pointed out that there--you didn't go to--you didn't work on your M.B.A., I think, until your wife had finished her Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And then you--
Speaker 2: She started--she finished her Ph.D. in September, I think, of 2008.  And I started--or maybe she finished or defended her dissertation in that summer and I started that fall of 2008.  And it was a real, it was a real passing of ships in the night, whereby she finished her academic pursuit and then I started mine.  And at the time, our son was in eighth grade, I think he was finishing up eighth grade at the time, and I remember sitting at the table at, at home, at the dinner table doing homework together.  He was doing his homework and I was working on some of my M.B.A. work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those were--those were special times.
Speaker 1: All right. So you just have the one son?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have one child who is a seventeen year old senior in high school now.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about him and you said before how you met your wife and everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit about Steven.  My son is Steven, Jr. [Steven Smith, Jr.].  He, he gets the moniker Steven.  Most people, if not all, professionally, call me Steve, and so he gets to be Steven.  My family calls me Stevie, my mother (Lois Smith Rushin) calls me Stevie, so it's easily distinguished.  But we have been very blessed to have a terrific young man as a son.  Steven is--Steven has been a real blessing for us as a family.  He's a neat kid.  He's--you know, I describe Steven like, Debbie [Debra Smith] and I always wanted a child, and I know that I'm his father, but I can describe him almost objectively in that he's a well rounded kid, neat, has lots of different types of friends.  He is academically motivated.  He's athletic, and just a good kid of character.  I mean, he has--he has good character.  And of all the things I've described, the fact that we have raised him to be a young man of faith, and a young man of excellent character is something that makes his mom and I very proud of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And, did, did your mother get a chance to see you become, you know, successful?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother is still living.  She lives down in Lee County [Georgia].  As I indicated, she will be seventy-nine coming up January 1.  And one of the things that I--that I--that I sometimes forget, Larry [Larry Crowe], is that the things that I might take for granted professional, in terms of professional achievements, you know, I forget how proud that makes my mother.  And often what I--what I have to be reminded of is whatever professional accomplishments I might have, it's really a point of pride for her and the many people who are in my community that I grew up in down in Lee County.  I, I just--I have a real fondness for understanding people who have come before me, who have paved the way for me to be able to have any, any measure of success that I might have now.  There are people who came before me who paved the way for me to have that.  And not only that, but there are people in my hometown, my little small hometown, who are, who are proud of me and who are supportive of me, and that too helps me to have the fuel to continue to want to achieve and to continue to want to make those individuals proud of me and to be proud of where I'm from.  Because you know, it, it--you know, it's, it's not, it's not necessarily the, it's not necessarily the kind of small town or, being from that small town of Leesburg, you know, it's not where one would think that individuals who are successful and who have the opportunities to do the things in life that I've had the opportunity to do, it's not, not all of us get that opportunity, so I'm very blessed and very thankful for the people who are supportive of me and every time that, you know, you mention and ask about professional accomplishments, I have to be reminded and I am reminded that it's for those individuals who continue to be supportive of me, and the ones who've come before me who allow me to have some bit of success.
Story_ID: 641864
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My, my, my hope is that we, as an African American community, can continue to have the kind of progress as a community that I think we have had, the kind of economic progress, the kind of racial progress, the kind of, of, really, success that I think we have had, I want us as a community to continue having that kind of success.  And I think that we are poised to do that and I think that I'm very optimistic that we can indeed continue that success.  You ask about hopes and something else, what was the something?
Speaker 1: And concerns?
Speaker 2: Concerns.  You know, my, my concern, my concern would be having a male child [Steven Smith, Jr.] and knowing what the, what the statistics are and what the, you know, what the odds are for African American males in terms of achievement.  I would want to do whatever I can to lessen the concern and to do whatever I can to help foster an environment of achievement for African American males.  And to have African American males specifically viewed in a positive light and to have African American males on a track whereby we can help them continue to be successful.  I know that the--some of the statistics that we read and that are real, put African American males at a disadvantage and there're, you know, there's reason, there are reasons for us to be concerned.  So I would like to do whatever I can to lessen that concern and to be able to contribute in whatever small way I can to helping, helping really specifically African American males be in a positive position in life and understand the importance of education and understand the importance of character in doing the right things and being, being accountable.  So as much as I can do in those areas and more, I'd like to do that to lower that concern.
Story_ID: 641865
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you look back at everything you've done in your life so far, is there any major thing you would do differently or change?
Speaker 2: If the- if there were--I was trying to think if there were--there's nothing, Larry [Larry Crowe], that comes to mind that I would do differently in my life.  I've not--I don't have any regrets.  Now I say that just in life in general.  While I answer that question I was thinking about, you know, have I made mistakes in my work life, I absolutely have.  I've made mistakes in my work life and professional life, I've learned from those mistakes, and would not approach them the same way again.  But in general, I've had a very blessed life and a very--I'm very appreciative of the life I've lived and would not trade a thing for the journey I've been on.  I would not trade it one way or the other.  I, I have a real intentionality about balancing work and family life.  And I feel real good about the ability to have balanced that, specifically being involved with my son [Steven Smith, Jr.] and helping to--helping him to become a young man and being involved in his activities and being involved with my wife [Debra Smith] as we are involved with his activities and raising him.  So I'm real pleased about that.  Real pleased about and real thankful of the individuals I've had in my life along the way who have helped me to become the man that I've become.  Because I've had people along the way who've helped me to become the young man that I've become, and I'm very, very grateful and very thankful for that.
Story_ID: 641866
Speaker 1: When you look once again at your life and everything you've done to this point, and I think you've got a lot more to do, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy.  I'm the ripe old age of forty-eight, Larry [Larry Crowe], I don't know that, I don't know that legacy would be the, you know, the right phrase.  But I would, you know, I would think that what I would like people to know and what I would like to leave as a legacy is when, you know, when my name is mentioned I would like to say--I would like people to say, "He was fair, had excellent character, and could, you could always depend on him to get things done."  I, I think that, I think that I can't emphasize enough how critical it is for individuals and for myself personally to be of good character and to be accountable.  And I--you know, I preach that to my own child [Steven Smith, Jr.] consistently and I'd like for that to be, be my legacy.  The he was a good guy, he was fair and you could depend on him.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to raise before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No I can't, I can't think about anything you haven't asked with, with maybe the exception if I haven't had a chance to, to expound upon the fact that my growth and maturity in raising our child has been because I have a wonderful partner, a wonderful spouse [Debra Smith].  We have had a chance to mention my wife.  And I would just think that, you know, I--I'm just blessed to have had a partner in life who has been supportive of me and helpful to me in not only raising our family, but also in my personal growth and development having a spouse and a helpmate who has been very instrumental in making sure that she was supportive of me and me of her.  And outside of that, I think we've covered (cough)--we've covered pretty much everything else that I would want to, to add.
Story_ID: 641867
Speaker 1: Well the last question is not that difficult, it's very similar to legacy, but a little different.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as, and I, I have thought about this.  You know, Larry [Larry Crowe], I would like to be remembered as a good dad, you know.  The professional accomplishments are important, the civic engagement, it's important, but most important to me is being a good father, and being a present father.  And I've often talked to my wife [Debra Smith] about that and, and I've often said to her, I wonder if it's just because I was raised as a--in a single parent household and always wanted a, a father in the house.  So maybe I over compensated.  And I've asked my seventeen year old [Steven Smith, Jr.] that same question and he, you know, he's responded by saying, "Dad you're okay, you're not, you're not too much in my life."  But I, I really would want to be remembered as being a good father and if I could, if I could be remembered as being a, a good father with excellent character and faith, I'm, I am--I would be pleased, I'll be pleased if that's the case.
Story_ID: 641868
Speaker 1: This is 1989 in Albany, Georgia.  Debbie [Debra Smith] and I were married, this is a photo at our wedding ceremony.
Speaker 2: This photo is 1997 at the A. Philip Randolph Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] and I am at a celebration of my leaving the principalship and that is, I'm holding Steven and my wife, Debbie is beside me.  And to the left is my mother, and Debbie's mother is standing directly below me--
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: --so it's my mother and mother-in-law.
Speaker 1: Yeah, could you give their names?
Speaker 2: My mother is Lois Smith Rushin, and my mother-in-law is Ann Davis [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is Steven Smith, Jr.  Steven Wayne Smith, Jr., he's a high school senior.  And that's his football photo.
Speaker 1: That's Woodward high school?
Speaker 2: It's Woodward Academy [College Park, Georgia], which is a high school that he attends.
Speaker 1: And that is a action shot of Steven in a--one of his varsity football games.  I think that's away version, the white uniform of Steven in uniform.
Speaker 2: And that's Debbie and I with Steven during senior night.
Speaker 1: That's another action shot of Steven playing football.
Speaker 2: And that's Steven in his varsity basketball uniform.
Speaker 1: And here's the last one.
Speaker 2: And that's a family photo of Debbie, Steven and I when Steven was I think sixteen.  He's fifteen or sixteen in that photo.
