Story_ID: 12852
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Sanford, we begin our slate by asking you to state your name and please spell it.
Speaker 2: Adelaide Luvenia Hines Sanford, A-D-E-L-A-I-D-E, L-U-V-E-N-I-A, H-I-N-E-S, S-A-N-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And can you also state your birth date for us?  November 27, 1925.
Speaker 2: Okay, and today's date as well as the location.
Speaker 1: I believe this November 19th--
Speaker 2: September.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) November--September 19th, 2003. And we're at the John Henry Clark House at 286 Convent Avenue, in the village of Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, this HistoryMakers, and the--Matthew Hickey--pardon me, this is The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is our videographer.  The interviewer is Cathy Sandler.  Julieanna Richardson is the observer.
Story_ID: 12853
Speaker 1: Dr. Sanford, we'd like to start out by asking you some 'People Magazine'-type questions.  We have five questions, and the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like vegetables of all kinds, in particularly, those that are very green, kale, broccoli, brussel sprouts, spinach and I like fruit, all kinds of fruit.  But in particular, peaches, peaches and the melons. All kinds of melons, apricots, grapes, are a particular favorite.  And of the meats, I'm not particularly fond of meat, but I do eat lamb and chicken.  I like fish, particularly, the shellfish, which are not good for me because of the cholesterol.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think I like fall most of all.  I have an aunt who's a poet, and she said that nature arrays herself in the most flamboyant colors, red and gold and orange in order to announce to the world that, even though its late, she's going to have her flame.  So I like autumn.  Of course, spring is always wonderful because of the newness and the freshness.  But there's something special about autumn.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place on the continent of Africa.  I think there are part of South Africa that are unspeakably beautiful--Cape Town, but there's so much pain there until it's hard to say that I really enjoy it.  But any place where there's water and where there are root people, not highly commercial, but root people, as I call them.  I enjoy that.  So I enjoy the Islands [Carribean].  I enjoy the Continent [Europe].  I enjoy, particularly, Cape Town [South Africa], but not for a vacation.  I very much like Hilton Head [South Carolina], but there's so much pain there because that was once an island that was owned by people of African ancestry, and it's no longer true.  But it's beautiful.  And so it's a struggle to enjoy the beauty in spite of the fact that there are so many unpleasantnesses related to being there.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think that's difficult because there are so many that I, I care deeply about, but I think one of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] 's phrases, "Hate cannot drive away hate, only love can; and darkness cannot drive away darkness, only light can".  And it is one of my favorites because there's so much of a human instinct where there has been hate to reciprocate.  So it's a struggle to know that it won't work that way.  I think perhaps that's one of my favorites.
Story_ID: 12854
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about your mother growing up, a little bit about your mom?
Speaker 2: My mother [Sulir Lloyd Williams] was an extremely beautiful woman.  She was about six feet tall, majestic in stature.  She was not heavy, but she was large boned.  I thought she was exquisite, particularly, her hands because she was a master dressmaker.  She designed clothing, hats, shoes, undergarments, bathing suits, lingerie and her hands were very expressive.  They were not manicured.  They didn't have artificial nails, but they were expressive and magic.  And I thought that--she was very beautiful.  She was extremely wise.  I am the youngest of three children.  My sister and I are a year and four months apart.  My brother was five years older than I am.  But my mother raised the three of us as three separate children.  She allowed us to pursue our own interests, to develop our personalities.  She never insisted that we be alike, and that must have been very difficult, but she managed to do that.  Life had many disappointments for my mother.  She came to New York after having married my father, with dreams of going into business and, of my father working and of having a wonderful expansive life in New York because she grew up in Mississippi.  And there were limited opportunities for women of African ancestry, there was nothing that you could do but be a domestic.  There was no employment anyplace else.  But she had this enormous gift, and she was fortunate enough to be able to go to the Master School of Design in Chicago.  And once she was graduated from that school, she got a job.  But when my grandmother found out that she was working, she made her come home because an unmarried girl could not live away from home.  You could live away if you were in school, but not if you were on your own.  So she had to come home, and she was very disappointed with the limitation of the opportunities.  So when she met my father, it sounded like a dream come true, but, of course, when they came to New York, there was the Depression.  My father, who had been discharged from the Navy was unable to find employment, and they were really struggling.  My mother decided that she would create a job for herself.  And they lived downtown Brooklyn [New York].  And she would go out in the day and see women on the street, primarily European women.  And she would say, "Oh, you have an interesting figure, let me make something for you."  And they didn't know her, and they said, oh, you know, I, I don't know you.  And money is very tight, fabric is expensive.  And they really weren't willing to take the risk.  She would go to the thrift stores, primarily Salvation Army, buy a man's suit, take it apart, clean it with napther, (ph.) make a pattern out of newspaper, and tell the women, come I want to show you what I can do.  I have the fabric.  She built her reputation in that way.  She would buy beads and bead garments all over.  A woman who had a dress that she planned to wear to a special celebratory event, and she found that the dress had moth holes in it.  And she came to my mother, "Hines, what am I going to do?  I don't have time to buy a dress.  I don't have the money to buy a dress.  This is what I expected to wear."  My mother said, just leave it with me.  She went again to the thrift store.  She bought and old dress that had beads, took these beads off, mended the garment, and covered the mended holes with beads.  When the woman saw it, she couldn't believe it.  She said, "Hines, what did you do?  You're a magician."  And that's how her reputation spread.  And so she was a most unusual woman.  When she came to New York, everybody from Mississippi who came to New York came to my mother's house.  It was understood.  You didn't have to call in advance.  You didn't have to write a letter, just ring the bell, and you say, I'm so and so's son or daughter.  And there was always enough food to go around.  There was always a place for them to sleep.
Story_ID: 12855
Speaker 1: And so she [Sulir Lloyd Williams] was an incredible woman, really an incredible woman.  She died much too young, at the age of fifty-two.  As soon as all of us were out of school--my brother was out of medical school.  I had just completed my Master's at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts].  My sister had completed her masters at Brooklyn--NYU [New York University, NY, NY].  And it was a time when she wouldn't have to worry about the tuition and the mortgage and the tax.  And so I just could not believe that she wasn't going to live.  And I remember when the doctor said, "Your mother has cancer of the pancreas.  And we have no cure for that, we have no treatment for it."  And I said, "Oh, but my mother will live.  I know there will be a miracle."  There is no possibility that my mother could die at this point in her life.  I had just started teaching.  And he said, "Your mother has had this cancer for twenty years.  The size of the growth is a twenty-year cancer.  She's had no pain.  You have had your miracle."  It was not the miracle I wanted.  I wanted the miracle that met what I thought should have been the miracle.  But that was a profoundly important lesson in life, that we like to name the miracles, but the miracles come in their own form.  At that time, I wanted any piece of her that was able to survive, a toenail, a fingernail because I wanted to do something for her.  But I have since learned that it was a miracle.  My brother is a medical doctor.  And all of his friends who were at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennesee] in medical school with him, who had wives and children.  And they came to New York for internships or residences--residencies, they all lived with us while they were in school.  So our house was always full of intellectual vigor and bigger and bubbling with life.  And my mother sat at the front window, which was the dining room, and sewed after she went into business for herself.  And when the doorbell rang, before the door was answered, you put on the tea kettle because everyone had to eat.  The coal man, the ice man, the postman, the messengers, whoever came.  She was a sharing, giving person.  And I never remember in my whole life as a child a Sunday, a Sabbath, when there wasn't someone there for dinner because you cooked as though you were expecting company.  She was, she was just so generous.  And she didn't have a lot, but she gave so much.  And she was able to take so little and make so much out of it with joy.
Story_ID: 12856
Speaker 1: But as I look back on her [Sulir Lloyd Williams] life, I know that she must have had lonely times because my father was devastated by the fact that he [father, Henry Hines]could not get a job.  And the essence of manhood in America is the ability to provide for your family and to protect them.  And he couldn't do that, and that was shattering to him.  It was very hard for him to sustain a sense of his worth when he could not work.  But my mother could work, and it might have been easier for him if she had not been able to work.  But the fact that she could make the living that he couldn't was very, very traumatic to him, as it has been in talking to many native African ancestry.  When they lose the ability to work and provide for their family, they often--they can't stay there and see that.  They remove themselves from it.  And I guess that's what happens in many families.  But my father had an injury from the war.  He had shrapnel in his head.  They didn't remove it.  It was too dangerous.  It was near the, the optic nerve.  But he eventually became blind.  And when he became blind, he went into the Veteran's Administration facility.  He was a brilliant man.  He was a graduate of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio- the nation's oldest private, historically black university founded in 1856.]  So, when my father lost his eyesight, my mother always said that when we grew up, she was going to bring him back home to live with us, but he died before that happened.  So she lived most of her life as a widow, even though my father did not die at the time that the, the marriage began disintegrate.  They never divorced, but she never complained.  She was always positive.  I don't know how she did it.  I know she must have had some very lonely, lonely times.  But she--we were her life, her three children.  And if she had loneliness or sadness, we never knew it.  And as I look back, I know she must have.
Story_ID: 12857
Speaker 1: Wow, can you tell me your mother and your father's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Sulir, S-U-L-I-R, Lloyd Williams.  She married my father, Henry Hines.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about her growing up in Mississippi, where in Mississippi and then also, I guess, how she came to meet your father?  My mother was born in Mississippi, in the rural parts of Mississippi.  But they lived most of their life in Vicksburg, which is that historic part of Mississippi where the famous cemetery is, Veterans' Military Cemetery.  She had seven sisters and one brother.  So that meant that she was about the third in line from the oldest.  Her sisters, Elizabeth was the oldest.  She married in Vicksburg and had children.  Hester married and moved to Churchill, had children.  And Aunt Mary, who was the next oldest and the closest to my mother never had children, but she married a gifted, a carpenter and cabinet maker.  And they grew up at a time when the only work was domestic work; very painful because there was during the Reconstruction time great social pathology.  But also great emotional trials for people of African ancestry, which I think was the foundation of a lot of the friction that has developed over the years between males and females.  For example, it was known that the, the males of, of Caucasian background were predatory.  So that if you washed, and you would deliver the clothing, you would always hope that the master of the house was not home because if he came to the door, he could take advantage of you in any way that he wanted to.  And so there was the feeling on the part of many men of African ancestry that if you stayed there you would probably have been a used woman.  So many of the girls were sent away to school.  Of course, there were no free public high schools.  The high schools were on the college campuses.  So you would hear my mother and her sisters saying, "I went to Alcorn College [Alcorn State College, Alcorn, Mississippi] or I went to Natchez College [Colored College for girls, Natchez, Mississippi, founded 1887]."  They were going there for high school.  And it was an escape to keep those girls protected.  The boys stayed home and worked the farm.  So the had the problem of girls being much more highly educated than the males.  And also you had the issue of the mothers of these young women very concerned about their being able to be married, and concerned about the perception that if they knew anything about sexuality, that they had been used.  So my mother's generation grew up going into marriage without any conception of human sexuality, not even of their own anatomy because if they knew, then the thought was that they would have been used by a white man. So that was painful.  Marriage became painful because they actually went into marriage with very little understanding of what it meant to be a wife and very little understanding of what it meant to have any kind of, of sexual intelligence, shall I say.  But that was the mores, that was the custom.  You knew nothing because then that established your innocence.  And my mother was very quick to tell us, my sister and myself, that that was not a good way. That you needed to know something about human sexuality, that you also needed to free to be expressive.  But they did not have that option at all.
Story_ID: 12858
Speaker 1: She met my father through my aunt who was younger than she, aunt Ethel.  She's the one that was the poet and the musician and the dreamer.  And she was engaged to a man whose name was Lester Wright.  And he was in a family of the only undertakers in Mississippi, in Vicksburg, in that area.  And he was in the service.  And he met my father in France.  And when he was discharged, he said to my father, "Why don't you come and visit me in Vicksburg and my family?  And that's how my mother met him.  When he came to Vicksburg, with his dreams of having been in the [United States] Navy and having been in France and going to be at Newport, Rhode Island, which was where he was going to be based.  And then they would marry, and they would come to New York and have a wonderful life.  So that's how she met my father.  But she didn't know anything about his family.  And she always felt that it was important to know something about the family of the person that you marry because you marry family.  You don't just marry an individual.  You marry family.
Story_ID: 12859
Speaker 1: And I remember when my sister was becoming engaged, my mother wanted to meet her fiancé's family.  My sister met her husband at NYU [New York University, New York, NY.].  And my, my brother-in-law's mother had told him--she was a widow, he was the oldest of her children.  And she told him, after he came out of the service, that he could--he knew that he could go to school on the G.I. Bill, and that's what he wanted to do.  And she said, "You go.  This is your chance.  You've been with me, you've been the strongest one in the family.  You've helped me with the other children.  You go to New York, and you go to school, and don't look back.  Just do what's best for you, don't try to send any money home.  Just go."  And so, my future brother-in-law didn't have the opportunity to say, well, this is my family because they were in Virginia.  And when my mother said, "Well, I can't let you marry my daughter unless I know something about your family."  And we knew that he was from Roanoke, Virginia.  And he said, "But I promised my mother that I would never tell people where she was so they would go and visit her.  I just wouldn't do that.  She says, well, I don't want you to break your promise to your mother, but I'm going to find her."  And she did.  She went to Roanoke.  She went up and down the area, asking do you know, Eureal Jackson's mother, until just when her train was about to leave, someone said, oh, you're talking about--we called him Jack.  She said, you mean, Eureal.  Yes, we know Eureal.  He went to New York and he went to school.  We know him, and his mother, she lives so and so and so and so place.  And my mother walked over to this woman's house, knocked on the door.  The woman came to the door, and she said, "I'm Sulir Hines, and your son wants to marry my daughter.  And I must meet you."  And they greeted and talked, and then she got a coal truck to take her back to get that train (laughter) because she had no other transportation.  But she was so aware of the importance.  And when she came back, my sister was just so worried, she had gone to bed.  She was so worried because she knew that if my mother did not find her fiancé's mother, there would be no wedding.  And when she came back, and said "I found your mother, and she will come to the wedding."  Now, my mother was deceased before I got married.  And I met my husband here in New York, and I went through that same thing.  The closer we got to the wedding date, the more discontented I was.  And he finally said, "What is wrong?  What do you want?"  He thought it was I wanted a big wedding or--I said, "I want to meet your mother.  I must meet your mother before we get married."  His mother lived in California.  My husband had come to New York for concert organ.  His mother's--his father's mother had died, but when he called his mother, and he said, "Addie says that she must meet you."  She dropped everything, and she came a week before the wedding and stayed.  And when she walked in the door, she called me daughter.  And I felt so relieved because I felt that I--if I hadn't met his mother, I would not have fulfilled all of the things that my mother taught me (laughter) about the fact that you don't just marry a person, but you marry family.  That's the kind of power that she had over all three of us.  We believed deeply in what she said.  It was like it was a prediction (laughter).  So I've lived with that thought.
Story_ID: 12860
Speaker 1: I wondered if you could tell us your husband's name and--
Speaker 2: My husband's name is J-A-Y, W. Sanford, S-A-N-F-O-R-D.  And he's a native of Los Angeles, California.
Story_ID: 12861
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna go back, and back track to, back to your father [Henry Hines] because I didn't where he--I wonder if you would tell us where he was from.  And I'm just, we need to know a little bit about the service part of what he was doing, you know, where he was from, how he ended up in the service?  What branch of the service was it?
Speaker 2: He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio.  Unfortunately, that's all I know.  I have a feeling that he may have had some Caribbean background because when I look at his pictures, I mean he's, he's obviously deeply African.  But not having been born in the South, I don't know how his family got to Cincinnati.  And that's unfortunate.  That's one of the things that my mother was concerned about, that she really didn't know a lot about his family.  And I have longed to find out more about him.  He went into the Navy as most men of African ancestry did, thinking that they would have an opportunity to rise up through the ranks.  And he became a Chief Petty Officer, but that was about it.  You know, they had to wash the decks of the boat and, and the most menial kinds of, of jobs.  But he did go to France during the War [World War I].  And a very proud man, a great sense of order in whatever he did.  Everything was placed, everyone had to have their own drawer.  You had to have your own place to put your books, your own place to keep your materials of construction.  He had a great sense of order which my daughter has.  My son does not, and I don't.  But he was an extremely proud man and a very wise man for having chosen my mother [Sulir Lloyd Williams] (laughter) as his wife and as my mother.  I wish I knew more about him, but I love him and loved him and love him still because of the enormous suffering that he went through. The disappointment for not being able to earn a living and the disrespect and the lose of a sense of manhood that that brought.  And I know that that's not an uncommon story in the life of men of African ancestry. Which was one of the reasons my mother was determined that my brother would get the finest education and never have the insecurity of not being able to earn a living.  However, when he was interning, at that time, abortions were illegal.  And she was always worried about the fact that he might be tempted to perform an abortion for someone who may have been in dire need or because he might have needed money.  So she always made sure that there was a little bit of cash in the house in case he ever became pressed for money, that there would be money for him.  And he wouldn't have to do anything dangerous because she knew what it's like to be a man in America without money, without a job, without a support system.
Story_ID: 12862
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your father's name again [Henry Hines], and also about the War, for those who might not know, you're talking about World War I, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the, anything about his France experience additionally.
Speaker 2: I know that, when he was in France, there was more acceptance of men of African ancestry by the French people than there was acceptance of men of African ancestry by Americans.  Of course, they were segregated. The units were seg--totally segregated at that time.  And I know that he suffered many indignities when he was, but he thought that when he came out with his discharge, that he would be able to come to New York and get a job.  And, of course, that didn't happen.  I never heard him talk about his experiences in France, but I know that I heard my uncle, by marriage, the one that was his friend, he talked a great about his experiences in France.
Story_ID: 12863
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Sanford, I was wondering if you could take us back to, a little bit back to your childhood again, and do you remember your earliest, any early memories of the sights and sounds and smells of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Very vividly.  Certainly the smell is the smell of food (laughter), good cooked foods, succotash and homemade cake, and bread pudding, lima beans.  The smell of food is one of the primary smells that, that I recall.  And there's a comfort in this smell of food that's familiar.  Sometimes I try to cook something to try to recreate that smell (laughter).  I'm not always successful at it because of course we used a lot of products that we don't use anymore.  I think that my childhood was one that was filled with a sense of the importance of being strong.  My brother was the oldest, as I said, brilliant, had been advised in school that he could not be a doctor.  My mother told that was unrealistic for her to expect that he could be a doctor, not that he wasn't bright, but that she was a widow and really couldn't afford to give him this dream.  But I can remember the long conversations about, we create our reality and do not let what is the external conditions determine what our reality is.  The conversations are very powerful in my mind about the things that my mother told us to build our sense of capacity.  My sister was a year and four months older than I, but she was fragile.  She was smaller.  I was always the biggest.  I say I was--that she was born first, but I'm the oldest.  But I was the one to be strong.  And so I knew more about the bills and the expenses and the struggles than my sister or my brother knew about.  And I can recall sitting with my mother when she kept books, how much money she had, how many bills there were to be paid, when they had to be paid, what could be paid, putting aside the five cents for the carfare, even before I needed carfare and my brother needed carfare.  And so the struggle around that and how she would count, but she protected my sister because my sister was rather fragile.  She really isn't fragile in terms of character or spirit, but physically she was fragile.  I also remember always having a wonderful place to live.  My mother bought a house in Bedford Stuyvesant in, on Decatur Street in 1938, a large brownstone, very beautiful house.  And that's my memories of home, bay windows at the back, parquet floors, marble mantles.  Always full of people, always full of excitement, always room for more people, always good food cooking and all of the people that came from Mississippi to, to share whatever we had.
Story_ID: 12864
Speaker 1: So my memories are very strong of a, of a good childhood.
Speaker 2: I was talking to a youngster who was doing an essay about me.  And she said, "Well, how could you have been happy?  You were poor."  And I said, but I didn't feel poor.  I didn't feel economically poor because there was always enough.  But there was such richness of purpose and such richness of culture and heritage.  And I can remember every year, the National Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, it was called at that time, and they would have a breakfast every year.  And my mother would save all year for us to go to that breakfast.  She--wherever there was something positive being said about people of African ancestry, my mother would see that we got there, even though I know it must have been an enormous sacrifice because even if the tickets were $10, it's still--there were three of us and then she would go.  So she instilled in us the importance of being where positive things were being said about our people.  And she would look at young men, and she would say, oh, he's a college man.  She kept that model before us, whether or not it was true, I don't know.  But we believed it.  And so she always kept that positive model before us.  And that, that stayed with me.  At one point, my mother allowed the three of us to stay with my grandmother and her sisters in Mississippi because she was changing jobs.  It was a time of transition for her, and she probably just needed some time to breath.  And I can remember the letters and the candies and the dolls.  She sent us for Christmas dolls that were that tall.  I had never seen dolls like that, and I'm so sorry I don't still have it.  I never had any doll but a brown doll, never.  And that long ago because I'm seventy-seven.  So I'm talking about when I was five and six years old that she could find these brown dolls, so the imagery of the positiveness of our people was always there.  I also remember when she came to take us home and how she, she couldn't wait for the car to bring her to house.  She got out and she ran all the way home to my grandmother's house.  And it must have been difficult for her because she had two sisters who lived there who were not married.  And having three little children around when you are not child-oriented and child-focused is a little bit difficult, but they were very gracious.  That's the only time we were ever separated.  We went everywhere together.
Story_ID: 12865
Speaker 1: Dr. Sanford, I want to get back to some genealogy, more detail on your genealogy, but before I do, I want to ask you about the community of Bedford Stuyvesant at the time.  How was it?  What was the atmosphere?  What was the community?  Who were the peoples there?
Speaker 2: When we moved to Decatur Street, there was one other family of African ancestry on the block.  They were the Hurd's, H-U-R-D.  There grandson is an organist at one of the churches in Manhattan now.  But over the years, other families of African ancestry moved.  Most of the people who lived at the time were Germans and Jewish people.  A very--when the people of African ancestry began to move in, extremely neighborly.  I can remember one family, the Smith family.  The father was an employee of the Post Office, but he was a brilliant mathematician.  And if he had been able to pass the examination, he would have been a teacher.  He had two children, Lorraine and Allen.  But he was father to everybody on the block.  He never passed you in the street that he didn't say, "How are you doing in school?  I want to see your report card.  Do you need any help with math?"  That's the kind of neighborliness that existed.  Everybody shared everything.  We shared food.  We shared--when his, he would have a party, his little would come to door and he said, my parents had a party last night, and I brought you some of the candy.  Or I brought you a piece of cake.  It was great sharing.  There was a great sense of community.  As a matter of fact, when the story was being written about the Bedford Stuyvesant as it is today, and the young man who did "Do the Right Thing"--
Speaker 1: Spike Lee?
Speaker 2: Spike Lee.  I can remember an interview with Spike Lee on LIB [WLIB, New York City radio station], and he was about to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time as a guest lecturer.  And I remember saying to him, you know, "I wish that you would tell something positive about Bedford Stuyvesant, the neighborliness, the caring, everybody went to church."  The church was the center of, of our life, and everyone took care of each other's children.  In fact, my aunts who lived on Madison Street, until they died, they would tell all of the women in the block,"Look, I watched your daughter.  And you need to have her come and sit on my porch until you come home."  They took in everybody's children.  And he says, "But I don't know anything about that."  And it was painful to me that he didn't know about the Bedford Stuyvesant that I knew.  The grocer on the corner, you could go and get anything you wanted.  And at the end of the week, you would pay him.  And if you didn't pay him the end of the week, you'd pay him the end of the next week.  Many of the people who moved in were people from the Caribbean, many more Caribbeans than there were African Americans at that time.  But eventually, African Americans began to come into the, into the block.  And we stayed there until 1957, when we moved to Queens [New York]. And we moved primarily for a better school situation.  But when I went to junior high school, Junior High School 35, which is about three blocks away, it was predominantly a white school, and the teachers were predominantly Jewish and Irish.  It had excellent academic standards, but not much cultural intelligence.
Story_ID: 12866
Speaker 1: We're gonna go back to the school, your school experience momentarily, but I do want to make that we do talk about your genealogy as far as you know, how far extending back you can with your family.  Okay, all right.  So if you can give us some--
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother who was a chattel slave--I knew her in my lifetime, she died in 1938, talked about her life as a chattel slave.  Most people did not at that time.  There a, there was shame about it.  But she talked about it.  She was sold with her mother to a family that had a little girl her age, which was not unusual because many of the plantations were very isolated.  And it was not uncommon to try to--if you had one child, to try to buy someone with a child the same age.  And she was fortunate that she was sold with her mother, fortunate in that she had a chance to be with her mother.  She said that whenever her mother could get her quietly to herself, which was not often, she would tell her, "Always remember that you are an Ibo.  And someday you will be an Ibo woman."  And grandmother didn't know what that meant, but because of the circumstances in which she was told this, with, with whispering, with holding, with affection, she kept that in her heart.  She described what life was like on that plantation.  She was in the house, but she said that when the women of African ancestry who were enslaved, and the other children of African ancestry would come around them, they often could not speak the same language because they were separated by language groups to keep bounding from happening.  And whenever they could, whether they were cooking or washing or dusting or scrubbing, they would pat the children, you know, and whisper to them.  But if ole Miss came around, they would have to say, you get on away from me, I don't care anything about you, you little ugly thing, because they knew that any sign of bounding meant separation.  And my grandmother always worried that if you never got back to this child to tell the child why you did this, this contrast, one minute you were enhancing and validating, and the next minute you're pushing them away, how confused they would be by that.  But can you imagine what the life of a, of a--of a slave child was, never having that affection.  But her mother told her this story.  My grandmother, as I said, didn't know what it meant, but she told her children.  That was my mother's generation. They also didn't know, but they told us.
Story_ID: 12867
Speaker 1: Now, how was your--do you think that your great grandmother directly came from Nigeria or was it your grandmother--
Speaker 2: My grandmother--my mother's mother.  I did not know that an Ibo meant that you were from Nigeria.  But, of course, my generation, you were able to find out.  And I've met many Ibo's and have been embraced by them, named by them.  They look like me.  They have full hips and so forth (laughter).  My grandfather was a widower.  When freedom came, you had to either pay your slave or you had to free them. You could not keep them under bondage.  And so my grandmother had an arranged marriage.  My grandfather was a widower.  He was a carpenter.  He could not have his own shop.  So he used to carry his tools in a wagon, horse and wagon from place to place because a man of African ancestry could not have a business.  And so the marriage was arranged.  He was twenty years older than my grandmother--
Speaker 1: And this was all in Vicksburg?
Speaker 2: In Mississippi, in Church Hill, that Church Hill.  That was before they moved to Vicksburg.  But all of their children were born, and they had a very solid marriage.  The last child was born when my grandmother was fifty, and my grandfather was seventy.  And that was Aunt Florence, my mother's youngest sister, who was sterilized at the age of fourteen.
Story_ID: 12868
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry, but it just seemed like the sterilization story is a--can you--was this one of the things that they did to black women or--
Speaker 2: It was not unusual.  It was such a terrible story that--of course, I didn't know about it until I was grown up.  But I knew that there was always whispering and fear that Aunt Florence might get married.  I didn't know why that, I didn't know why this fear was that she might get married.  She was a teacher.  It seems that there was one doctor, Dr. Martan, who would treat people of African ancestry, he would make home visits.  So my, my aunt had this terrible stomach ache, just excruciating.  And so my grandmother called Dr. Martan, and he came and he examined her.  And he said, "She has appendicitis.  And she has to have surgery."  My grandmother said, "I can't take her to the hospital," because they always--they knew by rumor what happened.  And so he said, "I tell you what you should do.  You come to the hospital in the morning.  You be there at 9:00 o'clock.  Wait for me outside.  Don't go in until I come for you."  Well, the next morning my grandmother took Aunt Florence to the hospital, of course, to the back door of the hospital, waiting for Dr. Martan.  And eventually this person came out and said Dr. Martan says come in.  And my grandmother said, "No.  He told me to wait until he came for me."  He said, "Well, he's scrubbing up, and he sent for me."  So they went in.  And they totally, gave her a total hysterectomy.  Her stomach looked like a series of zippers.  They mutilated her anatomy.  When Dr. Martan came, he came outside and said to my grandmother, "Where, where is, where is Florence?"  She said, "They said, you said"--he said, "Oh, God, I just came."  And when he went in, he told my grandmother what had happened.
Story_ID: 12869
Speaker 1: And do you think Dr. Martan--now, was he, he was a white doctor, right?  He was a white doctor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--but the doctors knew that he was to operate.  And they knew that my aunt who was a teenager was there for that.  So they simply insisted that Dr. Martan had sent for them, and that was a lie.  He had not even arrived at the hospital at that point.  It ruined not only her life, but the life of the family because it was a disgrace to have had a hysterectomy.  The thought was that you would never be attractive to a man, you would never be sensually expressive. And also about that time the strangest thing--and I'm, I'm writing about this, there was a Hollywood star called [Roscoe] 'Fatty' Arbuckle.  He raped a young woman, and in raping her, she had had a hysterectomy, and he penetrated the bladder.  And she died.  So, of course, this is not something that you talk about openly, but the thought was if you've had a hysterectomy, you can never have a normal sexual life because you will be ruptured.  They didn't know that a membrane grows, and, of course, they didn't know that the doctors had prepared her inside so that the membrane would grow.  They knew nothing about what had happened to her.  But they were terrified that if she ever married, and had a sexual relationship, that she would die.  And that was the reason for all this fear, "Oh, Florence might get married."  And I remember when the telegram came that Aunt Florence was getting married, my mother fainted.  She just knew that this was death.  In the meantime, my Aunt Florence was a beautiful woman, voluptuous, so loving, strong maternal instinct.  And she never felt complete.  She felt that--she married a wonderful man, and he loved her. He told me, he says, I, I loved your aunt, but she all--it became (unclear) labor less because he must have been with a woman who could have children; he must have found someone who was more desirable.  She never felt complete.  She finally went into the service, thinking that she would go abroad and so forth.  Now, this is a college graduate with a Master's degree, and her assignment was to clean the latrines, it broke her spirit.  So she had a series of disappointments in her life. And she died quite young of a heart attack, but she was a wonderful, sweet, soft, affectionate, expressively, understanding woman.  And I think because she suffered so, she had great empathy for people.
Story_ID: 12870
Speaker 1: Your Aunt Florence was in--
Speaker 2: which service did she go into, World War II--
Speaker 1: WAC [Women's Army Corps].
Speaker 2: WAC, she was a WAC.  She was a WAC.
Speaker 1: Okay, wow.  I wondered if the sterilization, was it thought that just basically, there was a desire to sterilize all black women they could get their hands on or--
Speaker 2: It was widespread, in fact, my two senior aunts, both of whom died over the age of one hundred, never had an internal visit.  They would never go to a gynecologist because that fear of sterilization was so ingrained in them. Which also meant that many women who might have had fibroids and other conditions, could have been helped.  But they would not go to a gynecologist.  So it was very common, it was very, very common.  And it was experimentation.  You know, there's a Dr. Simms, he was a doctor, a medical doctor, during slavery.  He invented the tool that opens the body of a woman to examine her.  He developed this tool by experimenting on women of African ancestry whose slave owners brought them, said that they can't perform their function.  Now, obviously, they could cook, they could wash; they could iron, they could clean.  So that was not the function they were talking about.  But these were women who had what was called obstetric fistula, you've heard of that.  And he, he developed this tool which he used on women of African ancestry without anesthesia because he said they could bear pain.  And that's written, you can find that on the [World Wide] Web [see www.nycgovparks.org.]  There's a bust for him in Bryant Park because of his fame as a gynecologist to have made all of these discoveries.  So the, the female of African ancestry, her body was the tool for experimentation.  So it wasn't just that you wanted to give her a hysterectomy, but you also wanted to learn more about her anatomy and what would happen.  And then there was also the disfigurement because there was no reason why she would have these zig-zag marks like, like--as I said, as though she had zippers all across her stomach.
Speaker 1: And when do you think this happened, I mean approximately, this was the '30's or '20's [1930s or 1920s]?  I would say this must have been in the '30's [1930s] because I was born in 1925.  And, of course, I remember her.  And when I first remembered her, I remembered this very beautiful woman who was always very depressed and loved children, loved children.
Speaker 2: That's plenty to be depressed about.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  But also very--it was all hush, hush.  Don't talk about it (whisper).  You know she's been emptied out.
Story_ID: 12871
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your genealogy because now we've determined that your grandmother was Ibo and probably was born in Nigeria, right?
Speaker 2: Very probably.  Very probably, sure her mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'm sure that she was in Nigeria [Africa], positive that she was born in Nigeria.  Now, my grandfather was born of the rape of his African mother by the plantation owner.  However, it was the man that his mother gave her heart to.  You couldn't marry, you were not allowed to marry.  You couldn't marry white, you couldn't marry each other.  But it was that man who was spiritually connected to his mother who raised him, taught him his skills as a carpenter, cabinet maker, who loved and educated him.  And I often, when I speak to young men of African ancestry, I said, to have children by women for whom you have no affection and have children that you do not expect to educate and nurture, that's not the African thing.  The only person who did that was the slave owner.  But black men raised the children born of the rape of their wives.  And they did, many black men raised those mulatto children as their own.
Speaker 2: And your--grandfather was raised by this man, or carpenter who was not his actual blood father--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: His blood father was the plantation owner.  And when you look at my grandfather, you could see that he's, he's well mixed.  But, of course, there were--he was considered black. Because one drop made you black because that increased the slave trade.  Now, I don't know how he obtained his freedom.  I'm not--I don't know that.  But because he was twenty years older than my grandmother, and he was a carpenter at the time she married him, somehow he became free.  I don't know if he became free because he--I just don't know.
Story_ID: 12872
Speaker 1: Okay, so let us talk now about back to your youth and, and--and a bit about school. We'd started on that path.  Can you talk about your school experiences?
Speaker 2: My mother had the experience of having to go to school for both my brother and my sister because, of course, they were both advised that they were not college material, my sister should be hairdresser.  But after it got to me, they were sort of used to my mother, so they, they didn't tell me that I wasn't college material or that I shouldn't plan to go to college.  But what they did say to the class was, don't you ever let Adelaide Hines get the highest mark in this class.  She's gotten the highest mark over and over and over, it's got to stop.  So that was a clear--it was the same message, just in a different, in a different form.  And, of course, the fact that you could never really be in the fairytales because I--we were taught that 'pretty is, as pretty does'.  My mother made us feel that we were beautiful because we had all of the features that we were supposed to have, created in the image of God.  And so it was a shock to me when I went to school and found out that the whole world did not think I was beautiful.  And so then we did the plays, 'Rose Red', 'Little Bo Peep' and 'Cinderella' and 'Hansel and Gretel', I was always applying for the part.  And, of course, I could never get the part.  And years and years later when my daughter was in school, she was told that you could be the bear because you would not need a costume.  So it didn't change that much over the years.  But I was a good student, and I enjoyed school.  I enjoyed reading very, very much, and so I was, I was always a top student.  But I always missed learning about my people, from junior high school.  I just couldn't understand why there was nothing there.  Then when I went to high school, the textbook that we used was written by [Arnold J.] Toynbee  [British historian].  And he was one of those like a (unclear) and [Georg Wilhelm Friedrich] Hegel [German philosopher] that said that there was never any contribution made to world civilization by people of African ancestry.  And I knew that wasn't true because of my own background and experience and the places my mother had taken me.
Story_ID: 12873
Speaker 1: But, but that was difficult for me.  And the many people say, oh, you went to Brooklyn College, you know, you got a good education.  I really didn't.  I got an education about other people.  But it excluded me.  And even when I learned about other people, I really couldn't enter into their world.  But I did graduate from Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, NY].  I was valedictorian of my junior high school class.  And then when I graduated, I was too young to teach.  So I went to Columbia [University, New York, NY] for a while.  But my mother had a customer, Congressman Emmanuel Seller (ph.), his wife was her customer.  She made her clothing.  They--four outfits a year, they'd go the mountains, they'd go to the shore.  They'd go on the cruise and they'd go to Florida. So these women had problem figures, they were very heavy in the shoulders.  They didn't have much hips.  They didn't have big women's stores.  So they would go to stores like Depino (ph.), and they would buy a size eight dress, and then my mother would copy it for them.  And she made their girdles and their brassieres and so forth, that's how she made her living.  So, Congressman Seller had a daughter who went to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts].  And when she was graduated from Wellesley--she was a part of a group of women who wanted to bring some women of African ancestry to Wellesley, to the graduate school.  Wellesley had a graduate school at that time.  But they would only take you if you were in graduate school, and they knew that you would succeed at Wellesley.  So I left Columbia [University] , and I went to Wellesley on a full scholarship.  And that's where I got my Master's, an absolutely magnificent campus.  The foliage in the Autumn was some of the most beautiful I had seen.  I loved the foliage, but absence of any presence of culture and intelligence there.
Story_ID: 12874
Speaker 1: And I was wondering if we could go back to your grade school, high school experiences.  What are your memories of some of the people that influenced you in your schooling and your--was there a teacher or particular figure in your community?  What were some of the major influences on you as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not in school, because in school there was a total avoidance of, of people of African ancestry.  Everything was geared for the European students.  So I say I wasn't taught, but I learned by listening to the others.  But you, you sort of compensated for that when you left school.  You worked hard, you, you studied.  I can remember coming home and being so frustrated by the things that I had to hear in school.  And my mother would say well just write, the teacher said, [Chirstopher] Columbus discovered America.  You don't have to say he discovered it.  You don't have to say you believed it.  And that helped me to adjust to the omission and the distortion of what I had to learn in school.  I don't have good memories about school.  And I can't say that there was any teacher that identified with me as a human being.  I can't say that that happened, not even in graduate school.  So school was, not an unpleasant experience, but it had an experience that no, nothing personal or intimate or meaningful to me. I never had a teacher of African ancestry, never.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me--
Speaker 2: Until I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I was a Teaching Fellow at Harvard, and I, I did have teachers that were of African ancestry.  And what a difference it made.
Story_ID: 12875
Speaker 1: It sounds like your mother had some kind of education about, you know, a knowledge of history that was outside of the Eurocentric canon.  Where did she get it from?  Who else was giving you this kind of idea--the ideas that you used outside of school to help you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, growing up, of course, she--they went to segregated schools.  And so in those segregated schools, they learned a great deal about the history with people of African ancestry because the imagery was there and the whole life, it was intimate, the church, the school, the neighbors, they were all the same people.  And they had a rich cultural life in Vicksburg [Mississippi] because there wasn't any other life.  We were not allowed to go to the movies because you had to go in the back and go up in the balcony.  So we didn't go.  But the church had activities. Everybody went to graduation.  You had outstanding speakers from the pulpit, ministers.  And then they had plays, they had recitals.  My aunt played the violin, Aunt Florence played the piano.  So they had a rich cultural life within their community because they grew up in that segregated society, which had its value in many instances.  So that was her source of knowledge, which she transferred to us when we came to New York where everything was totally dismissive and omissive of us.  But she kept us reminded of that, and she wanted--if we could have afford it, we would have gone to historical black college.  But we couldn't afford it.  But my brother went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And that was the opening of his life in terms of the richness of seeing teachers and doctors and lawyers and dentists and strong communities of people of color at Meharry. And his wife went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And so that's where they met.  So that traditional of their knowing the richness of our culture and our heritage, irrespective of the finances, came from my mother, and it has stayed with me always.  And it's still with me.  And even when my children came along, it was a struggle to keep them informed about the positive things about our people because the world had not changed that much.
Story_ID: 12876
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Sanford, I think I, I was a little bit confused.  I've--you were actually born in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, my sister was.  I was born in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My brother was born in Newport, Rhode Island because my father was still in the Navy at that time.  When my mother became pregnant with my sister, she went back home to Mississippi.  And my sister was born in Mississippi, but I was born in Brooklyn, New York.
Story_ID: 12877
Speaker 1: And so your experiences in Vicksburg and in Mississippi were over the summers or--  Over the summers.
Speaker 2: Every summer we went to--as long as my grandparents lived, my mother would drive.  And at that time, you could not stop any place to sleep or any place to eat or even to get a glass of water.  But we would look for a place where there was a church.  And every night--and I mean this was for ten, fifteen years that we went, every summer.  And there was never a night that we would have some place to stay.  And when we would go to find the minister, they would give you a bed, if they had to sleep on the floor on a pallet.  They would give you breakfast.  They would make you lunch, sometimes lunch was a ham sandwich and fried chicken.  Sometimes, it was a chicken foot and hoat cake, but whatever they had, they gave you.  And I think that was the beginning of my love of my people.  They were so giving.  They had nothing.  And then they would tell her how many miles it was to the next church.  And she would be sure that she got to that church before sundown because it was very dangerous to be out there at night.  And that's how she traveled.  But one night in Georgia, she didn't make it to the next town.  And this truck pushed us off the road, and we--my mother's car went over the embankment.  And I can remember waking up hearing my mother say, get out of the car, get out of the--the car was upside down.  The wheels were spinning.  And we crawled away from this car because she thought it was going to explode.  The truck had forced us off the road.  And we were just over this embankment.  Everything was just pitch black.  We had no idea where we were.  Of course, the truck continued.  And all of a sudden we saw something that looked like stars, and they were coming closer and closer.  And we realized they were lanterns.  And there were people walking through the woods with these lanterns.  They had heard this crash, and they came to see what had happened.  Were the people dead?  Were they injured?  They brought chairs and carried us back to the farmhouse.  My mother's head was bleeding.  She had a gash in her head.  And the minister said, you're going to have to go to the hosp--to get your head sewn.  So my mother said, well, where is the hospital?  He said, there's no hospital.  The only place that this can be done is at the jail.  He says, you'll have to go to the jail and get your stitches because the gap is too deep.  He took us in a wagon to this jail.  Now, the jail was really just a building.  And you'd go inside.  You could see the prisoners behind these bars, white prisoners.  And when we came in, they rose up because it was a show, oh, look at that nigger coming with them children, them pickaninny children.  Ah, you look like you don't come from him, talk proper; let me hear them pickaninnies say something.  And they, they just leered at us.  The doctor came.  He shaved my mother's--half of her head.  And he sewed her head without anesthesia.  And the prisoners were saying, "Why don't you cry 'uman [woman]?  Why don't you cry?"  And we were hovering around my mother.  And she said, don't drop a tear.  Don't drop a tear, and I won't drop a tear.  And I can see her biting her lips.  The blood ran from her head down, mingled with the blood from her lips.  And he sewed up that gash in her head without any anesthesia.  And that minister told my mother that she'd have to go to court the next morning because the police had come.  The minister went away, a fine dignified-looking man.  And we stayed over night at this farmhouse.  And the next morning, we had to go to the court.  And the court was in the back of a grocery store.  And the Minister said, I'll meet you there.  So we went there.  And there were two people who were before us.  And he called my mother, "Sulee, you're Sulee?"  My mother stepped up and said, "Yes."  "You're here by yourself?"  She said, "Yes."  In the meantime, we had noticed in the corner there was this raggedly, shackled looking man.  He had a hat pulled down over his eyes, and he was just standing on, first one foot, and then the other.  But we didn't know who he was.  But when the judge said, "Anybody here for this nigger 'uman?" He stepped up, and he said, "I'm here, judge, your honor."  He says, "I'm here for her.  She just a widow, trying to get home to her mother.  She ain't got nothing."  And the judge said, "But she destroyed this man's truck.  Who's gonna pay for his truck?"  And he said, "We pay for it, your honor.  You know I ain't never been no problem to you.  I been living in this county all these years.  I ain't never been no problem."  He said, "I--we gon' pay for that truck.  And we gonna put her a bus and send her on to her mama cause her mama sick down there in Mississippi."  He humbled himself, he shuffled.  He degraded himself because that's not the way he talked.  And the judge said, all right.  He said, "If y'all--y'all gonna pay for the truck, get out of here cause we don't need no nigger 'uman round here with these three children whining and crying."  That's how we got out of there.  Never saw them, don't know who they are.  They paid for that truck, which we had done nothing to do; didn't put us on a bus, put us on a train, and sent us to Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 12878
Speaker 1: Now, this man, you say you say you never saw--you, you didn't know who he was?  He was the minister.  That's what I thought.  He was the minister from the night before.  But he knew that that's how he had to present himself in order to get us exonerated.  And I can tell you that there are times when I've shuffled for my people too.  And I've (eaten red worms?), but I've taken the insults. That's how--and I have this deep connection with my people, whoever they are because so many strangers have been the way we got over, the way we made it.  And we went on to Vicksburg [Mississipi].  My mother's bald spot hair eventually grew back; car destroyed, no luck at nothing.  How old were you when this happened?  I was about eight.  But I've never forgotten--I can smell the grass.  I can smell the oil in the lamps.  I can see the people coming through the woods with these lanterns that looked like stars from the distance.  I can see the fear on my mother's face because we didn't know who these people were.  We didn't know if they would be worse than the man in the truck.  But they were people who lived back on the farm.  Now, when you were eight--this is about 1933, right?  About that.  And so your mom was an African American woman driving a car--  Alone.  Alone with--
Speaker 2: --with three children.  And she did that for, every year for ten or fifteen years.  And that wa--you couldn't stop anywhere?  No place, no place.  You couldn't get a glass of water.  But every night we had some place to stay.  We had lunch, we had breakfast.  We had prayer, we had encouragement.  And that's what I've tried to be.  I can never pay back the sacrifices that were made by people for me and for my family.
Story_ID: 12879
Speaker 1: That particular event sounds like a kind of an influence, a pivotal kind of--  It was.  How do you think it--  It was pivotal in terms of several things.  One, that you were a place where you had no protection because this truck drove us off the road.  He, he honked and drove up behind my mother.  He, for a while--because, see, she had a New York license.  And so it was pivotal in telling me how cruel people could be.  They didn't know whether we were dead or not.  And they never stopped, so we were disposable.  Also, the people coming the way they did and caring for us.  We were total strangers.  But that minister--that proud, erect, soft-spoken, speaking grammatically perfect, the way he presented himself.  I'll never forget it.  You literally didn't recognize him in the courtroom the next day--  Because he looked so different.  We had no idea who he was.  But when he said who he was, apparently, this person who was the judge, he knew him.  He says, you know, "I ain't never been no problem to you.  Well, I been living in here.  I got my little church."  So he had established his reputation as being a harmless kind of person, shuffling kind of harmless person.
Story_ID: 12880
Speaker 1: So, going back, you take this experience back with you when you go back to the North, and schools.  And how did you negotiate those different Northern, Southern and racism, a part of both experiences, but there being some difference?
Speaker 2: How did you (unclear) (simultaneous)--  Yeah, it's different because when I became a teacher in Bedford Stuyvesant in a school near Atlantic Avenue, that was my first teaching experience, it was 1950.  So it's fifty-three years now that I've been involved in some way in public or private education.  And I was assigned a class that was called an 'Opportunity Class'.  It was made up of boys, fourth, fifth and sixth grade boys who were considered uneducable, incorrigible.  They were not, they were not considered mentally retarded.  But they were just behavior problems.  So they were put all together in this one class.  And I started there in November.  And they told me, they said, "We're gonna beat the hell out of you, just like we did all the four other teachers who came.  You not gonna stay here."  And I said, "Oh, no (laughter) because I need a job."  I started in November, my mother was ill then.  And they tried everything they could to run me out of that class (laughter).  But they were so bright.  And there was one boy, David Rosette, he was the ringleader.  He was the one that was really going to see that I didn't stay.  He was gonna keep his reputation.  Now, in the meantime, the principal told me, just keep them in the classroom.  Just keep them from running up and down the hall, and annoying the other teachers.  I had no materials, I had no books, I had no drawing paper.  I had nothing.  But I was determined to love them--cause I could see their ability.  They could organize, and, and assign each other things.  And so I decided that I was going to make this work.  And one of the things that they taught me was, they wanted to read about themselves.  They didn't want to read about Ted and Sally.  They didn't want to read about 'Dick and Jane'.  They didn't have any white house with a white fence, they didn't have no damned red wagon.  And so they were telling what they're asking me to read is not relevant.  So I said, well, what do you want to read?  Well, they tease--they, they tricked me at first.  They told me they wanted pussy and dick.  So I went to the principal and asked him--I thought it was a different reading series.  And the principal said, "Oh, my God, Miss Hines, close the door and get the guidance counselor.  So when I went back the next day, I said, "Look what you did to me."  They said, "Look, we knew you were dumb, but we didn't know you were stupid."  I said, "Do you know you almost got me fired?"  And I said, "I think that you owe me something.  So we, first thing we're gonna do is vocabulary because I didn't recognize those words.  I'm gonna teach you your anatomy so you know the proper terms.  It's nothing wrong with it.  It's not dirty."  And so that was the, that was the overture.  And then they told me that they wanted to read about themselves.  So I said, you tell me your story, and I'll write it.  And that's how I learned to teach.  I learned from them.  I did not learn at Wellesley.  They told me their story:  there are rats in my house.  Sometimes we only have beans to eat.  Sometimes the--whatever they wrote, whatever they told me, I wrote it.  And I said, this is David's story.  This is John's story.  This is Mary's story.  Then I extrapolated the words, the ending sounds, the rhyming words, the smaller words inside, make a sentence.  I--the same thing you would do with Ted and Sally, I did with--and they were so proud of their stories.  They identified with them.  And we began to learn.  And then all of a sudden, it became clear that these were very bright children, but they never wanted those children to go back into regular classes.  I stayed in that school six years.  And then when the new school opened, I went to the new school, which was the Crispus Attucks Schools in 1956 and I stayed there till 1985.  I became principal at that school.  And my whole philosophy was, every child has a story.  And he wants to read about his story.  It's interesting, in yesterday's [New York] Times [newspaper], this new school that they're opening at Columbia University [New York, NY], the curriculum for the only child whose grades is me and myself.  The next one is me and my family.  The next one is me and my world.  So, people know what's important, but they feel that every child doesn't have a story so they have to read someone else's story.  But each child has a story and has a life, and it has to be validated.  And we were quite successful there.
Story_ID: 12881
Speaker 1: But it was difficult because I was asked to become the teacher in charge of an annex, which was down the street.  The school opened overcrowded.  And there was a lot of turmoil, the children were setting fires.  The custodian had a gambling ring at the bottom.  And there was an assistant principal who should have been sent there.  But the principal became ill, and she knew that that assistant principal couldn't handle that annex.  So she asked me to go, and I did--and cleaned up the school, put up white curtains, brought in flowers and, and there began to have been some resentment because I was a teacher.  I was not the assistant principal.  So I was invited to speak at an in-service course about reading.  And I talked about the use of the experience charts, which comes out of the Board of Ed [Education] bulletin.  I didn't know it at the time because I had never seen the bulletin.  I just made the experience chart because the children told me they wanted to read about themselves.  But there was, there was a Board of Ed bulletin on the use of the experience chart.  That's what they called it, where you write the child's experience.  So I talked about that, and the fact that it was the teacher's responsibility to create the experience that the children could first listen to and then read about and then write about, as the normal process of, of learning, that you don't start off having children read.  You start off letting them talk and letting them listen.  So at the end there was a question and answer period.  And a group of teachers said--there were three teachers from another school.  They said, "You're making excuses.  These children are not deprived, they are depraved.  We came to this country, we had nothing, we were poor.  We went to school, we learned, we were successful.  So you're making excuses.  These children are depraved and so are their families."
Story_ID: 12882
Speaker 1: Were you able to give them another way of looking at it?
Speaker 2: I responded by saying, may I clarify a few issues, that when your fore parents came to this country, they came to a country which had already been economically built by slave labor.  The land had been taken from the Native Americans.  You came, but you were--you came, and you were able to vote when people of African ancestry were not able to vote.  Do they--and I--in addition to that, you had an opportunity maximize on whatever was available to you.  You could change your name because you had the ability to blend, but my skin will not allow me to blend.  I can't change my name.  I can't alter my features and become another person.  They filed a grievance.  I was told to apologize for what I had said.  I pointed out that they had said the children were not deprived, they were depraved.  Why should I apologize?  They said, you have to apologize because they were hurt.  And at that time, Saundra Feld (ph.) was not the president of the Union, but she was the President (unclear).  So for six months, we had to go through all kinds of training to get me to apologize and to--because I would lose my license.  I'd never be more than--and I, I wouldn't apologize.
Story_ID: 12883
Speaker 1: Now, tell us who these women were again cause I--
Speaker 2: They were teachers were in there for an in-service course.  The in-service course was being taught by two women of African ancestry.  And they invited me to speak, and we had the tape of the course.  As a result of that, about fifteen people left the school, including the principal because they said there were too many strong people of African ancestry at that school.  And that's what encouraged me to take the exam for assistant principal and principal.  And I passed.  And the parents asked me to stay and become the assistant principal.  And I did, and I stayed there and became the principal.  I was principal for nineteen years.
Story_ID: 12884
Speaker 1: And Crispus Attucks was known or distinguished for some things under your tenure.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, first we were distinguished for getting a new building because as I said, the school opened smaller than it needed to be because at that time people in the housing project had five and six children.  So the school opened in 1956 on a half-day.  Those children never had a full day of school.  And there was nothing on their accumulative record card to indicate that they never went to school a full day, from kindergarten through the sixth grade, never.  And when you think about it, it was supposed to be four hours.  And it wasn't four hours because you had lunch, and the teacher had a prep period.  So one of the first things we did was to apply for a wing so that we could have full day of school because after they closed that annex where I was going as the teacher-in-charge because it was a fire hazard.  So then they had portable classrooms in the yard.  They were hot.  There was no toileting in it.  There was a, a problem everyday.  So we petitioned for a wing.  We went to see [Robert Ferdinand] Wagner [Jr.],who was the [New York City] Mayor at the time.  He said, "The building is too young.  It hasn't been--it's not old enough to get a wing, so you can't get a wing," though we told him all the problems we were having.  He said, "Okay, you go get somebody to write the plan.  And I'll see about it."  He didn't think that we would do that, but we found an engineering firm of African ancestry, and they wrote the plans for us.  And so we went back to Wagner, and we said, we have the plans.  And he says, "Okay, I'll help you to get the building."  Then the question was, who would be the contractor.  We were delayed two years because we insisted that the contractor hire people of African ancestry, a certain proportion of them had to be of African ancestry.  And they folded their, their blueprints and left.  They said, "No, that's out of the question.  You must be out of your mind."  They went to the superintendent, and they'd said, there's a colored woman over there.  She must be out of her mind.  She talking about that we have to hire people of African ancestry.  And so we were going to lose the wing, but the New York Times [newspaper] ran the story.  The day the New York Times ran the story, that's when the break came.  They came and said, well, what can we do?  Well, we had researched it.  And we found out that the primary construction could hire a certain number of non-union people because people of African ancestry couldn't get into the electrical union [IBEW- International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] and the (latherers?) and all of that.  And so we told them, we said, we have found out that you can hire a certain number of people who are not in the union.  So that's what we're asking you to do, and we're also asking you to take some apprentices.  But we made him a guarantee.  We said, if you hire people of African ancestry, and you hire security from this neighborhood, you will have no vandalism.  Nothing will be destroyed.  And he told us at the end of that construction, the only construction that he has ever had when not even a screwdriver was lost.  There was absolutely no vandalism.  And the Board of Ed [Education] made a Contract Compliance Office after that, that there had to be a certain number of minority they called--it's not minority, but that's what they called it, workers at all construction sites.  But, of course, if you don't know that that contract is there, that contract compliance is there--because all over now you see schools being built totally without representation of people of African ancestry because if you don't know that the law is there, you can't maximize on it.  You can't use it.  But we got the first contract compliance legislation.
Story_ID: 12885
Speaker 1: Dr. Sanford, when was this exactly?
Speaker 2: This was in 1969.  We got a new wing on the building with a full kitchen.  Before that they used to bring in--we had a soup kitchen.  Now, the food is cooked there, and had early childhood classrooms with laboratories and sinks right in the early childhood room, a beautiful wing.  It's called the Shirley Chisholm Wing because we were classmates in high school and college.
Story_ID: 12886
Speaker 1: Was there a moment when you realized that you had to become an educator and then go on and become a well empowered educator?  I mean what was that process?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to be a teacher, teachers are in the family.  My aunt--as I told you, my aunt was a teacher in Mississippi.  My hus--my brother was in--at Columbia in, in Surgeons and Physicians [Columbia University School of Medicine], and he was a teacher.  Teaching was just--I never played any game except 'school'.  But I, I loved being in the classroom, but it was circumstances that pushed me to go into administration.  But my happiest days were in the classroom.
Speaker 1: You're really a teacher at heart.
Speaker 2: I think so, I think so.
Speaker 1: But happenstance made you become in the administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Was that a need to make change?
Speaker 2: Parents asked me.  One parent said, "You know, if I had another child that had to come to this school, I'd kill it."  She said, "I'd said I'd commit infanticide.  That's how bad it is.  Can you please stay and help us?  Could you please become the principal of this school?"  And that's why I went on and studied.  And when I left that school there were five licensed principals on the staff of that school that I helped through the exams.  Wow. That's why I left.  It was time for them to have a chance (laughter).
Story_ID: 12887
Speaker 1: Talk about the context in which you're teaching and moving toward being a principal or assistant principal and become a principal, what were the movements that were simultaneously happening that were influencing what you were doing?  What, what--what was the social climate like that was--
Speaker 2: Well, of course, it was during the '60's [1960s].  So there was, at that time, great expectation that after the Social Revolution that things would be better, that employment would be better, housing would be better, education would be better.  But it didn't happen.  So it was a time of great disappointment and great frustration.  And it was also the time when drugs began to come into our communities, which I think was one of the most dastardly happenings in this country.  And, of course, we know that that was a, that was a constructed event, the Kefauver  hearings [ref. to 1950 United States Senate Special Committee on Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce] tell us very clearly that drugs were allowed to come in to suppress the social revolution because young black men were sitting down at lunch counters.  And they were integrating schools.  And that had to be stopped.  And, of course, our young people didn't know that.  And they were duped into being the ones who carried the drugs.  So when I first started at the Crispus Attucks School in 1956, drugs were not an issue.  There was a little bit of heroin and reefer around.  But when drugs came into our community, that's when there was such a disintegration of the family and such pathology.  Now, in the midst of all of this, there were the, what they call 'Title I', the federal legislation that was passed that labeled children, disadvantaged, culturally deprived, and gave a portion of money to the administration of the school to develop programs to bring these children to some maximum performance.  Now, I was there, I was teaching when the notion came in of Title I and being disadvantaged and culturally deprived, terrible words to use to identify children.  But those were the words that we used.  And my posture was to tell the children that that's not true about you.  That's a--that's the wrong identification, but this is the way we get the funds.  Now, at the same time what was happening, was the unions were becoming very powerful.  And in the '60's [1960s], when Ocean Hill-Bronzeville [ref. to labor dispute in spring of 1968, thirteen teachers in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville District were fired] came into its foment, when the parents were saying our children are failing, we want to be able to have some say-so in the selection of teachers and curriculum.  And [Albert] Shanker was the president of the union [American federation of Teachers- AFT] then.  And they declared that there was anti-Semitism and the schools went on strike.  Well, my school never closed during any of the strikes.  We stayed open.  We slept in.  And so that made me get the reputation of being confrontational.
Story_ID: 12888
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you to back track because I remember the Ocean Hill-Bronzeville scenario, but I think for people who might not, could you just like break it down a little more, like what exactly was the Ocean Hill, Bronzeville thing.  What were the issues and--
Speaker 2: Well, Ocean Hill, Bronzeville was the, was the identification of a school district.  And the, the major school was Junior High School 271.  And then the parents in that school felt that the children were not being adequately educated.  They went to the school board, which was chaired by Herbert Oliver, who's still alive.  He's a minister, Presbyterian minister. And I still have contact with him.  And they supported the parents in feeling that they should have something to say about the teachers if they were not satisfactory.  And the posture of the union [American Federation of Teachers Union-AFT] was, well, it's not the teachers.  It's just that the children aren't learning.  And mysteriously, a letter was circulated that said, we're going to get rid of the Jewish teachers.  They never identified the source of that letter, but the union said that it was written by parents.  And then the whole thing became a label of anti-Semitism which wasn't true because there were Jewish teachers in the school. [see Jack Saltzman and Cornel West, eds., Struggles in the Promised Land: Toward a History of Black-Jewish Relations in the United States, Oxford, 1997).] And I had Jewish teachers in my school and we never closed.  But when the strike came and we never closed during any of those strikes, that gave me the label of, of being a confrontational person, which I really wasn't.  But as a result of that, around that same came open enrollment when children--no, open enrollment came a little before that--when children in over-utilized schools were allowed to transfer to under-utilized schools.  And as I told you, when the school opened, it opened too small.  So we were on a double session.  Teachers in the school who found that children from the Crispus Attucks [School] were going to go to the school where their children went, they falsified the records because you couldn't go if your reading score was low.  You couldn't go if you had a lot of absences.  You couldn't go if you had health problems.  It was as though all of the children in the receiving schools were perfect.  And they actually changed records so that children who would have been eligible to go out on open enrollment, could not go.  In the meantime, those who did go were treated so badly in those receiving schools because the parents weren't prepared to accept them, the children weren't prepared to accept them.  So it was said, here comes the black bus.  And these children were the monitors for the floor and the eraser monitor and they were used in that way.  And many of them had very, very terrible personality problems.  Some of them came back to the former school, to twenty-one [P.S. 21- Public School 21].  And that's what made me realize, it has, we have to do something differently.  We cannot let our children go and be destroyed externally, and we cannot have an unsatisfactory school system.
Story_ID: 12889
Speaker 1: And that's what drove me into administration.  And my posture was that the children are brilliant.  Their parents, regardless to the condition in which they come to school--and at that point, some were alcoholics and some were addicts, they wanted the best for their children.  Every teacher who came in, person who came in, who was not certified, hadn't passed the exam, I said, "If you're a good human being, I will help you pass the exam."  So we had no unlicensed teachers.  Within two or three years, they were licensed.  However, we had a reputation of, you have to work hard if you go to that school.  So I was brought up on grievances for--because I required that the teachers couldn't come in dresses like they were going to the ball game or to, or to the party.  And I said, I'll give you a letter for a smock if you, saying that I required that you wear a smock.  So the reputation was, that's a hard place to go to work.  And so one year a group of teachers came and interviewing them, I said, "Well, tell me what you know about the children who are in this school."  They didn't know very much.  They went back and said that I asked them if they dated black men.  And so I was brought up on grievances for that.  And because, if they refused to work, they could have lost their job.  So, they had to structure that I didn't accept them because if they rejected the school, then they could not work.  And, so we went through a whole trial and, of course, they were saved, but not for twenty-one.  But that established the reputation that this is a difficult place to work.  But in the meantime, our scores were going up and up and up and up.  And they stayed up.  We sued the School Board because we had a class of children that took an exam for a specialized middle school outside of our district and they passed.  And they were not allowed to go because the district wouldn't release them.  So we had a group of lawyers who sued the School Board and the decision was, these children can go to any school outside of the district as long as the district doesn't have a program for the gifted and talented.  So there was just a repetition of things that made it difficult for, for me to establish the fact that I was there for the children.  But I stayed.  I never became a Superintendent, never applied to be a Superintendent.
Story_ID: 12890
Speaker 1: And then after I left, I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a year.  And that's when I was approached by Al Vayan (ph.) to consider taking Kenneth Clark's place on the Board of Regents.  So I had to move back to New York because I was living in Cambridge [Massachusetts] then.  I was going to finish my Doctorate.  I was gonna do some writing.  But I came back to New York, and I became a Regent.  And I said I would do it reluctantly for a year or two, and seventeen years now.  Now, what exactly is a Regent.  And, I mean I just have a vague sense of what it is and how does it, how were you able to influence--  The Regents is the governing board for education for the state [of New York], responsible for all education from pre-kindergarten through post-doctoral studies, libraries, museums, education, the prison, public television, public radio.  We license and regulate thirty-eight professions, all federal program are regulated and monitored by the Board of Regents, all programs that come out of the legislature are monitored and regulated by the Board of Regents.  You're elected by the Assembly and the Senate in Albany [New York].  And you serve without salary, without a driver, without an office, without a telephone, without compensation of any kind.  And the Regents meets every month, two to three days a month, except August.  And I'm a Regent-at-large.  I was elected in 1986, unanimously, but I haven't been elected unanimously since (laughter).  But it was unanimous that first time.  And I've been re-elected three times. [2005: Vice-chancellor of the Board of Regents]
Story_ID: 12891
Speaker 1: Wow, what--you got your Ph.D. somewhere in the--
Speaker 2: No, I never got a Ph.D. because every subject that I submitted--I went to Fordham[University, Bronx, NY] on a Ford Foundation Scholarship for Urban Educators.  And when I finished that program, I had an opportunity to go on and get the Doctorate, which would have taken a few more years.  But every topic I submitted was not acceptable.  And I didn't see any point in writing about something that was of no interest.  I was already a principal, that was supposed to be preparing people for the principalship.  So I completed that program, and I was asked to teach there, which I did for a while.  My husband was in the program the following year, and he went on and got his doctorate, but by the time he got a thesis topic through, it had no relation to anything that he was interested in because it had to be a research topic.  That meant you had to give back what somebody else said.  You could not write a creative topic on something that you were interested in.  And I just, I just didn't feel that there was any reason for me to do that.  Now, I have several honorary doctorates, three or four, I think.  But I never got an earned doctorate.  I will some day, but it will be in African Studies.  It won't be in administration and supervision.  But I've taught administration and supervision courses.
Story_ID: 12892
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the influences on your sort of educational philosophies and, you know, some of the people that were critical to your development of some of ideas.  I wonder if you could talk about that.  It's difficult to say who was critical in, in my education, formal, in-school education.  I think the people who have been critical have been people like Asa Hilliard [educator], Wade Nobles [professor of Black Studies at San Francisco State University], people like Dr. John Henrik Clarke [historian], none of whom were my teachers in a formal setting, but from whom I learned the history, the true and accurate history of people of African ancestry.  But, as I said, I never had a teacher of African ancestry.  And I never had a teacher who saw me as a human being--
Speaker 2: Except you said at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: When I was at Harvard, [Dr.] Charles Willie [sociologist], who was professor of Education .  But, of course, I, I was retired at that point (laughter).  But he influenced me in terms of the profundity of his understanding.  He had been the major consultant for desegregation.  And he talked about the fact that the issue with desegregation implementation was, it was given to the segregationists to implement.  And it opened my eyes to a lot of what happened, even with Title I, and even now with "No Child Left Behind".  You're giving the money and the implementation to the same people who failed to start with.  And they were not in any way socialized to change their perception. They're just given the money while other people get reparations, it goes directly to them.  But you have to define yourself in a minimalist way, in a negative way to get the funds which are given to somebody else to cure you.  And that has, that--that is a major component that I already had in terms of my philosophy.  But I had never been able to verbalize it in that way.  So he was a profound influence on my understanding of why so many of the programs that come in--the people who, who do the work are successful.  But the constituents aren't because it has nothing to do with changing the way we think about each other and the way we think about ourselves.  And until that changes, no program is going to work.
Speaker 2: And Dr. Willie, you studied with in '86 [1986]--
Speaker 1: Charles Willie.  I was at Harvard from '86 to '87 [1986 to 1987] because I, I had started at Harvard when I asked to be a Regent and was elected.  So I completed that year, but I didn't, I didn't stay on because you had to live in New York.  I sometimes wonder if I made the right decision.  Coming back to New York?  Yeah.  Would it have been better for me to have stayed there and, and finished writing and finished my doctorate?  Could I have been more productive?
Story_ID: 12893
Speaker 1: I hadn't thought about that.  So you feel like you could have been more productive?
Speaker 2: I wonder,  I don't know.  I will never know, of course, but the seventeen years as Regent has been extremely frustrating, extremely.  People ask me do I enjoy it.  That's not the word that describes it because you see the system from the top, and you understand how impossible it is to change that system because people come on the Board of Regents with their own frame of reference.  And I think they come on with an idea to maintain the life that is comfortable for them.  Most of them are very wealthy people, very successful people.  And they're not, they--they are elected by people who are elected to serve their community.  All of the elected officials are, the majority come from upstate and Long Island [New York].  And they're elected as Assembly people and Senators to serve the people in their community.  So why would they plan a budget people to help people who live outside their community?  So the way it's structured, it's not structured to work.  And that's what's been difficult to deal with, the fact that when you see the structure, you know that this is not developed to work.
Story_ID: 12894
Speaker 1: Could you talk about Afrocentrism, is that--it's been a big, an influence in your thinking and Dr. Clark and Dr. Ben [Carson, N.Y. Regent]--, I just wondered in terms of your education philosophy, could you--
Speaker 2: I don't call it Afrocentrism because people have defined that in, in different ways.  But what I think they're saying is that African people have a culture, a specific way of believing, of valuing. A sense of what the world is about, what the involvement is about and what human relations are about.  And in the African context, it's communal, it's collegial, it's not me, it's we.  It's a feeling that I am not a separate person,  I belong to a group and a family.  And I can't be successful if all of the people who are related to me are failing.  So it's a different philosophy.  People have used the word Afrocentricity to suggest that we're saying that African people are different.  They have been treated differently.  Actually, all life began in Africa.  And people moved from Africa to different parts of the world.  And that movement developed a different way of thinking, but whenever you go to the Continent, you--I don't care what part.  And my husband and I have been going since the '70's [1970s], you find that sense of, we are a people.  And whether you are poor, you're proud because this is your land.  And I feel the loss of the land, the fact that I can never go home, I can never really know where home is.  The loss of the land, the loss of the language, the loss of that identity.  I long for that.  I miss that.  I miss the fact that I can never really go home.
Story_ID: 12895
Speaker 1: Do you not feel that the sense of Pan-Africanism give you a space to be--
Speaker 2: It, it--it helps, but I should be able to say I am a Nigerian.  I should be able to say I'm an Ibo or Afanti or a Ghar (ph.).  But I can't.  So we look at the--Africa is a continent,  it's not a country.  There are more than two thousand languages in Africa.  So while there are some commonalities, there's still a vagueness about it, a vagueness of identification.  Well, I was made Queen Mother in Ghana in the Upper Volta area.  And it was a wonderful experience.  And I was welcomed and embraced in a way that I have never been welcomed or embraced in America.  And they were protective and nurturing.  I can't call Mississippi home.  They lynched my people and sterilized them.  I can't call New York home, I didn't learn about myself.  My father couldn't get a job, he couldn't buy a piece of property.  How could I call this home?  So where is home?  Where is that special place where I really belong?  And people--when I go to Ghana and they can tell me about their great, great grandparents, and the great, great grandparents' sons and daughters.  And they're all there together.  That's wonderful.  I can't do that.  Now, do I feel like I'm an American?  I'd like to think I'm an American.  I don't have the privileges of an American.  When I went abroad--when we went to Kenya and we were insulted on the, on the airplane by a Frenchman who pushed us out of the seat because he wanted to see [Mount] Kilimanjaro and we reported it.  And when we went--when the plane landed, we sent for the Embassy and the Consul. He came and identified with the-- with the Frenchman, not with me, even though he was American.  I called my Congressman from Kenya to tell him, "Who was here for me?  Where is the "me" of "we"?  Where is the, where is the--where, who--to whom do I belong?  And certainly all of the times that our soldiers have fought in wars and come back and can't get a job, can't--look at Levittown [New York. Suburban community in Long Island].  Those houses were for Europe--white men who came back [from World War II].  And they could buy those houses for $10,000.  But a soldier of African ancestry could not buy a house in Levittown.  Those things are very much a part of my thinking.  I'm not destroyed by it, but I'm aware of it.
Story_ID: 12896
Speaker 1: What do you think would be, like some of the important things that could happen for education in terms of African Americans in this country?  What would you like to see happen?
Speaker 2: Change in curriculum, so that the curriculum will speak the truth.  I don't expect them to teach my culture or my history, just tell the truth.  And if you tell the truth, we will be there.  For example, if you just look at New York.  When you look at the fourth grade studies in New York, they don't study the African burial ground [largest colonial-era cemetery for enslaved Africans in America]  They don't study Seneca Village [Manhattan's first significant community of African American property owners--existed from 1825 through 1857.]  They don't study the Draft Riots [Civil War Draft Riots of 1863.]  They don't study the, the slave auctions on Wall Street [ref. to Wall Street Slave Auction House of seventeenth century.]  So they don't tell the whole story.  That would make the biggest difference--just tell the whole story.  And we're still finding bits and pieces--this whole thing about [President] Thomas Jefferson.  Look how long that went on.  Look how many times Thomas Jefferson said, "This is a terrible atrocity, God will frown on us, for this institution of slavery."  And he still kept slaves.
Story_ID: 12897
Speaker 1: I just want to backtrack to Shirley Chisholm before I forget.  Can you just tell me about your--
Speaker 2: Well, we were in high school together.  She was a Jamaican, very bright, very talented.  In fact, when I was in college at Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York], most of the people of African ancestry were Caribbeans.  The Caribbeans came to this country, they had not seen lynching. They had not seen 'whites-only' because their experience as slaves was different from the slave experience in America.  So they had a lot of pride and they had a lot of belief in the possibilities.  And they came and could take advantage of those things which people of African ancestry had become too depressed, oppressed and suppressed and repressed.  So many of them were Jamaican, as she was.  We were almost the only two young women of African ancestry who were at Girl's High at that time.  And then we went on to Brooklyn College together.
Speaker 1: Girl's High.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your high school.
Speaker 2: And, as I said, her--the wing is named the [former United States Representative-NY] Shirley Chisholm wing, the wing of the building.  And she's, she's lost her eyesight just about now.  But whenever she comes to New York, we try to see each other.
Speaker 1: You mean she's no longer here in New York?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: She's no longer here in New York?
Speaker 2: No, no, she moved.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I think to Florida.
Story_ID: 12898
Speaker 1: I think I read somewhere where Ebonics was a discussion that you were a part of and took a stance that was not necessarily popular, I mean in the mainstream.  Could you talk about that?  Well, I really never took a stand.  I believe that in Oakland when the issue of Ebonics [African American Vernacular English] came up, it came up in reference to children failing again. And the School Board in Oakland and the woman who did the work, Dr. Joyce King was a very close friend of mine, they said, "We would like for the language that the children bring to school to be recognized and respected and take them from there to standard English."  But people became hysterical.  They said, oh, we want to teach the children Ebonics.  They want to teach the teachers Ebonics.  I never took a public stand on Ebonics.  There was a major conference on Ebonics held at the Medgar Evers [College, Brooklyn, N.Y.].  And the National Organization of Linguists declared Ebonics is a language.  It has a syntax, it has a system.  It's grammatically intricate and so forth.  And, I never spoke at this conference, I wasn't involved in the conference.  However, subsequent to that, Charles Barron, who was now a member of the council, had a forum with [Rev.] Herbert Daughtry at their church [Pastor of the House of the Lord Pentecostal Church.]  And they talked about Ebonics.  And I was a participant in that panel.  I tried to help them to understand that no one was talking about teaching Ebonics.  The children come speaking Ebonics.  But every language system that a child brings to school should be respected as a language system.  You don't condemn it because language is full communication.  There's no language that's superior to any other language.  That's all I ever said about Ebonics.  But when the issue came up about my running for the Chancellor of the Board of Regents, they dragged this out and ran this article in the paper saying that I was a supporter of Ebonics--even had a manufactured picture of me with a sign that said Ebonics.  But I have never taken a public stand about Ebonics because to me it's, there's no need for a public stand.  Whatever language a child brings to school, you validate that language.  Children don't just have to speak one language.  Right.  When you go to Curacao or other parts of the world, children speak four or five--they come up and say, "What language do you speak?"  And whatever it is, they can speak it.  So we don't have to discard one language.  And then, as I pointed out, the spirituals are in Ebonics.  The slave narratives are in Ebonics.  You expect me to throw that away.
Story_ID: 12899
Speaker 1: Dr. Sanford, you went to Egypt in--
Speaker 2: Many times.  Okay, can you talk about your, sort of beginnings to going there or what it was and--
Speaker 1: Oh, the first time I went to Egypt, I went with my church, Bethany Baptist Church.  We went to Egypt and Israel.  And then--
Speaker 2: What year was that?  Sorry, approximately. Was it the '70's?
Speaker 1: Oh, about 1973 or [1974] four.  But I had been to Senegal before that, and I had to been to Morocco before that.  But that was my first trip to Egypt.  Then Asa Hilliard, who I had met at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the year that I was at Harvard.  He was having tours, guided tours to Egypt.  And I went about nine times with him.  And the history, particularly of the people who are now in Aswon, who were the Nubian people, who were the original Egyptians, it was fascinating and all of the history of the tombs and the temples that were built by the pharaohs and so forth, was just fascinating to me.  So I go as often as I can.
Story_ID: 12900
Speaker 1: You spoke of your interest in seeing the children get a chance to go there.  I thought I saw it on a Golden Apple program--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I felt that before children would travel anyplace outside of the United States, it should be to the Caribbean and it should be to the Continent of Africa. Before they go anyplace else, Paris [France] and England, they should first go to Africa.  And then they should understand that what you see in Paris and in England has been built with slaves that were taken with the colonization of the continent of Africa.  They should understand that, that was how, that's how those countries built their wealth.
Story_ID: 12901
Speaker 1: Now, what could this information do--you've talked about how important it would be for us to, for African American people to get our history in schools, what also does this information and this truth, how might it be helpful for the mainstream as well.  I mean--  Well, it, it's very important for all of the children so that they wouldn't feel so privileged and so entitled.  But for the child of African ancestry, it would give that child an identity because they were told they had no language.  And they were told that they were barbarian and primitive.  I can remember when my daughter was in the third grade and the teacher gave the assignment to come back with some phrases that your great, great grandparents used.  And she said, "You don't have to do it Janie, because your people didn't have a language."  And I had to help the teacher to understand that they did have a language.  So I think that's, that's the important piece.  It's the sense of personhood and identity that it would do for the children of African ancestry.  But it would also balance the scale for the European child and certainly for the immigrants who come to this country, come with privileges that people of African ancestry didn't have, and become our bosses.  They learn the negative words of the negative evaluation of people of color because they don't know the history.
Story_ID: 12902
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?  What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I never thought about having a legacy.  I think as long as my grandchildren live, that will probably be my legacy.  But if I could choose a legacy, I would choose the magnificence of our story.  I would teach the imperatives of the legacy.  I would teach the importance of being worthy of the sacrifice.
Story_ID: 12903
Speaker 1: I wondered if you could tell me when you met your husband and when you had your first children, and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: I met my husband in 1954.  He came to my church, Bethany Baptist Church as the organist.  And, according to him, he used to see me as the only person sitting in church for the Postlude (laugther) because I, I enjoyed the music and he's an incredible musician.  And, of course, I, my parents were deceased, I was living alone at that time. I had three aunts who were living on Madison Street--
Story_ID: 12904
Speaker 1: So, I wondered if you could, you were saying that you met your husband in church--  Yes--  And he's was a mus--he's a musician, and-- He was an organist.  As I said, he came to New York for classical organ, but he became a teacher.  And he also became a principal, a very successful principal.  And then he went on to teach at the college level.  But his sister came to New York to visit him.  And in the customary tradition, I went up and said to him, "Well, I'd like to invite your sister over for dinner.  And, and you may come too."  And so he came and he brought his sister.  I can never forget that.  And I cooked dinner.  And his sister sat in the chair and went to sleep, any my husband and I talked.  And then he said, "Well, what are you gonna do with the left-over food?"  (laughter)  He said, "Would you like to have someone to share it?"  And that's when we began dating.  And we were married in 1955 in February when the school break came.  And it's been forty-eight years.
Story_ID: 12905
Speaker 1: And you have how many children?  We have two children, my daughter, Jaime, is a professor of Education at Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And my son, David, he's the younger of the two is a para-professional with the New York City School system.  He works with dropouts and is planning to go to school probably to become a guidance counselor.  He has a twelve year old, he and his wife have a twelve year old son.  And my daughter and her husband have a three year old.  So I have two grandsons.  You want to give us the names--  The oldest son, the oldest grandson is David Corey.  His father is David.  His mother is Jewel.  My daughter's son's name is Deragja, which means Most Worthy One.  His mother is Jaiminn, and his father is Gary.
Story_ID: 12906
Speaker 1: Now, I asked you about your legacy, what you might like your legacy to be.  And if people are going to remember you for a particular -- how would you like to most be remembered?  How would you most like to be remembered?  That's my question.  The importance of our responsibility for children.  Our children are neglected, our boys, in particular.  The prisons are full of our very, very bright youngsters.  I think that during integration, we abdicated our responsibility to tell our story.  And we let the oppressor define our children.  And those definitions were a majority the negative.  And because they heard it in a vacuum, they didn't hear any other voices, they began to think that that's what being African, that's what being black is, Super Fly, no place to be somebody, Shaft.  Boys in the Hood, they identified with that negativism because that's all that was there for them.  And I feel responsible in part for that because I think it's my generation that believed that integration was going to really happen.  There was never any intention for it to happen.  And so I think we have a responsibility for the children that the next generation wouldn't suffer the pathology, would not be seduced by the drugs, would not be seduced by the me-ism and by the materialism, by the quick money because that doesn't bring happiness.  And it doesn't solve the major issue.  And America needs virtuous people.  The pathologies of our society are not being perpetrated by the dropouts or the drug addicts or those in prison. They're being perpetrated by people who are supposed to be well educated.  All of, every time you pick up the paper, there's another scandal of corruption.
Story_ID: 12907
Speaker 1: And so your legacy is to address this?  Is to be responsible to teach the children the traditional values that sustain us.  They are materialistic.  They are not 'me-ism'.  They are not immediate gratification.  They are a life that has purpose, a purpose that's higher than we are, who understands that we're not a mistake.  We are creatures created in the image of the Creator and that our ancestors suffered enormously.  I used to ask my grandmother, "How did you -- why did you want to live like that with the beatings that you saw, with the sterilizations, with the lynchings, with the rags."  She said, "Because of you, the hope that I had for you."  And whenever I get weary, I think about that.  I think about the sacrifice that she made for me.  She could have committed suicide.  She could have jumped off the ship.  She could have taken poison, but she didn't.  She had the hope that there would be a good life.
Story_ID: 12908
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, Luvenia.  Can you spell her name and (unclear) (simultaneous) --  L-U-V-E-N-I-A.  Last name?  Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  And do you know when the photo was taken or the occasion for it?  Well, she died in '38 [1938].  It probably was taken some place around 1930 -- maybe '25 or '30 [1925 or 1930].
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford's grandmother, Luvenia WIlliams. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12909
Speaker 1: And that's my grandfather who died before that, but I do remember him.  So it was after 1925.  I would say maybe he died about 1930, and because I remember him.  I remember sitting on his lap in the rocking chair, wonderful man.  Can you say his name?  His name was Peyton, P-E-Y-T-O-N, Peyton Williams.
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford's maternal grandfather, Peyton Williams.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12910
Speaker 1: These are my parents shortly after they were married.  Sulir Lloyd Williams Hines and my father, Henry Hines.  And that picture probably was taken about 1923.  And can you spell your mother's name?  S-U-L-I-R.  And the middle name, L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford's parents, Sulir Lloyd Hines and Henry Hines. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12911
Speaker 1: There were taken when my daughter was about five and my son was probably two or three years old.  So that was probably about 1959 or 1960.  Can you go from left to right in the picture?  That's Adelaide, Jaiminn, David -- no, I'm sorry, Adelaide, Jaime and Jay and David.  (Unclear) J-A-M-I-N-N, combination of her father Jay, and her grandmother, her paternal grandmother whose name was Minnie.  So she is Jaiminn.
Speaker 2: [The Sanford Family.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12912
Speaker 1: My family taken probably just before I retired, 1983 or four [1984].  So you can see how the children have grown up.  David to the far left, my husband Jay in the back, Adelaide in the middle, and Jaiminn on the far right.  And that was an event, a congratulatory event for me.
Speaker 2: [The Sanford Family, 1984. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12913
Speaker 1: That was when I was made Queen Mother in Ghana.  And this is at the ceremony when I was made a Queen Mother in the Upper Volta area of Ghana [Africa].  This is about 1999.  Wonder-- wonderful, wonderful occasion.
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford in Ghana.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12914
Speaker 1: On the far right, you have Mr. Gil Nobel, of Like It Is and you have the former Deputy Speaker of the New York State Assembly, Arthur Eave (phonetic), and you have Percy Sutton from Inner City Broadcasting and you have Dean Smith who was then the Dean at Hofstra University and Adelaide Sanford on the far right.
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford poses with other New York educators.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12915
Speaker 1: And this is with Bishop Tutu taken in Washington, D.C. about 1980 at an event where--where we were both speakers at an event in Washington.  What's the event?  It was the, a conference--a conference on the development of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission [Truth and Reconcilliation Commission of South Africa formed in 1995, after the election of Nelson Mandela].
Story_ID: 12916
Speaker 1: On the far left Adelaide Sanford.  In the middle, Dr. Ben Carson from John Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], and on the far right, Shima Evans Trayman, Associate Commissioner of Education for the New York State Education Department.
Story_ID: 12917
Speaker 1: This a picture of the Members of the Board of Regents, probably taken in about 1990 because many of the people on that picture are no longer on the Board of Regents.  In fact, nobody on that picture is on the Board of Regents any longer but me.  I am the Senior Regent on the Board now.  So all of the people that you see on this picture are no longer members of the Board.  How many total members are there?  Sixteen.  Appointed by, is it all by the Governor?  I'm sorry?  Is it all by the Governor appointed?  Ordered by the Governor?  Yeah, all of them.  No, elected by the Legislature.  Oh, elected by the legislature --  The Assembly and the Senate.  So it's highly political.
Speaker 2: [New York Board of Regents, 1990.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12918
Speaker 1: This is Toni Morrison at an event where she was having a conference with the woman who sculpted the picture of [President]Franklin Delano Roosevelt on the dime.  And her name was Melba Burke.  She's deceased now.  Selma Burke?  Selma Burke.  Cause Melba is her niece.  Melba is her niece, that's right.  And it's Melba who took me to this event with Toni Morrison.
Speaker 2: [Toni Morrison with Adelaide Sanford.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12919
Speaker 1: In South Africa where the oceans and the rivers meet together in absolute magnificence.  Is that like Cape Town or what year was that?  Cape Town South Africa.  When was that?  Let's see.  This is 2003--2000.  It was the year of the Durban Conference.  2001.  2001, is that it?  Time flies, but we were at the conference in Durban Conference on Racism.  Were you helping with conference?  I went to South Africa and Ethiopia and I was supposed to go to Durban, but after I went to Robben Island, I went to the hospital and stayed the whole time that the conference was on.  I was so traumatized by Robben Island.  I never got to the conference. [Robben Island Prison--where former South African President Nelson Mandela was held for more than 25 years]
Speaker 2: [Adealide Sanford in South Africa, 2001.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12920
Speaker 1: This was a traditional Kwanza ceremony.  You can see the Kwanza candles and the kumara in the background.  That's held here every year since we opened this house in 1992, a very festive occasion with drummers and speakers and the lighting of the candles and a tribute to the children.  And this probably was about 1996 or 1997.
Speaker 2: [Kwanzaa Ceremony at the Sanford home, 1996. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12921
Speaker 1: All right.  This was, picture was taken at the Congressional Black Caucus.  I was making a presentation on education in 1990.
Speaker 2: [Adelaide Sanford, 1990.MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
Story_ID: 12922
Speaker 1: And this was a picture that I don't even know when the gentleman took it, but I was a part of a panel at the Education Brain Trust.  I think it was in Chicago, and this person took this picture and sent it to me.  Apparently, someone was speaking and I was thinking about what the person was saying --
Speaker 2: (Unclear) when --  Probably about 1993 or '4 because my hair was not gray (laughter).
Speaker 1: [Adelaide Sanford at a conference, 1993. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of Adelaide Sanford.]
