Story_ID: 124154
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Rodney E. Slater, R-O-D-N-E-Y, E. for Earl, Slater, S-L-A-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The date of birth is February 23, 1955.  And the place of birth is Tutwiler, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: T-U-T-W-Y-L-E-R [sic], Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you grew up in Marianna--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Arkansas, right?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Marianna, Arkansas, M-A-R-I-A-N-N-A.  Marianna is in Lee County, Arkansas, right across the river from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is, I'm a lawyer.  And I've been a governmental administrator for a number of years but back into the legal profession now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think we ought to say what you, what position you held with the Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton, 42nd President of the United States] Administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did join President Clinton here in Washington, D.C., first in 1993, as a Federal Highway Administrator.  I was the first African American in the one-hundred-year history of the agency at the time.  And then in 1997, I became Secretary of Transportation, U.S. Secretary of Transportation in the second term of the Clinton Administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November the 14th, 2003 [November 14, 2003].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office at Patton Boggs.  Patton Boggs is a law firm and we're here at 2550 M Street, Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 124155
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we kind of use as a warm-up here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  Probably, oh my favorite food is what you get at--during Thanksgiving, a Thanksgiving meal, turkey and dressing, you know and all the trimmings.
Speaker 1: You got something to look forward to.
Speaker 2: Something to look forward to.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well we like this what, Lost Creek Ranch out west in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a place we go a lot.  We also like the water.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that could be any number of places.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 124156
Speaker 1: Yes.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do.  It's hard though to break it down to one so let me tell you which they are and then I'll think about which is the most important to me.  But probably the two biblical verses that are most important to me, I say them all the time, one is "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me."  The other from Galatians "Let us not grow weary in doing good, for in due season we shall reap if we do not lose heart."  And then finally a phrase from Alex Haley, "Find the good and praise it."  I like that.
Story_ID: 124157
Speaker 1: All right, now I'd like to ask you about your family history as much as you know.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name, full name is Velma Lee, V-E-L-M-A, Lee, L-E-E, Slater-Brewer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Hmm, I'll have to get the place but her date is December 18.  And she--you want me to give you the year she--?
Speaker 1: Well, or approximately if you can (unclear).
Speaker 2: Let me make sure I've got that year because I'm off maybe a year on that, just--but its December 18.
Speaker 1: Okay, about--which two years are we--?
Speaker 2: It--let's see--'28 [1928], so it would be--'64 [1964], so it would probably be about--hmm, let me just get that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'll have to do the, do all of the math for you.
Speaker 1: In the '20s [1920s] you think or--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.
Speaker 1: Thirties?
Speaker 2: It would be.  Here we can figure it out.
Speaker 1: Okay (Laughter).  We probably shouldn't spend that much time on it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But go ahead.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Let's see.
Speaker 1: Probably, I'm thinking [December 18,] 1937.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and she was born in--?
Speaker 1: I, I, I need to ask--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on that.
Speaker 2: But she did live in Tutwiler for a while?
Speaker 1: She lived in Tutwiler for a while but they, they're originally from Arkansas.  I'm thinking that it's Des Arc.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Des Arc, Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Yes, but I'll check that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How do you spell Des Arc?  Is that D-E-S--?
Speaker 1: D-E-S-A-R-C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I believe.
Story_ID: 124158
Speaker 1: What do you know about her [mother Velma Lee Slater-Brewer's] side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Hmm--
Speaker 1: Do they have stories or--about people in the family and where they came from and--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I should probably--I want to be exact on all of that.  I should just probably review that.
Speaker 1: Well, you know it's--this is oral history and not that it shouldn't be exact, but if you can tell us--
Speaker 2: I should have brought my bible.
Speaker 1: --what you heard about, you know what you've heard about it or what you think you know about it--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --it's just as, you know I mean it's maybe not exact but it's, it is like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay but then you, you're going to have the tape though.  It should be exact shouldn't it?
Speaker 1: Well you know--
Speaker 2: Pretty much--?
Speaker 1: --we can't always be completely exact but the thing about is if you, if that's the tradition in the family of what happened whether it happened or not it's   something--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that people say happened, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so which makes, which influences what we do.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well I should--
Speaker 1: And it can be followed up on, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: If you want to follow up.
Speaker 2: We should probably--I'm just thinking I'd like to be a little more accurate.  I've got some good, I mean they're good stories that you hear about. But basically my, let's see--Des Arc was very, a very important city to the family.  Lonoke, Arkansas, Cotton Plant, Arkansas also even Jefferson County, Arkansas, I mean these are--but principally Arkansas.  In Mississippi, it was for the most part just Tutwiler.  That's what I recall.  But I should probably, let me--I should probably get more detail on that.  I mean, I--because you want to go way back.  I was thinking that it was principally just--
Speaker 1: Well you know, it's not--
Speaker 2: --mine.
Speaker 1: What I--what we're asking for right now is what you remember about what was told to you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's important--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.  I mean someone could in some other capacity like do exact research and find out, perhaps. But I'm just asking you what you heard about it and what you know, and that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well we were--I mean I should probably get more information.  But clearly my mother's family they did a lot of sharecropping and they did that in Arkansas and Mississippi.  The times that I'm most familiar with were you know, times after they moved back from Mississippi and they were moving back basically to Cotton Plant which is in Woodruff County and that would have been around '55 [1955].  And then we lived in Marianna, Arkansas which is not far from there.  And then--but that's pretty much what I've got on that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should, I'm gonna--I need to just get a little more so I can be more fluid on that.
Story_ID: 124159
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents--
Speaker 2: I knew--yes.
Speaker 1: --on your mother's [Velma Lee Slater-Brewer's] side?
Speaker 2: Oh definitely.  My grandfather, Salone Slater, he was in the [U.S.] Navy, World War II.  He's buried in the veterans cemetery [Arkansas State Veterans Cemetary] in Little Rock [Arkansas].  My grandmother, Mrs. Bessie Glasson Slater, she still lives in Cotton Plant [Arkansas], Ma Bessie and I know that she was from the Des Arc [Arkansas] area.  See, that's the part of it that's a little gray.  And then my grandfather lived, I think it was Des Arc, Jefferson County [Arkansas], you know those general areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is the tradition that the family was basically involved in agriculture or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: For the most part.  For the most part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also, there was a tradition of serving in the armed services as well.  Especially my grandmother had a brother who was a career service, serviceman and then you know, many of her children, my uncles served in the armed services.  A number of them are serving now so I would say armed services and farming, which is principally what is done in the Delta region of Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did, is there, are there any old stories from like slavery or civil war or reconstruction or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  No none that we, that we're very familiar with.  Now clearly, we like a lot of families, are trying to you know go back deeper but none that I recall.
Story_ID: 124160
Speaker 1: Okay, now when your mother [Velma Lee Slater-Brewer] was coming along, did she have access to education in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.  She graduated from high school and I think graduated there in Cotton Plant [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So did she have any stories about growing up there and what conditions were like when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: You know none other than the stories you hear of walking to school, uphill both ways.  I mean you get all of that, and the way they farmed.  The most powerful story I remember about their growing up involved a particular fall when they were--you know as sharecroppers you've got a relationship with a landowner where you're obligated to basically harvest their crop.  Well, more than that I guess, plant and you know, nurture and then harvest their crop with the added privilege then of having a little section of land for yourself.  And it's always the obligation to take care of their farm products first.  And so farmers in that period would generally plant so that their crop was coming in just at the end of, you know maybe a week or two or so later, as they were preparing to harvest the landowner's crop.  And this one particular year because of an early frost and then you know, one of those hot summer or hot Indian summer days in the fall, their crop, the cotton in this instance opened prematurely and so they were faced with the dilemma of having both crops there to be dealt with.  And if you're really doing right by the landowner's crop, you're working from sun-up to sundown.  They used to talk about working from "can't see in the morning until can't see at night", "slap to smack", "dusk to dawn", "kin to king".  And if you're doing that then how do you deal with your own business?  Because usually when you're, when you get home you're just dog tired.  You've got enough energy maybe for dinner and then you're trying to get a little time but you're basically going to bed and getting ready for the next day.  And this particular year with this dilemma they had to figure out how you do it.  And the story goes that they basically went back into the fields and picked their cotton at night and that the blessing was you know, having a bright moon, and a bright cloudless, starry sky and you're doing it.  And as you're doing it you are developing what it takes to always do it, meaning whatever the challenge is, you figure out a way to deal with it because you've got to get your cotton from the field.  And that's just a, that's a powerful story and it has application I think in our lives even today.  And I think it was [Henry Wadsworth] Longfellow who said that "The heights of great men"--and women-"reached and kept were not obtained by sudden flight, but they, while their companions slept toiled upward in the night".  And so, you've just got to get it done.  And that's a good story for me and it's a life experience that was shared.  Now clearly they talked about you know the parts of town that they had to live in, the segregated side, the society in which they grew up in, the water fountains and the like.  But in one sense, that was also my story even as young as I am growing up in the South and in Arkansas.  That was an experience by my--that was an experience for my grandparents and parents but it was also an experience for me as well, early on.  But you know, just the--but it was worse then, clearly it was worse because that was before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and before the modern-day Civil Rights Movement.  But you still had people who were cognizant of their situation but always wanting to make it better, you know and doing the kinds of things that you need to do to make it better and dreaming of a better day for their children and grandchildren.  So yes, I mean I know about those stories.
Story_ID: 124161
Speaker 1: What about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father is actually--my stepfather--his name was Earl Brewer, Jr.--passed away this year.  And birthday, December 29 and his year would have been 1933 [December 29, 1933].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and he was born in--?
Speaker 2: I think he was born in Lee County.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do--
Speaker 2: Not in Marianna.  Not in Marianna.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you know anything about your birth father at all or--
Speaker 2: (No audible response.  Shakes head no.)
Speaker 1: --just nothing really said about him?
Speaker 2: Nothing that I care to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --talk about.
Speaker 1: All right.  So he was, he wasn't really in your life at all?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've met him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, but your stepfather was the one that served as the real father--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did he ever talk about his ancestors and where they came from and what they did?
Speaker 2: He did.  I mean the experiences were pretty much the same.  I did meet my grandfather, Earl Brewer and then my grandmother.  They lived in Marianna so I knew them very well as I did you know my mother's parents.  But you know they were just again hard working folk as well.  My grandmother was more of a domestic you know, and so she not only--I guess this would be with really both my grandmothers, not only caring for their children but frankly the children of people they worked with, worked for.
Speaker 1: So rather than going to the fields every day, they basically worked in the homes of--?
Speaker 2: For the most part, but they spent some time in the field as well.  They spent some time in the fields as well.
Speaker 1: With the labor-intensive kind of work I guess that people had to you know, do what they had to do you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes.  And you know one thing I'm--I've thought about this, a couple of things about my stepfather in particular of late because as I said he passed away earlier this year so that's you know--I guess for some reason you probably reflect a little more intensely on just what a person was able to do with the time given and with the challenges faced.  And if there's anything that--probably the most significant thing about him that was learned was just a pride in one's work you know whatever that work is.  And this was a man who I just can't recall having fewer than three, four, five jobs ever.  And you know just, I don't remember a day when he was so sick that he couldn't get up to--with the chief goal of just providing and that's just something that I've come to respect more.  And you know so those, just those kinds of things about, about him--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I really respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, he went to school for a short period of time, roughly third grade.  But for the most part he was you know, like a lot of young people at the time and even in my own experiences growing up in Marianna, when you'd go to school a half day so you could work on the farms in the afternoon, which is--I even did that.  But he went to about the third grade and then started working basically.
Story_ID: 124162
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about how your parents [Earl Brewer, Jr. and Velma Lee Slater-Brewer] met?
Speaker 2: Not one that I really recall, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not one that I recall.
Speaker 1: So they, do you think they met in Mississippi or Arkansas?
Speaker 2: No, they met in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, how many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fall (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've got two brothers, two sisters.  I'm the oldest and you know they're all great.  I've got a sister who lives in Marianna with her family and then a sister who lives in Little Rock [Arkansas], they're both teachers.  Then I've got two brothers.  One is in the [U.S.] Military.  He's stationed in Korea right now, and the other who is in dental school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now tell us about growing up in Marianna [Arkansas].  What were some of the--what did the place look like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well two things that come to mind about growing up.  One--and they're interesting.  They're transportation-related, which is kind of interesting.  One that I recall is just living on this highway, Highway 79.  This is when we were very young and watching the cars go by.  And you're wondering where they're going and what the people are doing and I just remember that as if it were yesterday.  And we used to play this game, my two sisters and I.  The next car is your car, the next car is mine.  And I can just remember the belly laughs you know, I mean of my car just needing repair, painting.  But I can remember dreaming about Memphis [Tennessee] and Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and that was it for the most part, Buffalo [New York] where we had relatives but--and Chicago, same.  But--and it was mostly to the North you know, never to the Northeast necessarily other than Buffalo and never really other parts of the South, not really, not the West.  And I think that that was part, partly a part of the history of the great migration North you know, to the plants of Chicago and Detroit and all of that.  And you do hear stories about that and you hear--I remember stories about how some brothers and sisters did that and how you know my parents decided to stay and just nurture their roots there in Arkansas.
Story_ID: 124163
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right. We were talking about--
Speaker 1: Yeah, smells, sound--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The other thing I was going to mention was I remember how we would walk along this railroad track back and forth to school.  And school was a pretty good trek but the point that I, that became obvious to me, was how railroad tracks separated communities and that was long before I heard the phrase, "on the other side of the track".  I mean it was just something that I noticed.  I noticed a couple of other things too.  I noticed that for a certain part of my trip you'd have sidewalks and for a lot of my trips you wouldn't and you'd have open ditches and narrower streets.  And I started to focus on that immediately and just acknowledged that I remember that.  Again, I was looking at an exhibit not long ago at a museum here and it was focusing on the life of Dr. [Martin Luther] King principally.  But I remember this picture, the first time I'd seen it of Linda Brown and her sister.  It was a picture of their backs and they were walking along this railroad track making their way to school.  And they were clearly dramatizing the fact that this was a dangerous journey and why the issue of--was not just being able to go to the nearest school, it was about what you have to go through to get to the school you were going to and I reflected on that.  I remember we didn't think it was so dangerous at the time.  I could not remember that necessarily although it was.  But I could remember just the stark divide that it represented.  And you know, and clearly I can remember walking on the top of the track and trying to stay on as long as you could and making whistles out of the little steel pieces that you'd find along the way, those kinds of things that were fun.  But this was something that I remember a lot.  I also remember thinking about whether I'd ever have the courage of jumping on a train and being one of those, well I don't know what we call them, castaways, hobos or whatever, that would just take a ride someplace.  And for some reason as I thought about the train, I always thought about Kansas City [Missouri].  Maybe it was that--
Speaker 2: The song?
Speaker 1: --song, Kansas City here I come, I remember that.
Speaker 2: Were people still doing that a lot when you were coming up?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, you would--
Speaker 2: Taking that train--(unclear) like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah you would see that from time to time.
Story_ID: 124164
Speaker 1: And then the other thing about, that I remember was, and a little older, I started thinking about again this highway running south.  For the first time later, not earlier when I start to really understand the importance of the City of Pine Bluff [Arkansas] to my community.  My wife [Cassandra Wilkins] is from Pine Bluff but I remember thinking about Pine Bluff in terms of the fact that it must be a fine city because all of my teachers have gone there and all of them are always talking about homecoming and going back to the yard and the wonderful experiences.  And these were people in my community that I, you know, was really looking up to, the educators like Ms. Anna P. Strong who was a colleague of Mary McLeod Bethune  and that kind of thing.  And there was--I mention that because there was something about the two directions.  Looking north it was all about the lights and the excitement of the movement of people in the city.  But going south it was more of a, of an enlightening kind of intellectual kind of thought process.  This is where my, the older brothers and sisters of my classmates go and they come back and they're doing something totally different.  They aren't necessarily working on the farm.  They're teaching me and they're wearing nice clothes and they have shirts and ties on and they're challenging me and they're encouraging me and they're you know stroking me but also challenging me.  And I, early on sensed that that was something that I wanted to do, that I wanted to take one of those roads going one way or the other to get what I was not necessarily getting there.  But I remember that.  I remember, the smells I just remember Sunday dinner, that was just, that was a wonderful smell.  And there are a couple of movies now that kind of give you that sense.  The one that I remember most recently is, well 'Soul Food' some years ago, cause that was the, sort of the centerpiece of that movie.  And then this other movie, 'Antoine Fisher' where you know there's that scene with all of the aunts and the uncles and the grandmother and the grandparents and the brothers and sister and the, you know the preacher who's there on Sunday and the--
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful scene.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful scene.
Speaker 2: It makes the movie if nothing else happens.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And I remember those scenes from my own experience and so those are the smells and the sights that I recall.
Story_ID: 124165
Speaker 1: Well the first school was Strong Elementary School [Marianna, Arkansas] and again this was a school named after Ms. Anna P. Strong who at the time lived on the campus.  She, I believe had retired as principal.  But I was--
Speaker 2: So she was a colleague of Mary McLeod Bethune?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  And she was quite the lady.  But she was old, you know and I believe had retired by the time I came along.  But I just remember how people respected her and how they talked about her.  And for me it was a big deal that the school was named after her, that there was an African American that had a school named after them and so I was excited about that.  Then I went to Strong Elementary, I mean Strong Elementary, Strong Junior High [Anna P. Strong Middle School, Marianna, Arkansas], and by the time I was going into high school, we integrated.  So today the movie 'Remember the Titans' is, that was my year.  That was my experience, all of it basically, the athletics, the friction, the challenge of it all.  That was my experience in high school.  We basically, we went to a school, Lee Senior High School [Lee County, Arkansas], which was named after the county.  And the county is Robert E. Lee County.  The downtown square has a big statue of Robert E. Lee.
Speaker 2: What was the connection between Lee and that county?  Was there any direct connection?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I'm very interested in finding out.  I just think it's a matter of counties you know coming into existence around the period of the Civil War and you know naming themselves after Confederate generals.  You've got Forrest City in St. Francis County [Arkansas], that's a neighboring county and that's Forrest--
Speaker 2: Nathan Bedford Forrest, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  You've got--
Speaker 2: He founded the [Klu Klux] Klan.
Speaker 1: Exactly, I know.  You've got Phillips County [Arkansas] where you have a number of Confederate generals who are buried there.  I mean Phillips County I think produced about six or seven Confederate generals.  So you've got--it's, that, it's a very interesting area this eastern Arkansas.  You've got Elaine, Arkansas which was the site of the Elaine Race Riots in 1919.  You've got as we celebrate the bicentennial of the Louis and Clark expedition, you've got the marker, survey marker for the Louisiana Purchase [acquisition of Louisiana territory by the United States from France in 1803] right there in that area where Lee and Phillips and Monroe Counties meet.  So you've got a very interesting area, rich--
Speaker 2: There was also (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --delta farmland--
Speaker 2: --horrible lynchings that took place in Marianna in 1921.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: I actually read--read about it and tried to read about something else (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.  Yes, you've got all of that there.  You've also got an area where you've had some of the early black elected officials too.  You've got John Gray Lucas.  I think he was from Pine Bluff.  You've got oh, what's his name?  He was actually one of the earlier national black political figures.
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois] or--?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, this was in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: --in Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Yes.  What's his name?  Graves--
Story_ID: 124166
Speaker 1: But you've got an interesting area [eastern Arkansas].  You've got blacks who owned farmland in that area.  Not only did you have a lot of blacks who works on "plantations" and the like, but you've got a number of black land owners who lived in that area.  And you've got an area where some African Americans from the North actually moved to this region and this was right around the time of the Civil War, meaning not necessarily after the Civil War but in the heat of it, probably during the period when it was coming to an end because there was the belief that there were opportunities there.  The person that I'm trying to think of, I just can't right now, but he was the head of the Masons.
Speaker 2: Right, the Masonic connection--
Speaker 1: Is very strong there.
Speaker 2: --with the black Masons is really strong in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: And (unclear) researched it out and it's huge now.
Speaker 1: Right, it is.  And actually through the church and through organizations like the Masons but especially the Masons, you have these opportunities for upward mobility.  You have people who you know they become affiliated with societies that focus on self-worth and dignity and honor and those kinds of things that are the foundation for I think, a person just really continuing to climb and to realize his or her full potential.  And Ms. [Anna P.] Strong again, as an educator, was very much into that.  But it will come to me.  I'm thinking about a number of other names like Mifflin Gibbs was one of the people, individuals who moved to the area, not eastern Arkansas but the person I'm thinking of actually invited him to Arkansas.  They met Gibbs at some meeting of colored leaders as was noted at the time in South Carolina and suggested that he come to Arkansas.  He did, and by 1871 was elected Municipal Judge, the first elected Municipal Judge, African American in the U.S.  But this was just really a hotbed of black activism during that period as well as a place where the [Klu Klux] Klan and other--
Speaker 2: White reactionary groups were--
Speaker 1: --were very prominent as well.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) and--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And you're right, although the--yeah a lot of prominent blacks moved there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Jesse C. Duke was an ancestor of one of the people we interviewed in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Oh is that right?
Speaker 2: --[HM] Geraldine McCullough--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who started a paper there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And he was a Mason as well.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Marcus Delaney's son moved there, Alexander Dumas Delaney was a journalist (unclear).
Speaker 1: In that area, in--oh great.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) because of the Masons.
Speaker 1: Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Oh Pine Bluff was the, so that was the headquarters of the Masons in the state and they still have a wonderful building there that they still own.  But you're right, pine Bluff because of the, because of Branch Normal [School] which became the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, was very, very much a magnet and I bet you would find that to be the case in other cities where you have Historically Black Colleges and Universities where that middle class sort of begins to develop.  This was Pine Bluff.  And you know individuals like Wiley Branton and I mentioned Alex Haley.  He and his brother George actually lived in Pine Bluff for a good period of time because their father, Simon Haley taught at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, AM&N College, was the dean of the agriculture department.
Story_ID: 124167
Speaker 1: This one name I just can't--for some reason I think it was Graves.
Speaker 2: The politician?
Speaker 1: Yes.  But he was quite an individual.  He actually did a--he seconded the nomination of, can't remember who it was at the Republican convention.  I can't remember who it was.  But you know just interesting individuals.  And not only did they have a presence in Arkansas but they had a presence beyond Arkansas.  There was one other person that they called "The Stonewall Jackson of the South".  What was his--it will come to me but he actually was one of the first Confederate officers to suggest that blacks be allowed to fight for the cause of the Confederacy in exchange for their freedom which was very interesting.  He was--clearly Jefferson Davis would have none of it so it never occurred but Lincoln did, and it did occur.
Speaker 2: Jefferson Davis even turned that way towards the end of the war.
Speaker 1: Yes, that' right.
Speaker 2: He couldn't get--
Speaker 1: But it was too late.
Speaker 2: --some other governors--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to go along-the states they said what are we fighting for?
Speaker 1: Yeah, if we do that.  That's right.  Have you read this book by, or have you seen this book by the way of, it's on Jefferson and it deals with--the title is an interesting title.  They call--it's titled 'Negro President' and the point that they're making is that he became president largely because of the three-fifths clause.  Because what it allowed was for southerners to not only have their own votes but the votes of their property.  And that meant that they could vote beyond their actual numbers.  And so they get into how with the closeness of that race it was really that clause that made it possible.  And he was sort of referred to disparagingly as "The Negro President" by northerners because of the power of that clause when it comes to giving the south an extra hand if you will.
Speaker 2: And they didn't even ask the--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --black people who they wanted to vote for.
Speaker 1: Who they wanted to vote for.  That was not--
Speaker 2: They just counted them.
Speaker 1: Right.  But a very interesting book I think and especially reading it at this time when you've got [Howard] Dean and his comments and then you've got the reaction of John Edwards, a Southerner and Wesley Clark, a Southerner.  And you know, and it's all just very, very interesting cause Dean is saying I want the votes of the individuals who drive this truck and who may have this--the cross bars on the license plate and then others who are of the South responding to that saying, wait a minute.  What does, what do you mean by this?  And Reverend Sharpton [HM Reverend Al Sharpton] with his take on that as well.  But interestingly the other white Southerners saying, what do you mean by this, which is very interesting.
Story_ID: 124168
Speaker 1: No, that was my experience growing up.  I had wonderful teachers.  My family believed in education.  Being the oldest, clearly you know there was something about the experience for me.  I mean I hungered for the opportunity to excel in school.  I was also an athlete and early on I wanted to view myself as a student athlete.  I remember in the seventh grade [Anna P. Strong Middle School, Marianna, Arkansas] I was told that you can play only if, you know you maintain your grades and you continue to be a good student, only if.  And it was based on a promise that I would do it so that I could win a scholarship, so that I could go to college.
Speaker 2: Did you have role models or heroes in terms of athletics and scholarship?
Speaker 1: Only later.  I mean for some reason that was something that I wanted to do.  I do remember early on though reading this story about Fred Duke Slater who had gone to the University of Iowa [Iowa City], Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], later played in the NFL, is now in the Hall of Fame and I saw how he had used education and athletics to move.  And he became a judge and so I'm thinking you know lawyer, moving from Perry Mason to an actual individual I can identify with and then ultimately meeting an African American lawyer in my junior year for the first time.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: John Walker who is a civil rights lawyer in Little Rock [Arkansas] currently.  And I later clerked with his firm and we're good friends.  But he came to my hometown to actually represent a group of students which included myself, which included me.  We were involved in a student boycott during my junior year and you know pretty heady stuff I think.
Speaker 2: Now what was the substance of this?  What happened?
Speaker 1: The substance of the boycott dealt with--well there were always issues.  You know we've talked about the kinds of tensions you have in a city that, small town that's principally agricultural, that's based on an economic system that has African Americans basically working on those farms, a lot of times a sharecropper, sometimes owning the property but also knowing that they're in the majority.  And you've got all of these limitations to their actual participation in the governance of the county or the city.  This was around the time of, you know, Selma to Montgomery [Alabama].  You're getting the echo of this, you know.  You're getting the echo with people who are involved in the Civil Rights Movement coming to a little small town but also you're seeing on television some of the clips, you know and you're--and it's taking root in these small cities.  And then you've got the response to Brown [Brown v. Board of Education, the United States Supreme Court Case that ended legal segregation in public schools] with Central High [School, Little Rock, Arkansas] but then you've got the you know still the resistance--
Speaker 2: And backlash.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And ultimately it happens years after Brown in 1970 that you finally integrate.  You've had the freedom of choice but only a few people you know take advantage of that.
Speaker 2: Cause it's a risky thing to take advantage of.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  But a few people do it and then you've got a few teachers who go from one school to the other.  And then ultimately you have a couple of experiences where there is a little athletic competition where you're brought together which was the case in Marianna [Arkansas].  And then you've got this point where you just can't wait, which is my case because you want to know.  You want to know how you stack up.  You want to know because you know that this is only part of your stop.  You want to know in your home town because that's a step to knowing across the country.  You want to know and you just got that hunger that you want satisfied.
Story_ID: 124169
Speaker 1: And that was the case with me.  So you get into high school [Lee Senior High School, Lee County, Arkansas], you experience you know what we all experienced in '68 [1968] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  It's all the more painful when it occurs right across the [Mississippi] River in a city that you just love [Memphis, Tennessee], you know because that's where you go when you're going uptown, you know, when you can ride the escalators and the elevators and go into the big shops, that's where you go. That's where you go to see championship wrestling with your dad or that's where you go to see the Starlight Revue with some of your friends.  That's where you go.  That's, you know that's kind of like Mecca, Memphis, the City on the Hill of the Bluff, the Mississippi [River], that's your favorite city and something like that happens there.  And then again years later you're in high school and you're going to have this program for the first time to honor an individual who's African American and you're going to do it in a setting where you got black and white students together for the first time literally.  I mean it's the second year of that experience but it's still kind of the first time.  And you're looking forward to being able to say in that audience you know, I too sing America, literally.  And then the program is canceled.
Speaker 2: So that was the suit--that was the--you all--
Speaker 1: That was the impetus for the--
Speaker 2: --(unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, that was the impetus for the sit-in and then the sit-in was broken up by the police and the fire trucks and that led to the claims and counter-claims.  And that's what puts you in the courtroom.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's it.  That's when you see [civil rights lawyer] John Walker you know, and that's when you start to after a period of time realize that there's always an opportunity to gain something.  Even sometimes in the darkest hours you gain something, you see something, you come to know something that is taking you to light, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's what that was.
Story_ID: 124170
Speaker 1: So, what happened when the students boycotted and--?
Speaker 2: Well the students boycotted.  Many of the black students just ended up being out of school.  Some actually went to neighboring cities or cities in other parts of the country to live with neighbors--I mean to live with family or friends to continue to go to school.  Basically I stayed in the city [Marianna, Arkansas] and just, I was just out of school [Lee Senior High School, Lee County, Arkansas] for a semester.  Entering my senior year, the good thing for me was that I was basically ahead of myself in classes, courses so I only had to take I think an English class during the summer and then the next year I was on track and moving towards graduation. The only problem for me was that because we had been out of school the previous semester, the penalty was that we could not participate in extracurricular or athletic events that first semester.  So I was not able to play football my senior year which was problematic because I had made a promise in the seventh grade that I was going to win a scholarship and that was a little problematic.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the school really-[civil rights lawyer] John Walker basically was able to get you all reinstated in the school.  Was that his role?
Speaker 2: That was a part of the--yes, he was able to get us reinstated.  The charges were ultimately dropped.  But still the penalty from the athletic conference was that we could not participate.
Speaker 1: That seems, I mean it's good that you were able to get back in school but it, you know I think people listening to this would be shocked that the school wasn't trying to fend off a lawsuit (unclear) or you know--
Speaker 2: Well they may have been.  I mean I think that part of our action was against the school and then part of the action against us was disorderly conduct and inciting a riot and some of the other charges.  I can't even remember what they were.  But you know, would I do it over again?  Yes.  It was a wonderful learning experience.  It's good to know that you'll stand up for something and it's good to figure out how you make those choices early on.
Story_ID: 124171
Speaker 1: So how were you able to get your athletic scholarship?
Speaker 2: Well I think I was lucky in one respect and then the other respect is that I was a good athlete and more importantly a good student, better student probably.  You asked me earlier about a role model.  There was a role model and I'll just mention this briefly for me, there were two actually in school.  One was a gentleman by the name of Jessie Williams who was a good football player but a good student, and this before integration.  And I just found it unusual that coaches as they talked about his playing ability would also talk about him getting those books and they'd make a big deal out of that.  And to me that was a big deal.  And another was Freeman Garrett who was the brother of a good friend of mine who was herself a very gifted student and this family, a family of very gifted students.  But he was a basketball player, but they were both older.  But I did notice that people were saying good athlete, but they get those books, get those books.  And that was the way it was phrased.  I mean it wasn't student athlete, it wasn't scholar athlete but it was the same thing and it was enough for me.  And again, I think the Fred Duke Slater piece was a part of it as well, but just summarizing the point about the experience, luck and then good experience.  One thing about our town is that it was a small town but it thought pretty highly of itself and the ability of its students.  So we had teachers and athletic officials who were always trying to put us in the arena with the best.  It didn't matter the size or whatever.  And so during my sophomore, my junior year, we played Little Rock [Arkansas] Central [High School] which was probably five times or six times the size of our high school [Lee Senior High School, Lee County, Arkansas] and we played Fort Smith North Side, South Side.  So these were big teams, big schools and we did fairly well against them.  We did not beat either but you know I remember in Central, we probably--I ended up with over two hundred yards and--
Speaker 1: So you played running back?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  And we had some wonderful athletes on the field like Will Robinson who was a champion hurdler and a sprinter and that sort of thing with Central.  And a coach actually--this is the luck part.  The part that's not luck I think is being in the arena with the best and that's the lesson I learned from that, that we could have been playing some other team.
Story_ID: 124172
Speaker 1: And the other piece that I'll say in a few minutes might not have--it could have happened but the result might not have been the same.  But the two things come together I think is what made it possible; one, that we were playing top talent in the state and that in that arena you do well and people take notice of that.  So I think that was part of it, having the opportunity to compete against the best.  I--and I don't think in a situation like that, that it's about winning and losing because I don't think you can ever lose, ever when you're in the arena with the best.  That's my take on it.  Then the second piece of it was a coach actually came to our city [Marianna, Arkansas] to see another athlete.  His name is Dennis Winston.  I mentioned him earlier.  He did go on to the University of Arkansas [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and played with the [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] Steelers during their Super Bowl years, great athlete.  And while he was there to see him, he happened to see me and that was basically it.  And it's like, who's that?  Tell me about him.  Did he play this--no.  Well tell me about him.  A little small but tell me about him.  He is, and no question about the academics.  I'd like to visit with him.  And that was basically the way that occurred.  And so I ended up going to college at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan] which for me was in keeping with Highway 79.  It was in keeping with Highway 79.  And when we left you know in our 1966 Bonneville in 1973, that's exactly the route we took.  That's exactly the route we took.  And I was--
Speaker 2: So you're going places.
Speaker 1: There you go.  And for me, I wanted to go.  I mean I had some options.  I could have gone to the University of Arkansas on a track scholarship which would have been great to stay with my friend Dennis and to go to the university.  I was actually recruited, went to some visits could have walked on as--in football.  They knew about the abilities and that sort of thing but I wanted to venture out.  And Dennis and I talked about it and I thought the University of Arkansas was a better deal for him and he thought and we thought that Eastern was a better deal for me, and it was.  And it turned out well for both of us.
Story_ID: 124173
Speaker 1: So you went to Ypsilanti [Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: Ypsilanti, that's right.  And I was a scholar athlete there and I was the captain of our football team and had some great experiences and was a member of our National Championship Forensics Team, and would never have been introduced to forensics but for the trip to Eastern [Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].  And that's made a world of difference.
Speaker 1: Now you didn't have the opportunity to do a lot of public speaking I guess in high school I assume?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  But I did take some speech courses and I was always fascinated by speech.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm X, Sidney Poitier, Walter Cronkite, Eric Sevareid, watching them on the six o'clock news which was a family experience.  You always watched the six o'clock news.  That was your sort of picture to the world, right?  And you also remember when you talk about that, the big deal that was made out of buying that first set of encyclopedias and the money that was saved all year to do that.  And that was your Christmas present.  That was the family's Christmas present and looking through and you know reading about this and that.  And reading--I mean it was like reading a good book as a family.  And you wouldn't--you'd just open it up.  I remember doing it that way too.  Wherever you opened it up, that's what you do.  So--but anyway, back to speech, we did have--I remember giving one hell of a speech when I was a senior and it was because of the speech class.  And I remember the speech coming to me when I was--on a Saturday.  I was listening to this song called "Patches" as I recall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Clarence Carter.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, I'm depending on you, son, you know pull the fam--all left up to you, that kind of thing.  And I remember this speech that came to me that was really a part of a nagging question I think.  And the title of the speech was, "Life:  Is it Really Worth Living?"  And I answered it on the upside but I remember dealing with you know the hurdles and the challenges and the limitations that people seek to place on you and your desire to break out, you know to step forth.  And just the power of that and people believing in you and seeing things in you that you don't necessarily see in yourself, you know.  You know that something is there.  You know that but you don't know how this burst of energy and drive is going to play out. You know, you just don't know which reminds me of something.  There was a family from, a family of brothers from Arkansas that went off to Detroit [Michigan], much like I went off to Ypsilanti some years later, and at the time that you know their enterprise came to the, to light, they probably had one of the most sophisticated drug operations anywhere in the country.  And all I'm saying is--
Speaker 1: These are illegitimate drugs?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And all I'm saying is to talk to them, I bet you would have them talking about the desire to burst out, you know the desire to achieve and accomplish, to do whatever you do with whatever comes of that.  And I think that that's the side of the same coin, you know and I think that is where you, you know you have the substance and the reality of the statement there but for the grace of god, you know people know that it's--that this thing of self-actualization and will and desire can be channeled any number of ways.
Speaker 1: But it's the same hunger.
Speaker 2: But it will manifest itself and it's the same hunger.  And the challenge is to help people realize that, or utilize that drive in a way that's positive--
Story_ID: 124174
Speaker 1: And so beyond the drive itself, which was mine and god given, there were the other actions by others that were purely blessings, you know from parents to coaches to teachers to friends.  And I think at the end of the day it takes all of that.  I don't think that it's the drive itself.  I don't think it's the innate ability itself.  I don't think it's what you bring to the table yourself.  And I guess what I'm saying there is, I don't know that any person is a self-made person.  I think that there is a lot of self that's in it, but without others being self-less and willing to give something of themselves to you, that drive is not enough, you know.  It's not enough.  So I was fortunate that Jim McKinley came to Marianna [Arkansas] to see Dennis Winston and happened to see me.  I was fortunate that two years earlier because of a relationship that he had with a friend of his of many years, James Bankston led him to Arkansas to Pine Bluff to recruit Gregory Bankston and a promise made to go back and to bring friends and others from the state if he would come.  And Greg was a premiere athlete you know and went on to do many things with the [Pittsburgh] Steelers as well.  And you know those kinds of things, decisions that are made long before a decision involving you, bring people your way.  So just to close out this, I remember--I mention Dennis and Greg, there was a time when I had five friends who were with the Steelers and it was all the same time.  It was amazing.  Greg Winston, Ron Johnson whom I played with at Eastern [Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], John Banaszak at Eastern, Reggie Garrett at Eastern, all of these guys end up at the Steelers together and I'm the glue, you know which is amazing.  And it just shows that these relationships and the ties and the threads and all that you all are dealing with in The HistoryMakers effort, show how you know life is this ever-flowing stream with all of its ripples.
Story_ID: 124175
Speaker 1: Now Eastern Michigan [University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], you must have found it radically different from Lee High School [Marianna, Arkansas] I guess in terms of--or was it?  I mean what was it now?
Speaker 2: Oh I thought it was, yeah it was different definitely.  I remember just I felt--it was interesting.  In one sense I felt a little out of place cause I--there was, everybody was so cool and fly.  That was the time of 'Super Fly' and--
Speaker 1: The platform shoes?
Speaker 2: --oh, all of this dress.  And I just you know, I--I'd had a little taste of that because of Memphis [Tennessee].  That's why Memphis was so dear to me.  But there's a difference in the Memphis flyness and the Detroit [Michigan] flyness.  Detroit fly is just, it's something and I like it.  And--
Speaker 1: It's the standard of fly.  That's what Detroit people say.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: They lead the fashion parade and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --all that.
Speaker 2: And for me I guess one of the other things that was exciting about Detroit was that just that Motown piece, you know. All of my just years of sweet memories with you know with the dances and the pantomime and the, and I guess we call it rapping now but I don't know what we called it then.  But that all centered principally on the Motown sound.
Speaker 1: The Temptations--
Speaker 2: Oh, Supremes, [HM] Smokey [Robinson], Stevie [Wonder], I mean just down the--Four Tops, I mean just down the line, up and down the line.
Speaker 1: It was like a black Hollywood--
Speaker 2: Aretha [Franklin]--
Speaker 1: --in some ways.
Speaker 2: There you go.  And so, and Gordy and you know just the business genius behind it.  So I was excited about that.  To me that was the thing and I remember going up for a visit and I saw something that I'd only seen once before and I felt that I wanted to be a part of that.  And at--it was actually an athletic event and there was a gentleman by the name of Stan Vincent who was an Olympian and he was at Eastern at the time and it was an indoor track meet and you got to, you have to go around the track twice.  And the first time he came around he was behind and the second time he came around just as he was going underneath the stands and moving towards the finish line he gave a, it was not necessarily a black power sign but it was a--he had a baton in his hand cause it was a relay and he raised it like a black power sign and the crowd just went wild.  And by the time he came out of the curve again you're underneath the stand so you don't see any of this, by the time he came out and was in the straight away, he had overtaken the opposition and I said yes, I want to be a part of this.  There is this air of you know, edge that I like cause to be able to do that, meaning to say it with the action and then do it with the effort was something I liked.  To me that was Muhammad Ali revisited.  That was you know that was--I liked that.
Story_ID: 124176
Speaker 1: And then the, there were a few other experiences that I liked [at Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].  I didn't tell my mother [Velma Lee Slater-Brewer] about the co-ed dorms and all that but I liked that.  And I met my roommate, we were roommates for four years and he was from Pine Bluff, Arkansas and I'd never met him before and I liked that.  And there were other just wonderful experiences but there was this song, I think it was by the Average White Band and I'm trying to think of the name of the song.  But I remember driving from Eastern into Detroit [Michigan] and just having that blasting in my ears.  And the reason I mention that is because the Average White Band was a white band, right?  But the music was right and I said to myself that's this experience too.  It was different.  I knew that I was getting ready to cross a line in an interface with whites in particular that I had not enjoyed in Marianna [Arkansas], not to the degree that I knew that I--not to the degree that I knew that I could and would.  And again for me, this was all about let's see how we stack up.  Let's deal with this.  Now the only real regret I have about Eastern was that there was a much broader international community that I just did not--I was not ready yet.  Meaning, I knew that it was there, I noticed it.  A dear friend, Hasely Crawford who was the 100-meter champion in the Olympics in '76 [1976 Montreal, Quebec Summer Olympics], he was from Trinidad.  And so again you're moving not just from the South but you're moving beyond the borders of the U.S. a little bit too.  And I knew that there were just a lot of Arab students on campus.  It was the first time I'd been exposed to that.  And--
Speaker 2: They're more Arabs in--
Speaker 1: In that area.
Speaker 2: --in the U.S., in, I mean in the Detroit area than--
Speaker 1: In--that's right.
Speaker 2: --any other place in the U.S.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And that was one of the, sort of the first things I noticed, but I just had no way of really, naturally connecting there and I was just making that first jump and leap.  I remember also being very excited about interfacing for the first time with a large number of students from you know the Jewish community.  One thing that I don't recall being of prominence in numbers were representatives of the Hispanic community.  I do remember Asians and the like.  And to me this was just great.  That--this was what I wanted to see and feel and touch and be a part of coming out of Marianna.  And--but I was not ready to move as quickly as I wanted to.  Forensics helped me with that.  I didn't start participating until I was a senior because I was a jock and forensics just did not sound that masculine at the time.  And so I finally started participating as a, in the last semester of my senior year because I didn't have anything to do in the afternoons you know.  For roughly fifteen years or so I always had something, I had taken my classes early and I'd always had something after two o'clock and it was generally athletics until six or seven, you know dinner and after my athletic career I just didn't have that.  So I wanted to fill that time and I did it with forensics.
Story_ID: 124177
Speaker 1: Forensics was very interesting to me.  My coach who was my, who was a, an instructor during my sophomore year [at Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], he taught me persuasive speech.  And ultimately even though I went into college as a political science major, I ended up majoring in political science and speech communications so I got a double major.  And that was just because once I got into the communications piece, I really liked it and I had just started getting deeper and deeper into it.  But Dennis Beacon, I'd seen him around the speech department, our department but I had him as an instructor in my sophomore year.  And after and during the course he said have you ever heard of forensics and I said yes, you know whatever that meant.  I'd heard of forensics medicine but I had no idea what he was talking about.  And I said yes.  And then he said well you know we have a forensics team.  And I said well I didn't know that.  Tell me about it 'cause now I'm trying to figure out what forensics is about before I get my next question.  So he told me a little bit about it and he said I think you would be very good.  And I said well--he said--no, he didn't say very good.  He said I think you would be good at this.  And I said, well you know I'm really into my athletics and I'm a, you know and I'm, I want to do better with my grades.  Because by that time I had met a student by the name of Mary Rosalou [ph.] who said I understand you want to go to law school and I said I do.  She said what's your grade point and I said its 3.2, something like that.  And she said well that, that's probably not good enough.  And I said well it's more than a B.  And she said--and I said and I'm an athlete and I said and I probably have the highest grade point average of any freshman athlete.  And she said yeah but you want to go to law school, right?  And I said yes.  She said I don't think that's good enough.  She said I've basically got a 3.8 and I'm not sure that that's good enough.  And for the first time you know, I just had to think about that.  And I always knew I was not doing--I was doing as well, I was doing as, I was doing well.  I was doing better than most, especially all the athletes because I did have the highest GPA average of any freshman or sophomore.  Anyway, so when--by the time I get to this discussion with Dennis, I'm thinking about that and I'm saying if I'm going to press forward on that, the academics and revisit that question, I don't know that I can do this.  Plus, it doesn't seem that masculine to me.  I'm playing ball and I'm having a great time and that's enough.  And so anyway I didn't do it.  So I come back my senior year and a couple of my classmates but also members of the team suggest that I do it.  And they said well come to a practice and I decided to go.  And I went to a room and I remember it was basically all white for the most part.  I think there was a blue curtain.  I'd never been in this room before and we all--they were all sitting on the floor which was kind of unusual to me.  And they were all white.  And then they said we, what we'd like to do is let you listen to an after dinner speech.  And do you know what an after dinner speech is?  No.
Story_ID: 124178
Speaker 1: But he's a good guy.  I'm supposed to go to Bethel [A.M.E. Church, Little Rock, Arkansas] and do--they're having their 140th Anniversary.  By the way I'm, they're--you talk, we talked about lynchings a couple of days ago.  I mean a lynching a few minutes ago.  There was one lynching in Little Rock where the pews of Bethel were used as a part--
Speaker 2: They took pews out of a black church and burned them?
Speaker 1: Pews out of the black church, burned them, and after the lynching, actually burned you know the victim.  It was just bad stuff--
Story_ID: 124179
Speaker 1: --I think we were talking about forensics.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And you went into the room for the first time?
Speaker 1: Went into the room yes.  And as I said it was all white and the room was all white, much like, maybe it was off white much like this but it--
Speaker 2: So you really stood out?
Speaker 1: --seemed like--yeah like a blue, maybe background.  But what they said was we want you to listen to a tape.  And they said we decided not to have practice but we're--if you listen to this tape then we just want to talk to you.  And I said okay I'm fine with that.  So I remember Ray Quill [ph.] was telling me about this and I thought Ray was a cool guy you know.  Ray had the air of a, sort of a young hippie and was just a cool guy.  Anyway, we started listening to the tape.  The tape was an after dinner speech that was given in 1964, and it was given by a gentleman who I--his name escapes me right now but I had met him.  I--and I didn't know he had been on campus but he had gone back to--he went to Vietnam and came back.  And I remembered when he came back he was always in fatigues, always.  And so I said hmm, I never knew he was in forensics though and I never knew he had given an after dinner speech, especially an after dinner speech that was recognized as the top in the nation.  So I'm saying okay, let me listen to this.  Well the after dinner speech was about the stereotypes of black folk and I'm listening to this speech and the brother is funny.  But it's just not all--it was incongruous.  It was the environment and the speech and the--cause I'm thinking Richard Pryor as I'm listening to him or Flip Wilson.  But I'm in this room and it's so good and so sensitive that it's almost like it could be me.  And how can I be asked to participate in something where I'm the butt of these jokes though they're funny.  And I said to Ray, Ray, please I can't do this.  And he said, he said Rodney we just started.  I said no, we've done enough though because this, you know we're talking about glide and stride and cut and strut and dip and hip and you know, and it's all again, good stuff.  But it's all about me and I really don't like it.
Story_ID: 124180
Speaker 1: Anyway, I'm thinking about this even as I tell about it 'cause I just did not feel good at all.  And the people that I knew, because I knew them it bothered me even more.  And so I said well I'll listen a little longer but I made it clear that it was not funny to me.  So at that point you know my friends stopped kind of laughing but we kind of catch each other maybe wanting to laugh but not being able to so it became very tense.  This is a relatively short period of time now cause an after dinner speech is only about you know, it's not that long.  I think its maybe fifteen minutes; ten minutes of comedy and then you've got your serious point.  Anyway at the end this brother said, you know stereotypes can be crippling to the minds of those who are the object of them.  And they can create a false sense of superiority in the minds of those who perpetuate them.  And he said, and in the end of the day, they aren't really good for anyone and he said plus if these stereotypes were true, how can you account for the moral conviction of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., or the invention of Dr. Charles Drew or--and he mentioned--he just went down the list, you know and if I--and I can remember it.  And I remember just boohooing, just crying and I said I want to do this.  I said all my life I wanted to do something like this.  I want to do this.  And then I remember all of these folk just coming around you know and they were you know hugging me and putting you know patting me on the back and they were saying this is what forensics is about.  It's about you taking the stage and taking something and making it real to an audience.  And then they started talking about extemporaneous speaking and impromptu speaking and poetry and prose and rhetorical criticism, I mean and you know I--even though I was a speech major, much of this I didn't know about forensics.  I mean I just didn't know about the nuances of styles and categories and all of that and persuasive even and I said I want to do this.  And I basically in a matter of two, three months did everything, prose, poetry.  My poetry piece was on Dr. King and my rhetorical criticism speech was "Malcolm X, Ballad of the Bullet."  My duet was on, what--Apache Blue with Sidney Poitier, right?  Is that the name of it?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.  And my after dinner was on jocks and I mean I just--and the thing about it is because I was so into it, I never really concentrated on any one area.  I think the poetry, prose, extemp [extemporaneous speech], those kinds of things, I had a natural talent for it anyway.
Story_ID: 124181
Speaker 1: That's what brought me to Washington, D.C.  Our national championship meet was at George Mason [University, Arlington, Virginia] and that was my first exposure to Washington, D.C.  That was in 1977.  And I remember going to the [National] Mall and going to the various monuments and just a wonderful time.  I also remember the first meet was at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and I remember all of the Ivy League schools and representatives coming in and I remember the blazers with the emblems and all of that.  And I remember Spellman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was there and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and--but it was basically, it was Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], it was Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was the Big Ten.  I mean and it was that level of competition too that I have always wanted.  This was the arena within the arena with the best.  And I remember we were just kind of before the meet saying well where are you in school?  Who are you?  Good meeting you, dah, dah-dah, dah-dah.  Where--and again, running down these schools.  And they said and where are you in school Rodney?  I'm at Eastern Michigan [University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].  And I remember saying it kind of sheepishly because you're on the campus of the University of Michigan and we always had a thing about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all Michigan schools hated the university (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's right, always a thing about that.  But anyway, once I said Eastern Michigan, something happened that had never happened before almost to a person, they said, umm, Eastern Michigan.  And I said Eastern Michigan, yes.  And I said I'm a senior and dah, dah-dah, dah-dah.  And they said well I guess you guys think that you're going to win the national championship again this year?  And I said well what do you mean?  I mean I was not really sure what I had heard.  I didn't--but I just knew that you had four or five voices almost in a chorus saying that.  And I said well--and then they said listen, listen to him, you know.  So you want to know what we mean.  Come on, you guys think you're going to do it but you're not going to do it this year, you know.  We're ready for you and almost to a person.  It was almost like they were ganging up and I'm saying what's going on.
Speaker 2: So they had a rep that you didn't even know about?
Speaker 1: That's right.  And they said so you, you're saying that you don't know that you guys have won that national championship like four of the last five times?  And I said, no.  I said I just joined the team.  And they said well you got a good team but we're going to kick your butts.  And I didn't know.  And I remember the--I couldn't wait to get to Beacon and I said Dennis, what is this about--and he said oh yes.  He said but it's not a surprise that you wouldn't know.  He said they don't--they never really write about what we do.  Then he said and they're already--they're always writing about what you and your football team and your basketball team do and I said I didn't know that.  And he said, and we are going to win the championship this year and you're going to be a part of it.  And then it just all started to unfold.  And eventually I figured out that I did have a knack and I was very successful, very.  At nationals I was in quarter finals in two or three events, was at the last cut for semi-finals in an event.  And I remember in one instance I said--they told me I didn't make the cut and I said oh my.  And then I caught myself and I said, wait a minute.  I said enjoy the ride.  You have never ever done this before and you just made quarter finals in like two or three events.
Story_ID: 124182
Speaker 1: And I said, and then I came around and I said to Beacon I said, Dennis, tell me if I had been doing this you know--he said Rodney if you had been doing it, there's no doubt, if you did it another year, this, this, this and this.  He said a lot of people have the natural talent and they need to have it refined.  And he said and then with some people they think that it's just the art and that's all they have.  And he said the power is to have both and then he started naming folk.  He said Avis Baker who's at Bradley [University, Peoria, Illinois], she's got both and, you know.  And then one other person, he said he Michael Rodriguez who's on our team, he said Michael has it all.  He said you watch Michael.  And Michael at the national championship was a five event winner as a sophomore.  Now he'd been doing this years and he was the best.  The best, so much so that he did something that I never, I'd never realize but it happens all the time and that was after he did it, he said I'm done with it now.  So even as a junior or a senior, he never participated anymore.  I mean he just basically moved on to other things.  He started dealing with this in a professional realm even while in school [at Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] and he's now in Chicago [Illinois].  And--but Dennis was telling me the other night we've got one of our former team members who's now in a television series that looks like it's going to make it, As You Like It or something.  Not that.  He gave me the name of it.  It's kind of unusual but Dennis Cochran.  And--but they're all over and as I said we did win.  The one best--the best lesson I learned, I got from Avis Baker.  By the way Avis was from Bradley.  She had a sister who was a competitor as well.  I mean these were two of the most beautiful sisters I'd ever met and they were serious about forensics and they were good.  They were very, very good.  And I liked that you know the kind of air that comes with that.  And--but she gave me a piece of advice that has been very helpful to me and I, I'll kind of share this with you and close out.  She said before every competition she goes into a room and preferably it's a room with no windows and she'll turn off all the lights and listen to herself.  And she said it is the most beautiful sound.  She said we seldom hear ourselves because we're too busy seeing ourselves or seeing all that's around us and you don't really hear yourself.  Said the closest thing to it is singing in the shower.  Have you noticed that you sound much better when you're singing in the shower?  That's because something is so unusual that's happening that sort of breaking the monotony of the outside environment that you really start to focus on the voice you know.  And it's just different because you close off so much that it allows you to see so much better that which is still within your sphere, the more enclosed sphere.  And--sphere.  And she said that's the way it is when you go into a dark room.  She says one thing that the voice does then is it has its essence manifested, recognized and that is, it is beyond the body.  It is really the one thing that extends beyond the body that's still very much a part of the body.  And the closest thing maybe to it in a comparison and analogy would be the spirit itself.  And her point was it is of the spirit.
Speaker 2: You know that's a very African analogy.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I mean it's, in the African culture the voice is sacred--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --the vapor that comes out of your mouth when you speak is considered--
Speaker 1: And people--
Speaker 2: -- spiritual.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  That's what I was about to say.  And it was the first time I'd seen, you know you hear that. People say "I can see it."  You hear that and you're a little kid and you say I can't see that.  And she's kind of weird.  Aunt, you know Betty is just weird.  She can see the voice or see the spirit as it exits the body.  I'm so scared I don't see anything.  Do you see anything, you know.  But that's what Ava [sic, Avis] gave me.  And she said when you cut, turn out all the lights, the voice will take up all the space.  There is nothing you know, a crack in a corner, there is nothing that the voice does not totally consume when you turn out all the lights and that's when you start to recognize its power--
Story_ID: 124183
Speaker 1: And so then when you're before an audience, you are sort of enveloping that audience.  And the person who I've seen in person who does that better than anyone I've seen in person is [President] Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: That's what people say.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And he--it is almost like even in the largest of crowds, he is connecting you know.  And we've talked about this and actually that's one of the things that sort of is the special quality of our relationship.  That's--you know how you have relationships with people and you say, this is ours?  This is the kind of stuff, this is one area that we talk about a lot.  And we'll talk about orators and speakers and all of that and actually I've introduced him to Eastern [Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].  When he was preparing for his debate in Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], we actually used a facility on the Eastern campus.  Then he went back during his campaign in--for re-election and then the last year we did the commencement there.  He was the commencement speaker.  So--and now Eastern, our forensics team is actually working with the William Jefferson Clinton Elementary School for public speech in Little Rock or North Little Rock [Arkansas].  So that's a nice little connection there.  But anyway, forensics you can see was very important to me for a couple of reasons.  One is, it gave me a level of competition that was at the top of the heat in that arena.  And it's interesting, this--last year the NCAA, they have this, what they call a Silver Anniversary Award and so on your twenty-fifth year, you have a select group of athletes who are selected from across the various sports.  And so they recognized, oh hmm, he played at Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] you know and they won the national championship my senior year, his senior year in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Was that Bo Ellis or--?
Speaker 1: Bo Ellis [Maurice H. "Bo" Ellis, former professional basketball player].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And then the guy who was a Olympian out of Arizona State [University, Tempe, Arizona] who ran track, his name escapes me right now but you see where I'm going with this.  They recognized all of us. They recognized me in football.  And the thing that they made a big deal out of was forensics which was very interesting because they dealt with the benefit of it to athletes that have really gone beyond their playing, how just that ability takes you beyond your prowess on the field and makes you more than that.  And they cited actually a couple of examples but interestingly they used my experience in that as a, sort of a point and how you know athletes now are doing so much more and they make so much more if they can do this.  I mean we see Deon now moving into a new sphere.  [O.J.] Simpson was one of the first with his breakthrough in the ad arena.  Jackson--I'm sorry [Michael] Jordan and now the young man from Ohio.
Speaker 2: LeBron James, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 124184
Speaker 1: But it's about having another piece and it's you know the piece of communication and expression and the like.  The last little joke on this was when Dennis Beacon said to me, he said yeah, we--we'll win the national championship.  And you're right, you didn't hear much about us because they were writing about you.  At the end of the day, he made the point that one of my big contributions to the forensics team was that my participation was such an oddity that a lot of the media actually started to focus on the team.  And because you know I was always, you know I think the kind of, the right kind of athlete meaning you know the kind of athlete that becomes captain.  In those stories it wasn't about me, you know.  And that was something I think the forensics team appreciated because it was about this new experience and the new people and the champions they are and the athlete who can speak to that in ways that the more broader public can understand and say, hmm, I didn't know about that.  But that's the level of competition and that's what our team has been doing.  And the joke was, no they don't ride on you know private jets and eat steak the night before a meet.  They're getting there in vans and they're eating from McDonalds and Burger King and they're winning championships, you know.  And so that was kind of nice.  It was a nice contribution to make.
Story_ID: 124185
Speaker 1: How, how did your [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] football team do?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: MAC [Mid-American Conference - College Football] I know it's--it can be rough.
Speaker 2: Right.  We did okay.  We actually were bringing the team into the MAC.  Before--
Speaker 1: Eastern, Western--
Speaker 2: Oh, all of that, Central.
Speaker 1: --Northern and Central Michigan, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, all of that.
Speaker 1: And Bowling Green [State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Bowling Green.
Speaker 1: --and OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Ball State [University, Muncie, Indiana].
Speaker 1: --Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio], Ball State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It's a good conference.
Speaker 1: Northern Illinois [University, DeKalb, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And as you know this is the year of the MAC.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: --they've been doing exceptionally well.
Speaker 1: Went through everybody.
Speaker 2: They are.  And so, and it's basically one of those conferences, it's where you have to build to that level. In this area it's probably Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] that's had to build to that level.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: It's clearly not you know a football school.  I mean basically our best teams around that time were, well basketball when George ["The Iceman"] Gervin was there.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And then baseball we were going to the World Series.  We were--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --either one or two.  And then track, that's really where we were shining.
Speaker 1: Hasely Crawford, I didn't realize he was playing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hasely.  Oh Hasely was, he was a great guy too, great guy.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: Had he known anything about football he probably could have played too I would imagine.
Speaker 2: Well he try--no, no.  He tried to come out.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was--Hasely did not like it at all, didn't like getting hit.
Speaker 1: You ever met an English back, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: -- or a Jamaican back in football?  I don't--
Speaker 2: Never.  But he was actually--they tried to play him at wide out, tight end.  Hasely was a big guy, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Hasely was about 6'2" and probably about 225, I mean he was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he looked like he was pretty big.
Speaker 2: You know great for a running back but he just couldn't take that.
Speaker 1: Could he play soccer?  Did he play soccer?
Speaker 2: He played a little soccer and we--but you know what, I don't know that we had a--soccer wasn't that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --big at the time.
Speaker 1: He may not really have gotten the opportunity to really play much of anything in, where was it Jamaica (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well no, he's from Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Trinidad, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, yeah Trinidad.  So--
Speaker 1: Depends on where he was raised and had access to.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  But we were pretty good.  But we ended up, we had, while I was there we had three head coaches during that period.  Our first head coach we lost to the Detroit Wheels [Ypsilanti, Michigan].  You remember the--
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear).
Speaker 2: --World Football League was it I believe?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear).  I remember when they formed that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was--he's still probably the winningest coach to ever coach there.  And that was tough for me because--
Speaker 1: Was he related to all those coaches and stuff, Jim Bechler [ph.] and--?
Speaker 2: They were all of the same ilk.
Speaker 1: All those coaches seemed like they were just--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --genetically related or--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in some kind of way on a family tree.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  You know I don't know that he was related but they had all, you know cause Miami was considered the coach, the--
Speaker 1: Cradle of the coaches.
Speaker 2: --cradle of coaches, that's right.  And they all were of that.  My coach after Boisture [Daniel P. Boisture] was George [W.] Mans who was from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and then Carr [Lloyd Henry Carr, Jr.] who is the current coach of the University of Michigan was there.  He was a member of the coaching staff. He was I think maybe defensive back or defense but I know--knew him well and we had a good relationship.  But we ended up having four or three head coaches while I was there which was always bad.  But you know the experience was good.  I learned good lessons and played you know and had a good experience.  So I wouldn't trade that--and we, they actually just brought back our 1973 team for a thirty-year reunion.
