Story_ID: 628772
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer and Cheryl Butler is observing.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Janet, J-A-N-E-T, middle name Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, my last name is hyphenated, Sims, S-I-M-S-W-O-O-D [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood].
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 22, 1945.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Rutherford County, North Carolina.  That's R-U-T-H-E-R-F-O-R-D and the city was Rutherfordton--
Speaker 1: North Carolina?
Speaker 2: --North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a librarian and a historian.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're at Prince George's Community College in Largo, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Twenty-fourth?
Speaker 2: April 24th, 2007.
Story_ID: 628773
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I've had three.  In my young days it was yellow, in my adulthood it was green, and now that I'm a senior citizen, it's blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: When it comes to the season, what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, do you have a destination that you love?
Speaker 2: I love the Caribbean 'cause it's warm.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two--from the Old Testament, Isaiah 40 [Isaiah 40:31].  "They that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up on wings as eagles and they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint."  And from the New Testament it's Hebrews, the eleventh chapter 'cause I'm a faith woman, and that's the faith chapter.
Story_ID: 628774
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family.  Tell me your mother's name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Hazel, H-A-Z-E-L, her middle name was Rae, R-A-E, her maiden name was Jeffries, J-E-F-F-R-I-E-S and then her married name was Sims [Hazel Jeffries Sims].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: All of my family was born in Rutherford County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: October the 18th, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about her parents?
Speaker 2: Her mother was a washer woman, I cannot remember the date of her birth.
Speaker 1: Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Pearl, P-E-A-R-L, Jeffries [Pearl Hampton Jeffries], and she was a housewife and what we call washer woman that took in washing and ironing.  And my grandfather's name was Thomas Jefferson--Jeffries [Thomas Jeffries].  And he was first a mill worker and then he became a farmer so he owned lots of land, cattle, pigs, did lots of vegetable farming.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: Just saved their money and bought it as far as I know.  They used to live in a little place called Cliffside, North Carolina, and that's C-L-I-F-F-S-I-D-E.  And then they moved--that was when he was working in the mill, there were lots of mills in that area, cotton mills.  And then he moved into Henrietta, H-E-N-R-I-E-T-T-A, North Carolina, and that's where he bought his land.  And the fact that--the house that my parents have now was land that they got from him.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know anything about their parents?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't go back any further than that with them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 628775
Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with them, your personal relationship with your [maternal] grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Pearl Hampton Jeffries] was--she just loved people and she would--she's one of those people that would do things for you.  She had a--like I say, she had a vegetable garden and she would share with all the, you know, all the neighbors 'cause there were some neighbors there that, you know, had children and didn't have, you know, maybe not have money.  And she would always share what they made with other people and she was a big church woman so she, she loved to go to church.  And one of the things that they did as farmers, they, they always had milk, and the kids would pass by their house every morning going--walking to school and she would, she would have milk for them and give 'em, give 'em milk.  And, you know, like a lot of times either biscuits or cornbread.  She was a great cook, so--and my grandfather [Thomas Jeffries] was a very quiet man so he was a farmer and that's basically what he did.  He didn't--he wasn't very social but he loved to farm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a personal story about you and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), since they were farmers, they also raised cotton 'cause in the western part of North Carolina, which is where we are from, cotton was the industry.  And on the eastern part it was tobacco.  So my, my parents--my grandparents also cotton, and I guess I was about twelve maybe, eleven or twelve, and during the summer you have to hoe around the cotton to pull the weeds away.  And of course to this day I don't know weeds from flowers, so I went out to help her weed her cotton.  And of course I was hoeing up everything that was out there that was green.  And so she came over and she gave me a dollar and said, "You can go home now, baby."  So she would not have a crop that year if I had stayed out there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said your grandmother was a good cook.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a good cook.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, fried chicken, biscuits of course, she just--her biscuits were just the greatest.  And of course they made, you know, because they had a--had cows, they made lot of buttermilk, which I don't like but most people do, but regular milk and buttermilk.  And they made butter, and they sold those products as well to people.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much education your grandparents had?
Speaker 2: No, I don't but I would say it was very little.
Speaker 1: And you said she was a woman of strong faith, what church did she attend?
Speaker 2: We were A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion].
Speaker 1: Did you attend church with her at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to, to same church, yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Zion Hill A.M.E. Zion Church [Henrietta, North Carolina].  And it's now an independent church.  We, we split from that church and we've become independent but the church is still there.
Speaker 1: So, do you have any stories about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Not many, only thing I can remember is him out there plowing with the mule and everything.  And he'd always tell you--and he had a goat that would chase you.  So he'd always tell you to make sure you stayed away from that goat because it would definitely chase you down.  So--but he was very business-like, he--and had a very old, old car that he would come and, you know, if we'd need to go somewhere, he would come and get us or take us somewhere in the car.
Story_ID: 628776
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] share any stories about her growing up?  Did she grow up on this land (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, uh-huh, they first lived in Cliffside [North Carolina] and then she's told me that when they moved--the little community is called Cooperline, C-O-O-P-E-R-L-I-N-E, and she said that they moved on Cooperline when she was around nine years old and it was just a wagon trail.  So that was--and it just developed from there.  And they were one of the first people on that line, so, and as I say, they had, had a lot of property there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what were some of the stories that she shared about her growing up there?
Speaker 2: One of the things that she told us recently was that her grandmother had this--her mother [Pearl Hampton Jeffries] had this very nice bedspread and my mother was a seamstress, she loved to sew.  And so she asked her grandmother--her mother if she could have some fabric and her mother didn't have any right then, so what she did she went on the other side of the bed where you couldn't see and cut some of that fabric off of the bedspread.  And of course her mother gave her a good spanking and took her scissors (laughter). She, she, she laughs about that today.  My mother now has dementia so we're trying to get some of her stories on tape.  So that was one of the recent ones she told us.
Speaker 1: Did she have to work on the farm as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, they, they worked on the farm so they, they, they could milk cows and--she said she didn't do very well milking cows, I think she was afraid of them.  But, you know, they, they worked in the garden and did, you know, fed the hogs and everything.  So, they, they, definitely worked there on the farm.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that she was a seamstress, did--how much education did she have?
Speaker 2: My mother probably just went to the eighth grade I think.  And that was--during that time, that might've been pretty much what it was, but the eighth grade.
Story_ID: 628777
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Marvin, M-A-R-V-I-N, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Sims [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was--was he also born in Rutherford County [North Carolina] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in Rutherford County.
Speaker 1: And do you know his date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 26, 1908.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about his parents?
Speaker 2: I didn't know any of his parents, his mother lived with them when they first got married but evidently she died very young because even my oldest sister [Glenell Sims Young] said does not--never knew her.  So we know nothing about his side of the family basically, as far as his parents and things.
Speaker 1: Were you able to find out her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Phoebe [Phoebe Sims].
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your father?
Speaker 2: My father--what I say about my father is that he was a gentleman and a gentle man, very easy to get along with, very friendly person.  He worked in the mills at an early age.
Speaker 1: Was this the cotton mills?
Speaker 2: Cotton mills, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most of the guys that worked in the mills--there was very little employment other than farming.  They basically, the black guys, basically worked either cleaning up or stoking the, the coal fires and everything like that.  So that's what he did early on and then he learned to be a brick mason.  And we have quite a community of brick masons in our area, and I called my next door neighbor because he was a brick mason as was his father.  And I ask him I said, "How did your daddy and my daddy become brick masons."  And he said, he remembered that his father was probably one of the first ones because he was a little bit older than my daddy.  He also worked in the mills and he was at work and this white gentleman there was working around the mill laying brick and he taught him, his name was Will Brewster [ph.], he taught him how to lay brick.  And then Will started teaching the other folk in the area.  So he sort of taught my daddy and then they started teaching everybody else.  So there was a--several generations of brick masons in that period because they taught so many people, my uncle, my mother's brother, my mother's brother-in-law.  They were brick masons.  My uncle taught brick masonry in the school system, so it was just a lot of brick masons in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many brothers and sisters did your father have?
Speaker 2: I only remember two brothers and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims]?
Speaker 2: My mother had a brother [Joseph Jeffries] and a sister [Amanda Jeffries].  And she was the oldest, my daddy was the youngest in his family.  And my mother was the oldest.
Speaker 1: And education for your father?
Speaker 2: I would say around eighth grade as well (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 628778
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] and father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know but they got married when she was sixteen, he's about seven years older than she was.  So, but I really don't know that story too much as to how they, how they met and got married.  But they were--they belonged to the same church [Zion Hill A.M.E. Zion Church, Henrietta, North Carolina] so I would imagine they were going to church at the same time, so that was how they met.
Speaker 1: So they got married and settled in the same community.
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.  There was another little--there's a lot of little--around that area there were a lot of mills because it was cotton mills and every little area had a name.  And they moved to a little place called Avondale [North Carolina], which is right--not too far, about a mile away from where my mother was living to begin with.  And so that's where they started their family and everything.  And they rented--they were renting a house from, from one of the doctors.  We had two white doctors in the--we lived in an area--when we lived in Avondale, basically all white but maybe about three black families in that area.
Story_ID: 628779
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the area in which you grew up?
Speaker 2: Okay, as I say, it was a lot of mill villages and each little village then had their own name, each little--and everything was--the cotton mills basically did make fabric.  They would either make jeans or they'd make sheets and pillow cases, towels and things of that nature.  So that's basically where most of the men worked, but in custodial jobs.  So very small sort of rural communities but some of the best people you'd ever wanna meet.  There were just--people really helped each other and they looked out for each other.  So, just some wonderful people there that I still have close contact with, with several of those people to this day.
Speaker 1: When you think back about that community of Avondale [North Carolina], you were born in that area at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thinking back, think of the sounds, the sights, and the smells of the community, what comes to your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, for the smells it's basically I think cooking because, you know, my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] was a good cook as well.  So, and usually especially in the South, when you go to someone's house, they always feed you whether you're hungry or not they feed you.  So anytime you went to anyone's house--my daddy's [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] sister was a good cook, there, all that--everybody in his family were good cooks so every time you went somewhere you always ate.  So we, we'd always--and of course that Sunday dinner was always, you know, fried chicken.  So that's one of my favorite smells.  Sounds, I guess would be us playing.  I ended up being a tomboy because my sister [Glenell Sims Young] is the oldest, and I'm the youngest so I ended up having to play with my brother.  So of course I had to play what he wanted to play which was cowboys and Indians [Native American] and marbles--I shot marbles and climbed trees and, you know, so my daddy made that his project to make a lady out of me.  So, but that's what I remember just being outside playing.  And the sights would just be, just people mingling with each other, and especially going to church on Sundays.  You know, we always met up at church and, of course, you sometimes stayed all day.  And, but just a lot of--I guess I just have a lot of love for the folk in that area.  They, they've just been so, so wonderful especially even today.
Story_ID: 628780
Speaker 1: Tell me about the community, you said that your family was one of the few black families there?
Speaker 2: In that particular--in Avondale [North Carolina] we were one of the few.  There were about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Avondale? How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was there from the time I was born 'til I was--daddy [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] built our house around the 1950s, around 1955, '56 [1956] was when he built a brick house for us to live in.  We were renting that house that we were in Avondale from one of the doctors.  And the other black family--there were two ladies that lived there and a couple of their grandchildren, and each one of those ladies worked for one of those two doctors.  So, then there was another black family there in the neighborhood, but that house people moved in and out so basically we were the two stable black families in that community.  Most of the other communities were somewhat mixed but most of them were pretty much segregated communities.
Speaker 1: So talk about the fact that there were only two black families living in this community.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, you know, it didn't, it didn't seem strange to me because that's what I grew up with.  But my problem was that there was no one there for me to play with because everybody else was older.  And so what my daddy would do on Sundays is that he would take me to his sister's house.  And she had grandchildren that were my age, so, as again, trying to make a lady out of me he'd always make sure I was around little girls that I could play with so I wouldn't be climbing trees so much.  But it was just a nice little small community.  There was a store that we lived right next to and even until a few years ago when the store closed, they would even still bring groceries out to you.  This is, again, a very small community.  And when we would catch the school bus in the mornings, they got so that they would open up before the school bus came so they could get our little nickels and dimes before we got to school.  So we'd always go in there and buy up our little candy and stuff, and stand there and wait for the bus to come.
Speaker 1: I want you to actually think about the community and go a square block around the community from your house and tell me what you see?
Speaker 2: Okay, as I say, on the right hand side there was the store.  Right in front of us for several years there was a radio shop which--and before people started getting televisions in their homes, people would always come to the radio shop because they were the ones that had the first televisions and would stand outside and look in the window at the, at television.  So they were--eventually people started getting televisions.  And there was a white family on the other side, back behind us a little bit was the other black family and right behind us was another white family.  So it was basically, as I say, basically surrounded by, by white families.
Speaker 1: What about the businesses, were they owned by blacks or whites?
Speaker 2: No, there was--across the street from the radio shop was a shoe shop, everything basically was owned by the white community.
Speaker 1: And were you able to shop in the stores?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, uh-huh, yes.  Yeah, they catered to everyone.  The--I remember getting a spanking in that store one day.  I went to the store, me and mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims], well you don't show out in front of my mother.  And I had one of my little fits trying to--I wanted my own personal little watermelon.  And I--it's probably was a cucumber that I'm guessing, you know, for something that small.  And of course, you know, I start crying and acting up and of course my mother spanks me right in that store.  She did not wait to get me home, you know.  So, but we--that's where we got--a shoe shop across the street was where we got our shoes.  The radio shop, my mother liked Rosetta Tharpe [Sister Rosetta Tharpe] and when they got a new record in with Rosetta Tharpe they would wait 'til my mother would be out front hanging our clothes and they would put the Rosetta Tharpe record on.  And she would immediately stop and go up there and buy the newest Rosetta Tharpe record.  So, just lots of fond memories.  Now one thing we did not do like during Halloween, we did not go out.  That was one of the things they, you know, although you were in--it was still a segregated area.  And that was the time during the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], you know, it was still very much segregated.  So we did not go out like in Halloween and trick-or-treat and things like that.
Speaker 1: So there weren't any community things that you did together but you did play with the children in your immediate area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, we did but until you get to school.  That was one of the painful memories of that childhood, was that I had a little girlfriend that I played with and we played together until we both started school.  And after you started school, because she went to the white school I went to the black school, we could not play together anymore.  And I, you know, being a child I could not understand that, you know.  Later on I did, but, at that time, you know, that was a painful experience.
Story_ID: 628781
Speaker 1: Tell me about elementary school, what school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, the school was about eight miles away, we were bused.  And it was Dunbar Elementary School [Forest City-Dunbar Elementary School, Forest City, North Carolina], of course, named after Paul Laurence Dunbar.  Early on there was a school, a school for everybody--I guess elementary school in a little place called Caroleen [North Carolina], which is the little town right next to ours.  I went there one--on, well, I went there a few days.  I started when I was five and would not go.  So I was--I never went to the Caroleen school, basically.  But--
Speaker 1: But, why didn't you go?
Speaker 2: I, I just didn't wanna--I was a baby, I was a big baby.  I was five years old, I was spoiled.  And so mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] didn't really make me go, I could've, I could've been a year ahead of myself, right.  But, no, they finally waited until I was six and let me go with the--'cause that was basically how--what time when we started school was at six, first grade.  'Cause we didn't have kindergartens.  So I wouldn't go that school.  And there was an older school called Grahamtown [Grahamtown School] which is in a little place called Forest City [North Carolina], F-O-R-E-S-T, C-I-T-Y, about--that's about eight miles away.  I went to first grade there, it was a very old school, outside toilets, everything.  And when I was in second grade was when Dunbar opened, it was a new elementary school for black children.  So that's where I went from second to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned that the first school had outside toilets, what about at home.  Did you have indoor plumbing?
Speaker 2: No, at--in Avondale [North Carolina] we didn't, we had outdoor plumbing.
Speaker 1: And that was the norm for all of the houses, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was the norm for--basically, yes.
Story_ID: 628782
Speaker 1: Well tell me about Dunbar [Dunbar Elementary School; Forest City-Dunbar Elementary School, Forest City, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Dunbar was a nice school.  I, I enjoyed going to school once I started.  But as my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] keeps telling people, "Now she doesn't know how to stop going to school, now, we couldn't get her there the first now she won't stop."  But it was enjoyable--the teachers--one of the things I say about teachers of that era, and because we were under segregation, they felt like if you didn't get that--from them you didn't get it.  So they taught you everything.  They, you know, they even kept, you know, comb, brush and some extra clothes there in case there was some kids that needed, you know, some hygiene attention.  They had that, they would come to your houses and visit because at that time a lot of the parents couldn't come to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings 'cause a lot of them were working either at the mill or farming or whatever.  So the teachers at that time would come to your house two or three times a year to talk to your parents if you couldn't get to the PTA meetings.  They'd talk to your parents about your progress, teachers and parents worked together.  Whatever that teacher said was gospel.  And even though, I think I was in third grade by the time we got a telephone, I have to this day I have no idea how the message got from school eight miles away home, that you got in trouble at school, because when you got home you got a spanking for getting in trouble at school.  So they, I mean, they really worked together.  And the teachers just, they took a lot of their own money and, and provided things for, for the kids.  So, for instance, my first grade teacher, her name was Miss Gardner [ph.], she had a very, very large property.  And on her property was a pond, and she would invite you to come there.  You could come there and fish, she especially liked asked the men to come and bring their sons so you could--they could bond together.  So you'd come and fish and you could have a picnic there.  You didn't have to ask her, you know, you just come on her property and, and have a good time.  And then her brother was a barber so all the guys would come to their house anyway, because they came to get their hair cut.  So all--the teachers were just, just fabulous teachers.  They, they really did care about us.  They let us know they cared about us.  They would also come to your church on Sundays, like a group of teachers would get together and this Sunday they may come to your church, the next Sunday they may come to--they don't--they didn't tell you in advance, they just showed up.  And don't be in there acting up 'cause you got two spankings, one from your parents and one from them when you got back to school.  'Cause at that time you--teachers could spank.
Speaker 1: Who was the disciplinarian in your home?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother more so than my father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.].  My father, as I say, was a very gentle person and he didn't like to spank you.  He tried any means necessary not to have to spank you, but mother was definitely the disciplinarian in the family.
Story_ID: 628783
Speaker 1: Tell me about your grades, you said you liked school.
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school, yes.  I did--I had good grades.  One thing I had--well, you know, early on I can remember one of the things I can remember before I even started to school I was--and I couldn't read and my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims], who as I say would take in ironing and washing and ironing, she'd be there ironing at night but what she would do, she'd make my brothers read to me.  So, that was also to make sure that they knew how to read.  But they sort of taught me how to, you know, taught me about reading and everything.  So I just--and I used to play school, that was what I always played when I was playing by myself.  I'd play school.
Speaker 1: You admired your, your teachers.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were all of your teachers black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were all of them female?
Speaker 2: No.  We had a few, let me see--elementary school [Dunbar Elementary School; Forest City-Dunbar Elementary School, Forest City, North Carolina] I think we had one, one, one male teacher in elementary school.  In high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina] we had about four or five.
Speaker 1: Okay, so grades were good for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, grades were good.  And later on my sister [Glenell Sims Young] was the truant officer so you had no choice (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there anything that your parents told you about grades?  I mean, was there a rule in your house that you had to have certain grades or not?
Speaker 2: They never really spoke it, but, but, you know, it was understood if you, if you came home with a bad grade, you know, you were gonna get a spanking so you, you sort of towed the line, you know, you towed the line.  They, they didn't play.
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Elementary school? it would be--probably be the first grade teacher, Miss Gardner [ph.], my seventh grade teacher, Miss Williamson [ph.].  We had one older teacher there, Miss Twitty [ph.], and she's the one that taught--she used to know how to bead and do sequence, and so she taught us how to, to do beading and, and doing sequence on, on fabric.  So, I just had a lot of, lot of teachers that I really admired.  I remember one time--guess I was in third grade and the North Carolina Symphony came to our school, and since we were first to eighth grade, they were not gonna let the young kids go to the symphony.  And so my mother wrote a note because I was in the--I was like third grade and my brother was like seventh.  And he was going and I wasn't, and she wrote a note to the school and said that she wanted her daughter in that--to see the symphony 'cause she had no idea if I'd ever see a symphony again.  So, then they opened it up to the whole school that--the one thing they just thought we couldn't sit still long enough to hear a symphony but we did, we did pretty good.
Speaker 1: Do you remember about that trip?
Speaker 2: No, the symphony came to the school.
Speaker 1: Oh, it came to the school?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what did you think about the music?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it, I loved it 'cause, again, it was the first time I'd ever, you know, really heard anything like that.  And I think it's, again, my mother wanted to make sure that I had that experience because not knowing that what, what, you know, if I'd ever see a symphony again.  So she wanted to make sure I was sitting in that audience.
Speaker 1: Besides playing marbles and climbing trees, was there any other activities that you participated in?
Speaker 2: Basically, there wasn't a lot to do there so, as far as, you know, we didn't have rec centers and things like that, so you sort of had to entertain yourself.  My mother taught me how to embroidery so I could do that and, so basically you sort of usually played, you know, with the other kids and played, you know, with yourself if you didn't have any, any other kids around.
Story_ID: 628784
Speaker 1: You told me that your brothers used to read to you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you learned how to read, what did you read as a child?
Speaker 2: Basically, biographies and probably fiction, novels.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the biographies that read?
Speaker 2: I think early on I read a small one on Mary McLeod Bethune who was one of my favorite people ended up, you know, I didn't know that much about her as I was reading but later I--she became one of my sheroes.
Speaker 1: So history was, was that something that you enjoyed early on?
Speaker 2: No, believe it or not, I could not stand history.  I did not like it, and if my history teacher from college [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] could--was alive I--he would--I--he would just pass out to know that I became a hist- I hated it.  But you know what really opened history up for me was learning how to connect it with everything else that was going on.  And that I didn't know early on in life, it was, it was until I, you know, later on in college when somebody really sit down and say, okay, history is everything that goes on.  So it's the politics, it's the culture, it's the music, it's everything.  And starting to connect it together as one thing causes another, that's when history really opened up for me.  But as a, as a child and early on I did not like history.  And I said, Lord, what did I miss, what did I miss.  I liked to read and I guess early on I liked to read and I liked--what else did I like to do?  I liked math a little bit, I didn't--I wasn't the greatest at math.  I could do some but, but I think reading was my, my strong suit.
Story_ID: 628785
Speaker 1: You went to high school after the eighth grade [at Dunbar Elementary School; Forest City-Dunbar Elementary School, Forest City, North Carolina], you go to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Tell me the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Carver High School [Spindale, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Carver?
Speaker 2: Carver, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, George Washington Carver.
Speaker 1: And tell me about high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, high school--I loved high school too.  We had some, again, really great teachers, really--they really went out of their way to make sure that you got this education.  One of my favorite--of course, I took home economics and that was I guess my favorite course.  I learned how to sew.  My mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] didn't teach me how to sew. I learned how to sew when I went to school.  That was my favorite, and she didn't--and I didn't learn how to cook though.  She didn't cook a lot, she did more sewing than cooking so we learned--and we used to have a fashion show every year and we would model what we made.  That's where I also learned how to type.  Although I had a typewriter at the house, my brother had gotten a typewriter.  Early on I could peck on it but I didn't learn actually how to type until I got to high school, which served me very well later on (laughter).  We had, we had several male teachers there.  We had a gentleman that taught agriculture, the biology teacher was also one of the coaches.  A math teacher was a male and he was also one of the coaches.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: The agriculture teacher was Mr. Whitworth [Ulysses G. Whitworth], and his daughter and I were in the same class so we were good friends back, in fact good friends now.  The biology teacher was Mr. Sanders [ph.] and the math teacher was Mr. E.D. Roberts.  And Mr. E.D. Roberts and Mr. Sanders both just passed in, in 2005.  And I was lucky to be at home to attend Mr. Roberts' funeral.
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite teacher or someone who inspired you or encouraged you in high school?
Speaker 2: I think it was the home economics teacher.  And at our last reunion we honored many of the teachers that we had, and I was the one that gave her tribute to her.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Miss Potts, Hortense Potts.  So she's still alive.  When I was in ninth grade, our teacher, Miss Perry [ph.], had to--we had career day one day so we had to all pick something to do.  And so I decided I would be a manicurist, and I asked my girlfriend to--if I could manicure her nails.  And when it was over she told me after class, she says, "Don't you ever come near my fingers again.  You almost broke 'em."  She said, "Do not ever become a manicurist; it's not for you."  (Laughter) But one of the things that my ninth grade teacher told us, Miss Perry, was that there was a need for librarians.  And so that next year we got a new librarian, Miss Murray [ph.], and she started letting me do a lot of work in the library with her in the library a lot.  And then she was the one that steered me to North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] because that was her school and they had an undergraduate degree in library science there.  So, I had several teachers that, that were working with me to influence me.
Story_ID: 628786
Speaker 1: Was it a given that you would go to college or was this something that you thought about once you got in high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: You know, there were not a lot of kids there going to college at that time.  They just did not have the finances.  And I think it was maybe a couple of classes before me that really, you know, maybe one or two would go out of a class but not very many at all.  And, but once I got maybe to about the tenth or eleventh grade was when they really started pushing it, that, you know, that we needed to go to college.  And we had to get out, and they started looking for ways for us to go.  They would find, you know, loans so that the teachers would work with us to find ways for us to go to college.  So, when I first went in I had no idea I was gonna go to college, when I was like in ninth grade but by the time--and then of course my sister [Glenell Sims Young], who was the truant officer, was pushing also 'cause she said, you know, she said, if mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] and daddy [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] had not decided to help me, that she was gonna do it.  And then she went to college after I did.  So, 'cause she--when she got out of high school, she got married and so she didn't get a chance to go to college until later on.  But she really, she really pushed me.
Story_ID: 628787
Speaker 1: Tell me about the book situation in elementary school [Dunbar Elementary School; Forest City-Dunbar Elementary School, Forest City, North Carolina] and high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina].  Did you have new books or did the books come from the white schools?
Speaker 2: The books came from the white schools especially in elementary schools, they came from the white schools.  So sometimes they were very, very old books.  So you didn't get the up, up-to-date information.  And I'm not sure about high school, but I would imagine pretty much the same thing 'cause segregation was ending although, you know, the '54 [1954] decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  But it was several years before schools actually integrated in a lot of those communities.
Speaker 1: You started working in the library, did you have a library at home even if it was just a set of encyclopedias?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] believed and so we had a, we had a set of encyclopedias there.  We received two to three newspapers, we got The Charlotte Observer, which came out of Charlotte, North Carolina, we got the Spartanburg Herald [Spartanburg Herald-Journal], which came out of Spartanburg, South Carolina.  My hometown [Avondale, North Carolina] is right near the South Carolina line.  Daddy [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] would often bring in the, the Afro [Afro-American Newspapers], we got Ebony, we had Jet and mother had some of the women's magazines like Family Circle and Woman's Day so we had quite a bit of reading material there in the house.
Story_ID: 628788
Speaker 1: Had you decided because you worked in a library that--and there was a need for librarians, as your ninth grade teachers told you, that this would be a career that you would look into?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was why I ended up working with the librarian [at Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina] and, as I say, she started steering me because I guess I was one of the really few students that actually knew that I wanted to be a librarian that early on so she really, really steered me.
Speaker 1: Before that time, what did you think that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: I always thought I wanted to be an airline stewardess.  That was what I saw on television, something I saw on television.  But I thought I would be an airline stewardess, that was sort of what I wanted to be.  But after, after ninth grade, it was basically I knew I was gonna be a librarian.
Story_ID: 628789
Speaker 1: Tell me about extracurricular activities in high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I belonged to I think the glee club.  Again, we didn't do a lot of things especially after school because we were bused, so you couldn't stay after school to do a lot of things.  The boys could because they could play football and stuff and get a ride home.  But girls, you know, kind of kept kind of close so we didn't get a chance to do a lot of extracurricular activities after school.  I was in the typing club and I was a pretty good typist 'cause I went to a couple of the--we used to have typing contests so I went to some of those.  And, again, I, I liked to sew, so I did a lot of sewing.
Speaker 1: And you talked about fashion shows, did you--where did you have fashion shows?
Speaker 2: She would have it at the school, at the end of the school year.  So all of the classes that she had would have, would have a fashion show and everybody would show off the outfits that they made.  So, if you made three outfits, you got to be in the fashion show three times that year.  So she really made it very possible for us.  And she would always put us on the bus, we'd go on the school bus.  There was a, a fabric shop not too far from the high school and she would always--that's where we'd go and get out fabric and patterns and things, all of our sets of things that we would need to sew.  And at that time, most of the sewing machines were pedal machines.  And that's what my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] had for many years, that's really what I sewed on for many years.
Speaker 1: Did you--did your mother make your clothes or were you able to buy clothes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She made, yeah, she made a lot of our clothes, she made a lot of our clothes.  My sister [Glenell Sims Young] often talks about the fact that mother only had one dress herself, that she wore to church on Sunday, a blue dress.  I don't remember that but she said that mother didn't make a lot for herself but she made a, made a lot of things for us.  And because my father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] was a brick mason and a lot of times he worked out of town, he would sometimes work in Virginia or he would sometimes work in--go to Charlotte [North Carolina] and work.  And he would--daddy was the shopper in the family too, so he would buy our clothes.
Speaker 1: Oh, he did?
Speaker 2: Yes, and a lot of--most times he could pick out stuff, and he knew your size.  He could fit you and I was a little on the chubby side, so, you know, he also found a store that, that specialized in clothes for chubby girls.  So that's where he took me every year to get my clothes.  But then he'd also bring me things when, when he shopped.  And he did the grocery shopping, he did all the shopping.  So some of the clothes were made and some were--and then I learned how to sew, so I made clothes for myself, my sister and my mother.
Story_ID: 628790
Speaker 1: Now by the time you are in high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina] your father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.]--you all moved from Avondale [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved when I was about twelve to the house that he built for us.
Speaker 1: And that was where?
Speaker 2: In Henrietta, North Carolina, which is just a little piece over not, not even a mile I would say.
Speaker 1: But this is where your mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] was raised?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where she was raised.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your father bought land.  It's the same land is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but he bought land from my grandfather [Thomas Jeffries] and built the house.  So, when my grandparents were living, they lived right across the--we didn't have a paved road but they lived right across the road from us.
Speaker 1: And tell me about that house?
Speaker 2: The house that he built?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It had four bedrooms, two baths, kitchen and dining room.  We had a very large yard, we had one porch that was open and one screened-in porch.  So, at that time, it was one of the bigger houses in the area.  So people would come to the house to look at it, so we were--people were always stopping by to look at that house.  And then he built a lot of houses in the area, 'cause he used to work with a white contractor.  And so he, he built a lot of the houses.  One other thing about that area too was that people bartered.  They would help each other out, like somebody might come to our house and paint and then daddy might have to--may go over to their house and, you know, if they need some brick work done.  And on Saturdays when daddy was building his house, on Saturdays was when my mother cooked a big dinner because his friends that he knew like from Charlotte [North Carolina], three or four of them would come up on Saturdays and work all day just for a meal.  And that's how they got their houses built.  And then when they built their houses he did the same thing.  So they just worked together.  So no money passed between 'em, they just worked together and got their houses built.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your bedroom?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a, a--at first I had one bed and then my--when we changed over my mother had--we had twin beds in there.  And it was yellow of course (laughter), so just a very nice comfortable house.
Speaker 1: Did you have indoor plumbing at this house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we had indoor plumbing at that house, we had two bathrooms there.
Story_ID: 628791
Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: My sister is the oldest, her name is Mary Glenell [Glenell Sims Young] she's about--almost twelve years older than I am.  And then there was a sister, Marilyn Jean [Marilyn Sims], who was born before her but she passed in infancy.  After that was my brother, Marvin, Jr. [Marvin L. Sims, Jr.], he's ten years older than I am.  And the next one was James [James Sims] who also passed in infancy.  The next brother was Frank [Frank Sims] and he's about eight years older than I am.  And then there a set of twins, Joe [Thomas Sims] and Jewel [Frances Sims]--Frances Jewel and Thomas Joseph, and Jewel passed as an infant.  She was about thirteen months old when she passed.  So three of the--my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] had eight children in all so three of them had passed on.  And I was the baby.
Story_ID: 628792
Speaker 1: Now in high school what year are we in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in--I graduated from high school [Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina] in 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the early '60s [1960s], the late '50s [1950s], tell me what music you're listening to?
Speaker 2: Since my--I had older brothers and sisters, I was listening to people like Little Richard, Fats Domino, 'cause those were the people that they, they were listening to.  And then of course, you know, by the time I came on it was Martha and The Vandellas and people like that.  And of course--then a little bit later on there was of course Motown [Motown Records], Motown was it (laughter).  And we used to--there was a radio station that used to come on at night out of--think it came out of Tennessee called 'Randy's' ['Randy's Record Shop Show'].  And you could get it on the radio about nine or ten o'clock at night, and they played all the black music.
Speaker 1: This is an AM station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an AM station.
Speaker 1: When did your family buy a television?
Speaker 2: I think I might have been about maybe in the third or fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had television for a long time (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, yeah, so we had television.  We had--and of course before that we had radio and a big, what they call Victrola, record player, yes.
Speaker 1: Did your family sit around the radio and listen to soap operas or the fights (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] was the soap opera person so I can remember she used to come from outside, 'cause as I say, she was a washer woman, so especially in the wintertime she would come in and get warm and then, you know, she'd--certain time she'd come in so she could listen to her stories.  And my grandmother [Pearl Hampton Jeffries] was, you know, she listened to the soap operas too.  And of course, you know, at that time they were usually about fifteen minutes long when they first started coming on.  After we got television, I remember on Friday nights was the fights so my brother and I didn't like fights, so daddy [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] and I, we had an agreement that one Friday night he could look at the fights and the next Friday night my brother and I could look at what we wanted to.  So it was a lot, lots of cowboy and Indian [Native American] television shows of course.  And there was a show called 'The Big Circus' that used to come on, on Saturday mornings.  And of course all day long was the cowboy shows so--'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] of course, so that was one of our favorite shows.
Story_ID: 628793
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, uh-huh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who did you go to the prom with?
Speaker 2: The first year--did I go to the--oh, let me see, my senior year I--well, my junior year we, we just really have a senior prom but I--my junior year we were able to go as--to help out.  But my senior year I didn't have a date for the prom.  Yes, I did, I think it was the prom my junior year [at Carver High School, Spindale, North Carolina].  It was the sophomore year we helped out.  I, I can't remember the fellow's name.  But my senior year, I was a senior and my boyfriend was a freshman and he couldn't come so I didn't have a date my senior year.  And we're still friends to this day.
Speaker 1: Is that right, okay.  So now you're preparing to go off to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know what--and you said that your teacher steered you to
Speaker 2: Yes, she steered me to--it was--it's now North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  At that time, it was North Carolina College in Durham [North Carolina College at Durham, Durham, North Carolina].  They had an undergraduate degree, minor in library science.  So the only other school that had library science at that time would have been Atlanta [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I knew my--they weren't gonna let me go out of state so, so she really did steer me to, to North Carolina Central.
Speaker 1: And how did you pay for college?
Speaker 2: At that time, we--they had a loan program called a prospective teachers loan and what would happen, if you stayed in North Carolina and, and taught for a certain number of years, they would cancel the loan.  I ended up not staying so I had to pay mine back but that's how basically I went.  And then my father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] paid for the rest of it.
Story_ID: 628794
Speaker 1: Was this gonna be the first time you were away from home?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, how was the transition [to North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: It was a little hard at first, I was, I was homesick.  I, I called a couple of times and asked to come home, and of course they said, no (laughter). But they came and got me, you know, I'd come home every Thanksgiving and Christmas of course, and Easter so--but it was, it was hard those first, first few weeks 'cause I was really homesick.  But I, you know, but then, you know, after you start making friends, you know, it's like you don't think about going home.  I started going home with my girlfriends after that so--but it was hard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about your first year?
Speaker 2: First year we had--and I stayed on the dorm--in the dorms the whole four years I was there.  And my freshman year we had--I had three--there were three girls in a room.  And one of my girl--one of my roommates was from New Jersey and the other one was from the eastern part of North Carolina so she was a--came from a tobacco farming family.  So we had a, we had a good time.  We got along very well and we used to go out in the hall at night and sometimes sit in the hall and study.  We'd have little study groups and we'd just sit in the hall and--although we had a little study room down in the, in the basement lot of times we'd just meet in the hall and just study.
Story_ID: 628795
Speaker 1: Now, in the early '60s [1960s] civil rights is starting to, to heat up.  Was there any activity on the campus where you were?
Speaker 2: There was some, uh-huh.  More so, later on.  I guess my sophomore and junior year, they used to have demonstrations down in downtown Durham [North Carolina].  Participated a little bit but not a lot, 'cause I was no going to do anything to get thrown out of school.  'Cause I would've been a dead person, so that was just, that was just all it was to it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about any other activities?
Speaker 2: In college [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I didn't do a lot--I tried to study because I, I know I needed to be out of there in the four years.  We did do some things like voter registration drives, things like that I'd go--we'd go out in the community and, and try to register because Durham was always rezoning.  So you'd have to re-register to vote and so I can remember doing that quite a bit.  And I remember one time I had this high school kid with me and they, they'd take you and drop you off in a neighborhood and you just go from door to door and ask people if they would go.  And we went to this house and the lady was sitting on the porch, her husband was doing all the work, her kids were asleep, and her husband was in the house doing the housework so we asked them if they wanted to go.  And so she finally let us in the house and the high school kid was standing behind me but she was fussing.  It was like, "I don't want to do this," la da da da da.  And I told that young man, I said, "Baby, you stand to the side because if this woman gets crazy, I would hate to trample you as I'm running 'cause I will be getting out of here."  But she finally, she went on and we sent her on--car came and picked her up, she went and registered to vote and came back and she was just as nice as she could be after that.  But, trying to get her to go was--but a lot of times people were afraid to--and 'cause sometimes there were retaliations for trying to vote in the south as you--as we all know.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to the student government?
Speaker 2: I wasn't an officer but I did participate in student government.  And I was one of--I can't remember what year I belonged to a couple of--some organizations.  Of course belonged to--we had a home economics club, we had a political science club.  I think I belonged to that, so just small organizations that we would belong to at college.  I didn't join a sorority while I was there, I joined the sorority after I graduated 'cause I knew it would take up too much of my time.  But I enjoyed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you were focused.
Speaker 2: I was focused, I had--I knew I needed to get out of there in that four years (laughter) if I wanted to live.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your major?
Speaker 2: I majored in sociology and I minored in library science and social science.
Story_ID: 628796
Speaker 1: When you're ready to graduate it's 1967 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: After I graduate [from North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I wanted to come to Washington, D.C. and I had two great aunts that were here.  And that was really the only reason I got here because I--even though I was grown, my parents [Hazel Jeffries Sims and Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] were not going to let me go anywhere where I didn't have a place to stay and they didn't know the people.  So luckily my two aunts let me come and live with them, and my brother had lived with them early on when he was in school too.  So, so that was the only way I got to D.C. was because they were here.  So I came and lived with them for a while and found a job.  Trying to remember, my first job I think was at a place called--ooh, what was the name, I can't remember that name of the first job I had but it was basically clerical positions at that time, 'cause basically we still--even though we were college graduates, we really, you know, basically GS-5s [General Schedule] and things, you know, sevens at that time.  So, mainly clerical positions and it was in a library.  Communications Satellite [Communications Satellite Corporation] was my very first job and I worked as a, worked as a clerk in their library.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then from there I worked for the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]--early on I changed jobs quite a bit.  So I went from there to the Library of Congress and there we worked in a division called the card division, and it was a gigantic room with every card of the card catalog, of every book that was ever published.  And what would happen is when you would--when organizations would send in to get library cards for their particular library, there's an order number.  And that's all we did, all we did all day was roll around on these little stools and we'd fill those orders if they didn't have their order number on there for the particular book that they were trying to get a card for, we filled in that number.  So lots of fun, lots of crazy people.  We had--well, we were young, we were young so we just had a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then from there I went to a place called Congressional Quarterly [Congressional Quarterly, Inc.] and I worked in the library there as a clerk.
Story_ID: 628797
Speaker 1: But that was the way I got to graduate school though, was that librarian sit me down one day and says, she said, "You're a smart girl," she said, "but you will not get anywhere without a master's degree."  So she made the appointment for me and put me in her car and took me out to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] to meet with the folk out there and that's where--that's how I got into grad school.
Speaker 2: And what was her name?
Speaker 1: Nancy Smith [ph.], Smith I think it was her last name.  And she was the one that took me out to the, to the University of Maryland.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what were your thoughts as she was telling you that you needed to go back to school?
Speaker 1: I knew what she meant, I, I, I, you know, I had thought about it--had been thinking about it but, at that time, you know, I was interested in buying a car.  And believe it or not--and the University of Maryland was also a school that was under court order to, to, you know, enroll some black students.  And the very day that they called me to tell me that I had been admitted, I was out buying a car, looking for one and getting ready to put my down payment on it.  So, when I got home that evening my roommate said, "You know the University of Maryland called and you, you're in."  And I knew then I had to--I wouldn't be able to buy that car so I called the people and told them I wouldn't be able to get the car.  And, so then I had to start looking for a Volkswagen 'cause--and that's what I ended up buying, a little small Volkswagen that I could get back and forth to school.  Because at that time too, in the library school, you were expected to be a full-time student.  They have very few--this was I will say from '70 [1970] to '72 [1972], they had very few night classes.  So was working at Congressional Quarterly [Congressional Quarterly, Inc.] so they would let me--some days I would go to work, go to school, come back to work.  Some days I'd go to school, go to work, and just do whatever I could do whenever I could fit my classes in.  So, 'cause I, I think we only had maybe about three classes in the nighttime that I--the whole time I was there.  But they would let me--'cause they--then they'd let me work on Saturdays to make up my time at Congressional Quarterly so that was how I ended up getting my master's.
Story_ID: 628798
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the experience going to school at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the University of Maryland? Because that year, again, was when they really had to integrate so there were quite a few of us.  There were a lots of people from D.C. Public Library [District of Columbia Public Library, Washington, D.C.], the main public library there.  There were a lots of people there getting--beginning to get their master's degree too, so it was a lot of black students there at that time.  So, we just had a good time, it was a good experience but I remember when I first came in, the dean of the library school asked me what I wanted to be when I grow up.  And I said, "Dean of Maryland's library school."  And, of course, he was my advisor.  This man did nothing from there on out, he just signed my paper and that was it.  He never talked to me about anything, nothing.  You know, 'cause that was not what I was supposed to have said (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the president of North Carolina University [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] at the time you were there?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Samuel Massie was there for a short time.  I don't remember who was president when I came in, he was, he was president I guess my junior year and senior year probably.
Speaker 1: And who was the president of University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: Now that I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Don't remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Story_ID: 628799
Speaker 1: You attended the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] from what years?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970] to '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: And up until this time, were your instructors black or white?  Had you had any white teachers before this time?
Speaker 2: I think I had maybe one teacher at Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and I think that was my French teacher.  Most of the white teachers that--would, would teach like French or German something like that.  That's the only one I can really remember being white.
Speaker 1: And at the University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: Pretty much all of them were white, there were maybe one or two black instructors at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did that make a difference for you?
Speaker 2: No, because I don't think I had them that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Oh, you had no white teachers?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had any--the two black teachers that were there.  I don't think I had them for a class, if I can remember correctly.  So most of my teachers at Maryland were white.
Speaker 1: Right, so that's what I'm saying to you.  This is your first experience with a white teacher?
Speaker 2: As I say, I think I had in undergrad, I think I had one.
Speaker 1: One.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and then there most of them were white teachers.
Story_ID: 628800
Speaker 1: What activity was going on, on the campus [of the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland]?  The political climate, Vietnam [Vietnam War] is--
Speaker 2: Vietnam, there's Vietnam and we--the students used to protest out on [U.S.] Route 1, which is the main, the main--right in front of the, the--so we always had the National Guard there, were coming in anytime of the day.  So they were on campus quite a bit.  So that I do remember quite well.  'Cause you had to decide how you were going to get off campus because, as I say, they would block the roads and everything so you always had to know a back way to get out of--off campus.
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about the experience there?
Speaker 2: We had a library school library so that's where most of us did our studying in.  And so, or the projects that we had to work on so most of us really worked.  So I didn't have a lot of contact with, with the rest of the campus, other majors or things of that nature 'cause the library school library was right there in the library.  So that's where we were mainly, so I didn't really have to take any classes in other buildings.  So everything was pretty much there, sort of isolated to a certain extent.
Speaker 1: What were some of the projects that you worked on?
Speaker 2: Oh, the one thing that I did that was almost a failure was we had to take a computer class.  And that was when, you know, they still had punch cards and things like that.  Well, I had to take this computer class and almost nobody in the class had ever had--or either even worked with computers.  We had--luckily we had one student and she saved our lives because she's the one that really got with us and made sure that--'cause we used to have to turn in programs.  We, they, they'd give us and we'd have to actually turn a program--we'd have to take it to the computer lab and run it.  And I can remember one day we went to that computer lab, because we got there and this man came--he came out and I, I told him my name and he started calling people from the back.  "That's, that's one of those people from that class," he said they--we put--they ran our programs and cards started flying everywhere.  I don't know what we did but whatever it was, it was wrong.  And, I mean, he, he--they was laughing at us so hard (laughter) but we ended up, we ended up getting out of there because of this one student that actually knew how to program.  And so she taught us how to program and at least get through that class.  But we, we--all in all it was a good time but, again, we tried to help each other because I worked in a--at that time, I was working at Congressional Quarterly [Congressional Quarterly, Inc.] so I knew how to do a lot of the library research to look for articles and things of that nature.  At that time, you had to go get, you know, now you get these little packs when you go (unclear) everything's in there.  But, yeah, at that time you had to go to, you know, you had to go to the library and go up and look for your, your magazine articles and Xerox them and things of that nature.  So I knew how to do a lot of that, so I would help them that way and then they'd help us in other ways.
Story_ID: 628801
Speaker 1: When did you decide that you would--or what was your first article that you wrote?
Speaker 2: I was at--by that time, when I, I came to Moorland-Spingarn Research Center [Washington, D.C.] that's when I first started publishing and that was in seventy, think I came in '74 [1974].  When I got out of library school [at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], I worked at the D.C. Public Library [District of Columbia Public Library, Washington, D.C.] for a while, Martin Luther King Library [Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington, D.C.], and that's how I got started in black studies, because they had a black studies department so I worked there for two years.  And then I came over to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in, in '74 [1974].  And I think my first article came out in 1975.  My supervisor and I did an article on Mary McLeod Bethune, my shero, and she did the actual biography part and I did the, the bibliography part.  So most of my research has been bibliographic research, so, so I did the bibliography she did the actual little bio of her.  And that came out in The Journal of Negro Education.
Speaker 1: So bibliographies--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --that's your specialty?
Speaker 2: --that was my specialty.  Now, since we have computers, that's not really considered that important now because--
Speaker 1: Well, it was important then at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was important then because at that time because it was, you know--I had one of the first--the book I did 'Progress of Afro-American Women' ['The Progress of Afro-American Women: A Selected Bibliography and Resource Guide,' Janet L. Sims] was one of the first large bibliographies on black women.  So people at Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] used to tell me they used to have to keep three or four copies behind the desk because people were always stealing it.  And, you know, because it had a lot of the articles in there that--listing of the articles and books and things that they needed for their research.
Story_ID: 628802
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next, now, you're at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to--came to Moorland-Spingarn [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] in 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Oh, one of the best experiences of my life (laughter). I miss it today.  I was able to do a lot of research, so I was able to do a lot of publishing.  We met some of the most famous folk because almost everybody had to come to Howard if they were doing a book.  So I met people like [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin who's still a good friend today, John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame], Darlene Clark Hine.  Oh, just all the scholars came there to do their research so I, I met them and helped them with their research.  Then a lot of them sent their students after, you know, when--and then some of them were their students like Sharon Harley and [HistoryMaker] Rosalyn Terborg-Penn who were back when the history people--people started sending their students to us when they started teaching so, you know, sometimes I may have had three generations of, of students from this one teacher.  They would send their students and that student would next send their students.  So, almost everybody had to come to Moorland-Spingarn.
Speaker 1: Tell us some stories about some of the people that you have met or some of the research that you have done?
Speaker 2: Oh, my area was, ended up being black women's history and that was at a time when it was really just getting started.  So people like Darlene Clark Hine who was doing research in black women's history, Bettye Collier-Thomas who ended up being--she was in charge of the Bethune archives [National Archives for Black Women's History] which was a black women's history collection there in Washington [D.C.].  In fact, was in Bethune's first house there in, in Washington, D.C.  And she was one of the people that really would refer people to me 'cause they were calling, you know, people were always calling around trying to get you to come to conferences or do papers, you know.  And a lot of times when she couldn't go, she would tell them to call me and then that's basically how I got started really on this circuit of, of going doing conferences and doing a lot of traveling, giving presentations and stuff.  So when Sharon Harley--Sharon was working on her dissertation when I was doing one of my--I guess the black women book ['The Progress of Afro-American Women: A Selected Bibliography and Resource Guide,' Janet L. Sims], the first one I did bibliography, and she used to let me come 'cause she had a desk at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] at that time.  Now you can't go in the stacks and have--but they would let the people that were doing research have desks and she would let me come to her desk 'cause she had a typewriter there and I could come and do research at her desk.  And she shared a lot of her information with me that she was doing 'cause she was doing her dissertation on black women.  So, I just had a, had a--it was a wonderful experience.  We ended--of course we had people coming from everywhere.  I--one year I had to mentor a lady that came from India, who was doing research in black women's history.  She was an English professor, so her book although it was (laughter)--and the--and although the material might have been in their language, they would always give me a thank you and that would be in English so I could see that.  So they would always send copies back and let me know that they appreciated what we did for 'em.  And I had a young lady that used to come from, from Japan almost every two or three years.  And while she was there she would buy up a lot of books so I always made sure I got her to all of the bookstores in the area and especially the ones that specialized in black women's history so that she could get her research.  So the books that she could send back to her home in order to do research.
Story_ID: 628803
Speaker 1: And then also, I became part of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History [ASALH].  I think I joined in the '70s [1970s] right after I, I came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So I started going to their conference pretty much every year.  I think, of all these years, I may have missed three conferences since the '70s [1970s].  And of course that was Carter G. Woodson's organization, and I was elected to the executive council in the '80s [1980s] and then I also served as the national secretary couple of times and I just came out as national vice president for membership in December.  So, I'm still very, very active with, with the association and go to their conference every year.  And that's gonna--and that's where I go now, you know, that's where we all would come every year to meet each other again because everybody was, you know, moving around.  Teachers especially move around and so that's the one place we could all meet every year and see each other.  And so, I, I've had friendships with, with that--with people from that organization for--today.  So it's just--
Speaker 2: And, and who are some of the people involved in--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was very active with them.  Again, John Blassingame [John W. Blassingame], or there were just so many people.  It's too many people to remember.
Speaker 2: Well, tell me the, the purpose of the organization?
Speaker 1: It's a history organization that's to study African American history, so it encompassed every--almost every field so whatever field you were working in, you know, you were always welcome.  And, you know, Carter G. Woodson also had a, a publishing company called Associated Publishers, and I was an officer with that group as well.  But we, we were part of the association and of course, you know, in the early days, people weren't buying black books.  So, he was one of the--or publishing them--so he was publishing black history books.  And what they would do is they would put the books in the back of their car and head south, and they'd sell the books out of their trunk, because they was--the bookstores would not take their books.  So people like Lorenzo Greene, oh, just so many people that, that were really very active in the--Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], most of the history folk they were just--that was their organization especially.
Speaker 2: And tell me about the conference.  I know the last--the nickname is ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History].
Speaker 1: ASALH, yes.  We meet in a different city every year.  We try to meet in a city where we have chapters or, if not, we'll try to start a chapter there.  So we try to go around to different parts of the country so that its, you know, 'cause like people from the West, we don't go west very often but we try to go there some because sometimes people from the West Coast can't get to the East Coast for a conference.  So we try to, to go around to the different cities and have our conference there.  And we have people that come and give presentations on their research, so we will sometimes have a big scholar there that's, that's doing something.  And then sometimes we'll have--a lot of times--and it's, it's a real avenue for the junior scholars to come and start doing, you know, presentations and getting comfortable doing research.  One of the things that I would do with the students at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] is, at the conference, I would try to find an outside instructor from another school that was in their field and introduce them.  So I said, "Because when you work on your dissertation, this may be the outside person that you can use as, as--on, on your dissertation committee."  So we try to connect people with each other, and also try to connect them with the other universities of organizations like Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], for instance, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  They all had black history collections so, you know, I try to hook the kids up with the--with people that--in those particular libraries as well so that, you know, when you go to another city and need to do research, you know, you'll have a connection.  Teachers used to call me from out of town and say, "I'm sending my students there, look out for them."  So they would come, come to Moorland-Spingarn [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] and we would, we would just like we would do for the Howard students.  We helped them just like we helped everybody else.
Story_ID: 628804
Speaker 1: 'Cause it was basically--what we would try to do is get the correct information out there, because once it is in writing and it's wrong, it is almost impossible to get it corrected.  For one instance is Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] and the blood plasma, the story has always been that when Charles Drew had the accident in North Carolina they were on their way to a conference.  And it was about three or four guys with them, and although--so 'cause he developed blood plasma.  Well, when he--the story went that when they took him to the hospital they would not give him blood.  But that was not the true story.  He was so--he was hurt so badly that there was nothing they could do for him once they got him to the hospital.  And the, the other three gentlemen that was in the car have said that, but it's in writing and that's the story that gets told over and over.  So that's one of the things that we try to instill in students as you're doing this research that it has to be correct.  And we have to tell the story the way it happened.  And the only way we can do that is we get this information out there to the public, so to try to make sure it doesn't go in wrong to begin with.
Speaker 2: But once it is wrong, how do you correct this story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's hard to correct, again, I still, I still have people today come up and ask me that story.  His daughter, [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, she's come on television, she's--they've been on--the guys that were in the car with him, they have them on tape saying that, you know, but once it gets written and unless you see this yourself, you don't know.  So you just, you know, a student will just basically is going to go to a library and look up some information, and what's written there is what they, what they gonna say, you know.  And I think that's why today people have such a problem with the, the Wikipedia that they get off the Internet, because anyone can go in there and, and change things or say whatever.  And a lot of the information is incorrect.  So, and, and once again, once the kids see it and write it, that, that's, that's the story.
Speaker 2: True, I know that that's one website in college they tell you, you cannot use when you're writing a paper (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, yes.
Story_ID: 628805
Speaker 1: It's very interesting that you would tell that story about Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew].  Are there any other tidbits that we should know (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, Lord, I guess there's so many, you, you learn so much.  Somebody asked me one time would I do anything else other than, than African American history and I said, no.  I said, because we have just touched the tip of the iceberg with what we know.  There's so much out here and so many people that have not been--have research been done on them.  And that's one of the things we also try to tell the students, because when they come in of course they wanna do research on people or topics that, that there's a lot of information so you don't have to look so far.  But what we try to encourage them to do is to look at some of the people that have not been--there's not a lot of information on and have not been researched that much so that we can put some new information out there.  So we try to introduce them to new people and, and other topics that they can, that they can research.  And I say, well you know, plus you know, your teacher is gonna really think highly of you if you, you know, do a topic that there's not a lot of research and you went out of your way to get all this information.  So, so that's how we usually try to do it.  But a lot of times they just wanna do the, you know, the famous people, Booker T. Washington, you know, slavery, Zora Neale Hurston or whatever.
Speaker 1: What topics need to have more research do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, although we've done quite a bit in literature, I think literature is a stem area that we don't know a lot a--and the sciences especially because we do not know a lot about blacks in the sciences.  I think that's really one of the critical areas that we, we don't have a lot of information on.  So that's, that's one area I try to encourage people to go into, but because the sciences is, is different.  It's not the humanities so it's hard--we don't a lot of times, don't see the science students in there trying to do the research.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, that's another problem trying to do for the areas that haven't been--it's more stuff done in humanities than anything else because the history folk, you know, they, they usually send their, their students to us so they have to come.
Story_ID: 628806
Speaker 1: So you have written how many books, book length bibliographies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have six book length bibliographies out.
Speaker 1: Okay, and usually when you write newspaper articles or chapters in books, what were they about?
Speaker 2: As I say, most of my research has been done on black women's history, so, I worked a lot with [HistoryMaker] Jessie Carney Smith who did a couple of books on notable black American women.  So I would do a chapter on a black woman for her--two or three chapters in her books for--on black women.  So I, you know, she'd give me who she wanted me to research and I would try to research those people.  And sometimes that meant going somewhere else and doing research on these people other than--so, you know, one library doesn't have it all and that's another thing I try to tell people.  So that's why you need to know the people in the other libraries, because at some point you may have to go there and do some research too.  We don't have it all, we have a lot but not all.
Speaker 1: Does it help that you are a librarian to go to other libraries?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--the one thing that I also tell students is once you know how to do research--and that's why we try to teach you how to do it, and, because once you know it, you can go into any library and do research.  The rules and regulations might be a little bit different in one library as opposed to another, but once you know how to do research, you know how to do it.  So that--and now you don't--because Moorland [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] also had a primary collection, you know, of documents from organizations and people trying to teach the kids how to do, to do research in primary documents as well so that, you know, like letters and things of that nature, that would be in our collection.
Speaker 1: So, now, from 1975 until when do you stay--
Speaker 2: I was there from '74 [1974] 'til I retired in 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was there for thirty, thirty-one years.  And lots of things went on in between.
Story_ID: 628807
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's go back to 1975 or in that era, because you--women's, black women's history was your main focus but you did some other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did some things.  One of my--and I didn't know this gentleman at North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], Lenwood Davis [Lenwood G. Davis], was also doing bibliographic research so I saw a couple of his bibliographies and wrote him and asked him if I could do some with him, and he said yes.  So he and I did about three or four books together--bibliographies that we published together.  We did one on Marcus Garvey, we did one on the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].
Speaker 1: How interesting was that?
Speaker 2: It was very interesting because we found out a lot of information about the Klan.
Speaker 1: Tell me some information that we wouldn't know?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's too much you don't know, you know, the Klan, you know, basically they, they, you know, rode through the neighborhoods and burnt crosses and lynched people, and, and things of that nature.  So, one of the things when I was working my director said to me one day, he said, "Now, they're not gonna come looking for you, are they?"  I said, "I don't think so but--," (laughter) but that was one of the organizations that was, that was suppressing blacks and they're still in existence today.  So, they just do it a little differently, don't, don't go out and burn crosses like they used to.  They do it other ways.  But it was a, you know, they--and that was one of the things they had people very, very afraid during the, during the, you know, when the Klan was very, very active.  You know, they would just, just come and burn down your house and kill you and whatever, you know, especially if you were as they called, trying to be uppity something like that.  If you were trying to get people to register to vote or if you were trying to get some rights for black people.  So, it was an organization of intimidation, you know, they, they intimidated you not to act.
Story_ID: 628808
Speaker 1: What topic or what was the most interesting for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, I guess during the latter years right before I retired was Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], that was the last thing that I was really working on and really worked hard.  But for my dissertation, I did black women--an oral history of black women who were in the Women's Army Corps [WAC] during World War II [WWII].  Fascinating folk, fascinating women.  What I tried to do--there were two--I ended up doing four for my dissertation but there were two that were here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and what I tried to do was I had 'em on radio.  ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] met here one year so I had three of my four people at the conference to talk.
Speaker 1: Who were your people?
Speaker 2: Dovey Roundtree [Dovey Johnson Roundtree] was one, she was a recruiter and she had been a minister at my former church.  And she was also a lawyer in D.C.  Martha Putney [Martha Settle Putney] was a history professor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Charity Adams Earley was their commander and she was out of Dayton, Ohio.  And there was another lady named Clementine Skinner out of Chicago [Illinois] who was in the WAC band and she was one of the people that I did not know was a WAC.  One year ASALH met in Dayton, Ohio and I asked Charity Adams Earley, who had just published a book, to come over because we have a group called the Association of Black Women Historians so I invited her to the luncheon and told her to bring some copies of her book, you know, so she could sell.  And we were sitting out there in the hall and Clementine comes down the hall and hollers out, "There's my commander!"  And I said, "Clementine you were in the, in the Women's Army Corps?"  She says, "Yes I was in the WAC band."  And so she ended up being my fourth person that I interviewed and what I did was something what we do for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is their whole life, because the [U.S.] military was just three to four years of their life.  So I had them to talk about from childhood on.  And then, at the time I was doing my dissertation, it was the fiftieth anniversary--coming up on the fiftieth anniversary of World War II so that was why I was taking them out and letting them, you know, have things for them to participate in things.  So it was just--there was a lot going on at that time so around that.  And Martha Putney, as I said, when we were doing the ASALH conferences for three years we did World War II as a theme.  And so she went to all three of those conferences with us.  And we had--would have a teachers workshop, and so we'd bring teachers from whatever community we were in, would come in for an all day workshop.  So she was one of the speakers.  And it was, and, you know really, it was--people would be in awe because a lot a times people didn't even know about the Tuskegee Airmen that much.  But they were really in awe about these black women that--'cause they had no idea that there were black women in World War II.  So they was--oh, they were just the fascinating ladies so we would follow them around.  I met a lady out of New York, out of Buffalo who just happened to come on campus and somebody sent her to me because I was doing women's history.  And when she came over there she told me she was doing--she's a military sociologist.  And what she was trying to do, she was doing current people but she wanted to go back and get the history.  So she and I hooked up together and she was a, a consultant on my dissertation.  She and hooked up together and would go to the WAC conventions, anywhere the WACs would be we would try to be there to try to talk to them and interview them.  So she and I went to several places where the WACs were and we'd get their stories.  But, again as I say, since I wanted my dissertation to be under three hundred pages, I only ended up doing four of the people for the actual dissertation.  But some of those ladies, I'm still in contact now like I just took Martha Putney to a--one of the WACs passed and I took her to the funeral here about a month ago.  So still stay in contact.  Two of my--the WACs that I used who had passed on, Charity Adams and Clementine Skinner.  And Dovey Roundtree lives in Charlotte [North Carolina] and I try to see her when I can, when I get home.
Story_ID: 628809
Speaker 1: You talk about your dissertation, when did you decide to go for your Ph.D. (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I was going to wait until after I retired to--'cause, you know, because, see, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] we were not faculty so we were basically staff.  And it wouldn't a made any difference so as salary or anything.  Any of the publications, none of that made any difference because it wasn't part of what I was supposed to have been doing.  So, oh, I'll just wait until I'm, you know, 'til I finish and that'll be something I'll do in retirement.  And one of my girlfriends and we were talking--one of my SAGE [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women] friends that I met through SAGE, told me one day, she said, "Janet [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood], why don't you just go ahead and apply and, and, and go on and do it."  And so I just stepped out on faith and applied.  And so I, I got in.  I went to Union Institute [Union Institute and University, Cincinnati, Ohio] which is a non-traditional college but I basically did what you would do as a--I took all the courses and things of that nature and--but I was able to do a few other little things.  Like I published a, a black WAC [Women's Army Corps] calendar.  I had a little small publishing company [Afro Resources] at one time in my career, only published two things.  I used to call it the one book publishing company but I did get a (laughter) I did get a, a calendar out of there too.  But, so, I was able to do stuff like that.  And one of the things I did in the dissertation, 'cause my, my advisor said, you know, "Your footnotes are almost as interesting as these interviews."  'Cause I really tried--being, being in oral history, you really have to document what's being said so I really had to document what these ladies said, and go back and find some research to say that this, this actually happened.  'Cause I always tell the students I said, "You--we have to prove we were there."  And one lady I wanted to use had--that had been in for twenty years, I could not use her because I could not document it.  And, 'cause she stayed in for--after--way after World War II [WWII].  She was a photographer for during World War II, and one of her jobs was photographing the dead folk--the dead soldiers.  After World War II, she was in intelligence.  So, I just couldn't use her 'cause I couldn't document some of that material.
Story_ID: 628810
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the World War II [WWII] women so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  As I say, one of the women that I wanted to use had been in twenty years and unfortunately I couldn't document what she said--a lot of things what she said.  During the World War II she was a photographer and she took pictures of the dead soldiers and things.  I could document most of that.  It was after World War II I could not document, because she was in intelligence.  And part of it was the fact that because I wasn't a military person myself, like for instance, the lady that was traveling with me, Brenda Moore [Brenda L. Moore] from New York, the military sociologist, had been in the [U.S.] military.  She told her a few things that she didn't tell me as far as intelligence was concerned.  She did tell me that they had to memorize everything 'cause they--the enemy--in case the enemy found anything written on paper, so they had to memorize everything.  So--and she was very paranoid, she was very, very paranoid.  Even after she came out of the military.  First of all, she'd been in so long that she couldn't live in the regular society because people didn't give her the respect and everything that, you know, that you get in the military.  And then she was just, she was just paranoid.  She thought that, that they followed her around for many years.  That the government followed her, so she was very, very paranoid.  And so she ended up, when she came out she lived in California for a while, but then she moved back to Arizona near Fort Huachuca, where most of the women were trained, and built a house right there.  'Cause most of the people that were in that community were retired military people so she was used to that environment.
Story_ID: 628811
Speaker 1: Most of the women, getting back to the [U.S.] military, a lot of the women--most of the women were trained at Fort Huachuca, Arizona or either Des Moines, Iowa, Fort Des Moines, Iowa [Fort Des Moines Provisional Army Officer Training School].  And a lot of times they did not get to go anyplace else because there was nobody calling for them.  The military personnel would have like, for instance, they wanted to go overseas and nobody would call for them to come overseas.  The commander would have to call for a group of black women to come overseas to do such--or wherever they wanted to go.  Well, the commanders were not calling for black women, so most of them stayed basically in that one place and that's why they came up with this additional for them.  Because, as I say, that had to do, had to do something with them so they just, you know, so--and they were the best marchers in the world because a lot of times they never left that.  And that's what they did, they marched a lot.  So they always won the marching competitions when they, when they would have the competitions and things like that.  Now, one group did go overseas, it was during--right at the end of World War II [WWII].  Charity Adams [Charity Adams Earley] took a group of--they were postal workers.  Because of the Battle of the Budge [sic. Battle of the Bulge] and the fact that the, the mail had stopped basically, so that was what they went over to do, was to get this mail out.  And one of the ladies that I didn't use that went over there, she talked about there was this big room and she said there was everything in there that was like, it was rotting food, you know, clothing, everything because, you know, Aunt Jennie would send you a cake or, you know, grandma would send you some cookies, and everything was stalled so it couldn't move.  So she said they had to wear special clothing, waterproof clothing and went in this building and just had to sort through all of that mail, you know, rotten food and all.  And what they would do, they would try to find something, 'cause they had the mailing list for everybody in the military wherever they were overseas, they had them.  So what they would try to do is, if they had a box, let's say, that came from Indiana, well, they would look on the inside and if they couldn't find, you know, they'd try to find a newspaper 'cause lot of times you pack stuff with newspaper.  Okay, well, this person is ended up from Indiana, and then they'd try to find the name.  And so, but, they basically got that mail out and it was in record time.  They got all kinds of awards and everything.  So, I mean, fascinating women, fascinating women.
Story_ID: 628812
Speaker 1: Dovey Roundtree [Dovey Johnson Roundtree], for instance, was a recruiter.  One of the questions I asked Dovey was about--I asked all of 'em, I had general questions that I asked everybody.  But one of the questions that I asked was, because this was the [U.S.] military and I know they--and they test you and put you in a certain place that's where you'd be.  Well, I say, "Were you ever able to do--ask them for another assignment or something like that, or once they tested you, did you have to stay in the--wherever they put you?"  And she said, "Well, I was put the transportation department," and she said, "I went to them and told them that I thought I was more intellectual than that and that I thought I, you know, and on top of that I can't drive."  But you see, you know, that didn't matter because they were gonna teach you how to drive.  Most of those ladies couldn't drive when they went in, but they told her that, "Since you like to talk so much, we're going to make you a recruiter."  So that's what she became, she was a recruiter and went around the country recruiting students.  Especially--and she got a chance to go back to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], where she graduated, and she did some recruiting there.  So, she recruited all over the country.  And one of the things that Dovey also told me, when she was in undergraduate school, 'cause all the WACs [Women's Army Corps] that went in, the very first group were officer candidates.  They had to go in as officer--and they had to be college graduates because they were gonna train the rest of the folk that came in.  So she was a college graduate, but she said when she was at Spelman she--her grandmother knew Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] and so--but she was gonna have to come out because she didn't have any money.  And she was out there on the campus one day crying, and this white teacher came by and asked her what was wrong.  And she told her, she said, "I have to leave, I have no money."  And the lady told her to--, "Meet me at the, the bursar's office the next morning."  And that lady came and paid the rest of her college education.  And she said while she was in the military she put funds away to come back and repay that lady.  And she was one of the few people that repaid her.  So they had, they had all kinds of stories that they told.
Story_ID: 628813
Speaker 1: Martha Putney [Martha Settle Putney] talks about being on a troop train and one time she was on a troop train where she was the only black on the train.  And nightfall came and they tried to figure out where is this woman going to sleep.  So, you know, you can, you can tell when people are talking about you.  She said they were all standing in a group and they were talking and then they'd turn their heads and look back at her, you know, and they--so she knew they were talking about her.  And so, what happened they ended up putting her in a private room and having her meals sent to her so she wouldn't eat with the rest of the, rest of the troop women on the train.  So, basically, when they first went in it was very much segregated.  They had their own unit, they ate together, they--everything they did, they did together.  By the time, by the time Martha got there though, they were beginning to have--be in the same barracks 'cause she did have an incident where a white lady did not want to be in the same barracks with her.  And, of course, they--the, the personnel straightened her out so--but they tell so many fascinating stories.  It's, you know, just, just things that happened to them because they were, you know, you were supposed to be protected by the military but in certain instances you were not.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they still had to deal with the discrimination.  And one of the reasons that--of course most of them went in, the men and the women, was because they were looking for, you know, they wanted to be citizens, good citizens.  But unfortunately they sometimes got treated better overseas than they did here.  And when they came back they still could not get jobs and things.  So, they still had a, had a problem but they really wanted to show that they were citizens.  And one of the things that--when I would have them with me or when I would do presentations, especially if I--and to students.  One thing that students ask me but they wouldn't ask them, was: "Why would you want to go into something that people--where you were not wanted?"  So I would have to explain the, the circumstances of that particular time period, the economic time period.  So that gave me a little time to teach them a little bit of a lesson.  And but, when they were there, if one of them was there, that was never a question that they asked them.  "Why would you go [into the Women's Army Corps]?"  And I think it was out of respect because they just, you know, that gives a question--'cause they were so proud of the fact that they had been in.  So they, they were really, they were fascinating ladies.
Story_ID: 628814
Speaker 1: So what year did you receive your Ph.D. [from Union Institute and University, Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].  And we probably need to go back a little bit because between that time before then I was one of the founding editors of SAGE, scholarly journal of black women [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women], which started in 1984 to '94 [1994] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-four [1994]. Okay, tell me about why you founded the SAGE?
Speaker 2: The same lady that told me about going to grad school, her name is Ruby Sales [HistoryMaker Ruby Nell Sales], Pat Bell-Scott [Patricia Bell Scott] and [HistoryMaker] Beverly Guy-Sheftall were talking about starting this journal.  And so finally Ruby said to them, she said, "Just go ahead and start this journal, start it."  So they also recruited Jackie Royster [Jacqueline Jones Royster] who was also--was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and Beverly was at Spelman.  At that time, Pat was at University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut].  So they also called me 'cause Pat knew me very well.
Speaker 1: Pat who?
Speaker 2: Pat Bell Scott.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She knew me very well so she called and asked if I would be a part of the founding group of editors that started SAGE.  So we--the--our first meeting--most of our meetings early on were at Beverly's house, Beverly Guy-Sheftall's house in Atlanta [Georgia], that's where we, we'd sit up all night working on this journal.  And the first issue--we did theme issues and the first--this year was on women and education.  So from there on out we just did theme issues and, and--one of the things that I, I'm very proud of is that we got--because we were a referee journal, a lot of junior faculty were able to get published in SAGE and that counted toward them getting tenure at their schools.
Speaker 1: What is a referee journal?
Speaker 2: A referee journal is a journal that is reviewed by the--by your peers and so by other scholars in the field.  So, usually it'll say journal of such and such of whatever.  And, as opposed to say, a magazine article or something coming out yet you wrote something in Time magazine or something like that, so would, you know, would be just a regular magazine.  So, yeah, it was a referee journal and that's what one of the things that counted toward your getting tenure if you were trying as a faculty member.  So and, Pat especially did a lot of the editing, trying to help, you know, we'd--trying to help, you know, if the writing, if we needed, we need to beef up the writing a little bit, we gave them information and, and tried to help them get, get the publication up to where it would, would, would pass muster as far as being a--getting in a referee journal.  So did a lot to try help junior scholars get published, and fascinating experience.  We went to a lot of colleges and campuses and things, and gave--we did papers and things at conferences promoting SAGE trying to get people to, to, to write for SAGE, you know.  Got quite a bit of, of support and Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] came on board as the president of Spelman during that time.  And so she was very, very supportive of us because basically we were coming out of Spelman.  So a very, very supportive woman to, to us.  And we did two issues of the journal of black mother daughter relationships and that ended up--we ended up doing a book, an edited book.  We took several of those articles and made it a book called 'Double Stitch' ['Double Stitch: Black Women Write about Mothers and Daughters,' ed. Patricia Bell Scott] about black mother daughter relationships.  And that came out both as a hardback and a paperback.  And, again, we got a--Johnnetta gave us--Johnnetta Cole gave us a large book party at Spelman when the book came out.  So, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, for instance went on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] and read excerpts from it when it came out.  So, got quite a bit of, of publicity.
Story_ID: 628815
Speaker 1: One of the other projects I worked on probably in the late '90s [1990s] was--it was a doll project.  I don't know if you've ever heard of a company called the--a doll called American Girl dolls.  They are dolls that are put out by the Pleasant Company, but they are sort of historical dolls; it's really historical fiction.  So it's a doll, it's a book series and it's also all the clothing, artifacts, everything.  So each--the doll that we did was called Addy [Addy Walker] and it was a doll that was born in slavery and soon came out and her family migrated to the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area when they, when they escaped from slavery.  So, we had to have people on the committee because everything that even--it's historical fiction so its fiction but it's also historical.  So every artifact that, that came out with that had to be correct for that particular time period.  I don't care if it was a birdcage, a student desk, a lunch pail, whatever, it had to be authentic for that particular period.  So we had about three museum specialists that dealt in black history.  We had one lady that was--her area was just slave children.  Mine was black women's history and then--trying to think, there was another one or two people there and I can't remember what they did but the lady [Pleasant Rowland] that owns Pleasant, the company, is filthy rich so she could hire the, the very best folk.  And that's what she did, she tried to get people that knew whatever time period you were working--they were working with whatever doll they were doing, because we--there were stories that went with it.  Like there might have been a birthday party so, you know, you, you--everything would--that would have to be authentic.  The child--if the child went to school, the school desk, everything had to be authentic.  So, that was what we, we did and she paid us very well.  The doll came out and, and she gave us all--I was only going to be able to buy the school desk 'cause I like education so much, I was gonna buy Addy's school desk but she gave us the whole collection.  All the clothes that went with it, everything.  So, we, we just had a wonderful time.  One of the things that happened and why it was important to have people that knew what they were doing, when Addy escaped from slavery with her family, they left a baby behind.  And the reason that 'cause they left this baby was because, you know, a baby cries.  So they were afraid, you know, that if we take this baby with us, it's gonna, you know, we're gonna get caught because he's gonna cry.  So they left the baby with, with one of the relatives.  And we'd gotten all through this storyline and was getting to the end of the series, and my friend that does the slave children, she says, she said to me one day, she said, "Janet [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood], how do you feel about this baby?  What are you thinking about this baby?"  And I said, "You know, I wish there was some way that we could, you know, we could get this in this story that, you know, they go back and, and find this baby."  And she said, "Well, you know, that did happen."  She said, "A lot of times when people came out of slavery they put ads in newspapers, they all--sometimes went back to try to find their family that they left behind, and many times they didn't but sometimes they did."  So we asked the, the person that was writing the story if we could write it in that, that Addy's family would go back south and find this, this child.  And they--and that's--so that's one of the things that we wrote into that.  'Cause it was just so important that, that we reunite this family.  So, it was--but, you know, there were also some controversy because when it's historical but it's also fiction, so you sort of put a little fiction in there.  But people will get very upset because--, "It--well, that really didn't happen that way."  But basic- say okay, now, remember this is, is although it's history it's also fiction, historical fiction.  So we got a little bit of controversy behind it sometimes, but it turned out to be a very, very good project.
Story_ID: 628816
Speaker 1: So, you talked about your small publishing company, what was the name of your--the company (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was called Afro Resources, and I did one small book on the psychology and mental health of African American women ['The Psychology and Mental Health of Afro-American Women: A Selected Bibliography,' Glenell S. Young and Janet Sims-Wood].  My sister [Glenell Sims Young] and I did it; she was a psychologist.  And, of course, it was not enough money to keep a little publishing company going.  So I really did--that's the only thing I was able to publish but--and that came out I guess in the '80s [1980s].  But then in '93 [1993] I did get out one other thing and that was I did a black WAC [Women's Army Corps] calendar.  Some of those pictures that I had gotten as I was doing my research I started developing a slide presentation and some of those photos that I used, I did a calendar with some of those photos in it.  So that was the other publication from my little small publishing company.  One of the things about doing that slide presentation that was--getting those photos that was the way I got Charity Adams [Charity Adams Earley] to come on board to let me interview her.  'Cause I had to go to her house in Dayton [Ohio] three times before she said yes.  And the last time I went to her--to see her I took--I had gotten photographs from National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration], I'd gotten some from them.  There was a WAC museum down in Anniston, Alabama [Edith Nourse Rogers Museum, Fort McClellan, Alabama], and I got some from Moorland-Spingarn [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.].  And so I took those photos with me and I sat down with her in her living room and had her explain those photos to me.  And of course a lot of the photos were propaganda photos, they were sort of staged photos like women working on the trucks and things.  'Cause there was a, a transportation school that the women went to some of them.  So, some of those pictures were staged but she did explain those, those pictures and what was going on in those pictures.  So, finally, I think she realized that I was serious and so she decided to come on board and let me interview her.  So those pictures really came--and that became a part of--I'm part of the Maryland Humanities Council speakers bureau, and that's one of the things that I do is that particular presentation on black women in the [U.S.] military.  So I go--I--what we do as far as the humanities council, we go into different communities--somebody would invite us a church or a school, rec [recreation] center or something will invite us to come and do a presentation and the humanities council would pay, pay for that.  So, in fact, I will be in Des Moines [Iowa] next month at the, at the army museum out there giving that presentation.
Story_ID: 628817
Speaker 1: You talked about reference journals, what other reference journals are there?
Speaker 2: As far as black history, there are quite a few now.  The two that--Journal of Negro History [The Journal of Negro History], which is now The Journal of African American History, that was one of the ones that was put out by the association, ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History].  There's Journal of Black Studies now, there's, oh, all kinds of journals out there now.  But early on there weren't, weren't that many.  Journal of Negro History was one, Journal of Negro Education [The Journal of Negro Education] was another, Journal of Negro Education came out of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So there were quite a few, it's just a few referee--what they call referee journals that, you know, that they considered that you could use for getting your tenure.
Story_ID: 628818
Speaker 1: Speakers bureau, one of the topics you said, what other topics do you talk about?
Speaker 2: For the humanities council [Maryland Humanities Council], one of the things that I did, as I say, as I was ending my career at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], was the fiftieth anniversary of Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was coming up 2004.  And so, that was the theme for the association for that year that was out, and we always put out a--we used to call it black history kit but we now call it a learning resource manual.  So, I was one of the editors of that particular for the 2004.  And one of the things I did was I got, you know, some, you know, people to get--to do articles.  I tried to do an article--have something in there on each 'cause it was five cases, which a lot of people don't know that there were five cases.  So I had somebody to do something on each of the five cases.  I also tried to do some things, some things for elementary school kids, I had one of my elementary school friends to do a little something on Linda Brown who was the, the Brown vs. Board of Education for the one, for Kansas.  I did two interviews in there 'cause we had a, we had a disc that came out with it, a CD and the two people that I interviewed was [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, Dr. John Franklin, Hope Franklin.  John Hope Franklin during that time was teaching at--I think he was at Central [North Carolina College for Negroes; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] I think at that time.  And Thurgood Marshall called him because they needed a historian to analyze their Fourteenth Amendment, so that, that was one of things they were going to take to court.  So he came on board and worked with Thurgood Marshall, he'd go up to New York [New York] he said, probably maybe once a week.  And he talked about how--Thurgood Marshall was a workaholic.  So, about--he said about midnight, Thurgood would say, "Okay, let's go get some dinner and come back."  So, he said, he'd walk on out with them and go get dinner and he would head on to his hotel while they came back to work.  He said, because he--Thurgood could work you all night long.  So, and I interviewed Dovey Roundtree [Dovey Johnson Roundtree] who was one of my WACs [Women's Army Corps] but she was also one of the people that was--that became a lawyer and was here in the Washington, D.C. area, and was in the courtroom the day when the decision came down.  They--it was somebody at the court that day and said called over to her officer said the decision is coming down.  So she and Walter Leonard [HistoryMaker Walter J. Leonard], who was former president of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], got in a cab and went down to the courtroom, and so they heard the decision that separate but is not equal.  So fascinating people.  One of things I also did with that, they had a Brown commission and they were to go around to each of the communities that, you know, talk--do programs and things of that nature.  So I hooked up with them and was able to travel with them to some of the places that they went.  So I was able to go to--with them to South Carolina when they met there.  I missed Delaware, I was sick that day but I did get to Delaware for one of their conferences and met the one lady--there were two ladies from Delaware and one was still living at the time we did this conference.  Delaware State did this conference in April, the woman died in May.  So just got that brief moment to--and they just found the woman.  So they didn't even know where she was, so, you know, we were briefly able to get her story on tape.
Story_ID: 628819
Speaker 1: But South Carolina was, was interesting because South Carolina basically is almost still pretty much like it was.  But there were two brothers, the De Laine brothers [HistoryMaker Joseph A. De Laine, Jr. and HistoryMaker B. B. De Laine], and their father [Joseph A. De Laine, Sr.] was the minister.  He wasn't part of the case but he was helping the people in the community with the case and their house was burned down, he was run out of town so he lived most of his life--the father lived most of his life in New York.  And only got to come back south, because there was a warrant out on him.  What happened he was--when they came and shot at his church he shot back and that's a no-no.  So they had to get him out of town fast.  And he was only able to come back, you know, under the cover of darkness.  So, but they burned his house down and the story that they tell is that the fire department came and the fire department told them that, "Oh, this is right outside our jurisdiction."  And so they stood there with the family and watched the house burn.  I mean, stories that they--I mean it was something, it was something else.  But one of the, the De Laines, they have a little foundation down there now in South Carolina [Briggs-De Laine-Pearson Foundation, Summerton, South Carolina] and they were having one of their reunions so I went to that.  And since I was there, and there was a gentleman there from Education Week, there was a film crew there doing the story on them.  So he decided to call some of the community folk in to talk about the case and most of these were the children of the families that, that signed the petition, because what happened when the families signed the petition, most of them were fired from their jobs and everything so lot of them had to leave town or had to send their children away somewhere else so they could be educated.  So they, I mean, it's a really hard time.  And so we were meeting there this Saturday and, and people were telling their stories.  And one of the things I did notice--I had a friend that was in the [U.S.] military when I was doing the military guys, I was doing some military guys once and he told me, he said, "You know, always watch the eyes when you're doing oral history when you talking to them because when you see fear, you can look in their eyes and see them reliving the war."  He said, "Back off."  And I remembered that, and I was watching those people and I could see fear in their eyes still.  And this was about 2004, these were the children of most of those parents that were fired and, and, I mean, it was--you could really see fear.  And one gentleman got up and he talked about the fact that his father worked at the coal company that was owned by a white man, but the father did all the--the man only came on one day a week, Friday, to get the money that was collected.  He collected the money, he delivered the coal, he did everything.  He ran the whole place.  Well, he was fired and--but the man called him and said, "Well, you can come back."  He said, "But you can't deliver coal to the black people."  He said, "Well, I can't come back under those conditions because these are my relatives, these are my friends."  He says, "I cannot, you know, not deliver coal to these people."  So he said, "You can--okay, you can deliver the coal."  He said, "But, if it's anytime they can't pay you, it comes out of your check."  Well, most of these people didn't have jobs, they couldn't pay him.  And he delivered the coal anyway so most of it came out of his check.  And all of sudden this grown man just burst out and starts crying.  I burst out and start crying.  They almost had to take me out of there.  The man from Education Week didn't even look up.
Story_ID: 628820
Speaker 1: You were a consultant for a number of projects--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --tell me about those?
Speaker 2: One was--'cause I worked with Ralph Carlson who--Carlson Publishing company [Carlson Publishing, Inc.], he did--one of the things he did was a sixteen volume set on African American women.  And so I worked with him on that as a consultant.  I did the bibliography for the set.  I used to go around with Ralph, he did a lot of conferences and things so I would always go around and do his booth with him so that he could get out and, and talk to people.  The other thing I did was with public television.  I did the Marian Anderson project with them.  It was the public television and they did a documentary on her, so they interviewed her for this documentary and when it aired, it aired at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.].  And they brought her in so I got a chance to meet her, and told her I had done one of my booklet bibliographies was on her.  In fact, that was the first full booklet bibliography on a black woman that was published.  So, and I told her about it and everything.  So after she died, her family invited me to--I went to the memorial that was at Carnegie Hall in New York [New York], so I was able go up to that by the invitation.  Also, at her hundredth birthday they did another one, I wasn't unfortunately able to go that.  They invited me but I had to be--I was speaking in Florida that next morning at nine o'clock so I couldn't get to both, both at the same time and get down there.  There was another one.  I did a project with a group called Very Special Arts [VSA, Washington, D.C.] and that was interviewing soldiers at the soldiers home here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  Most of them were white men, I had a couple of ladies that I interviewed but most of them were white men and they talked about their service in the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 628821
Speaker 1: Very Special Arts [VSA, Washington, D.C.] is a group that does things with handicapped folk or physically disabled people, so they just wanted to do that project over there. One of the stories, again, dealing with oral history is the matter of trust.  What I would do--and I had a student with me that was helping me.  I would--they would bring the gentleman down to the rec [recreation] room and I'd go get him and bring him to a room and we would interview him.  And then I would take him back to the rec room, and you know, then get another person.  And so, this particular gentleman, you know, we did the interview.  I talked to him for a little bit and so I took him back to the rec room, and then I went to the ladies' room and I came back.  So I came back to the room to ask the student--I say, "Okay, we're ready for our next person?"  He says, "Yes, but this gentleman's back here to talk to you," and so I said, "Okay."  And he says, he says, "I had something to tell you."  I said, "Okay, what is it?"  He says, "During the war," he says, "I had a child over there."  And I said, "Where is your child now?"  He says, "I have no idea."  He said, "Only thing I knew is I was dating this lady--," and I think they were in Germany I think.  And the war--, "I was transferred and this lady was pregnant and we lost contact, because the mail stopped.  And so I have no idea where the lady is, I have no idea where my child is," he said, "I know absolutely nothing."  And so I say, "Well, what did your wife think about that?"  He say, "I never told her.  You the first person I ever told."  I said, "Okay, well, that will not go in your story," (laughter) so that was it.  So, but they, they, you know, sometimes they trust you enough to tell you things that they would not tell anybody else (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 628822
Speaker 1: And I had another incident.  A government agency invited me down to do that slide presentation on the WACs [Women's Army Corps].  And I was talking, one of the things that I talked about was the negative connotations of black women who went in the [U.S.] military.  You either, you know, were promiscuous or you were--liked other women.  So that was one of the things I said, and after we--after I finished we were just having a question and answer period.  And all during that presentation, I kept hearing this woman in the audience saying, "Yeah, uh-huh, I remember that."  And I said, okay, I got a military lady here and I said she's probably Persian Gulf [Persian Gulf War] or Vietnam [Vietnam War].  So, you know, we got to that ques- so somebody else asked the question about the negative connotations.  So this lady, you know, and we've talked about that a little bit so finally the lady says something.  She says, "You know, when I went into the military my father, who had also been in the military, was so angry with me that he would not speak to me because of what they said about women in the military, so we had to correspond through an aunt.  But my father got sick and I was overseas and I came home a couple of times, and on his deathbed he finally told me how proud he was of me.  And that I even made a higher rank than he did."  All of a sudden this woman burst out and starts crying.  And this was really my first time having a black--having somebody cry on me at a presentation.  And I'm like--I'm standing there like, oh, god, what do I do now?  So I just came out in the audience and I put my arms around her and let her talk.  After that presentation was over, I had several friends that worked at this organization.  They came up to me and they said, "You know, this is the first time we ever heard that story from her."  Nobody knew, nobody.  And I say, "Well, it was because she felt like she was in a safe place and could now talk about it."  And she felt that there was enough trust in there for her to finally tell that story.  So it brings out--oral history brings out a lot.  And one of the--and that was the real slap in the face for me as far as--because I was still working on my dissertation at that time.  It was that real slap in the face that if you're doing oral history, it's not just a project.  You're dealing with someone's life and everybody's life wasn't all rosy, there were lots of challenges and you have to respect that.  But that really hit me.  It was like, okay, you got to take this very seriously and you got to respect this, because it's, it's--this is an actual person's life you are dealing with.  So, that, that really, that really got me.
Story_ID: 628823
Speaker 1: How long did you work on your dissertation, and how did you fund all of what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I started in ninety--let me see.  I started--it took me five years so I graduated in '94 [1994].  When I first went in, my husband [Raymond Wood, Sr.] died right after that, right after I guess I'd been in a, a year, a semester or two.  And, basically, that's how I--his insurance was what funded most of it (laughter). So, but, when I got ready to write the dissertation, I applied for a fellowship from the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH] and I received thirty thousand dollars to, to complete that dissertation.  So I was able to take that year off, '93 [1993] to '94 [1994].  I took off and that's actually when I did a lot of the research 'cause, you know, I was at National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] quite a bit.  As I say, I had to travel out of town to the, to the WAC museum down in Alabama [Edith Nourse Rogers Museum, Fort McClellan, Alabama].  So I was able to do most of my research and the writing--to finish up the writing during that particular time.  'Cause, I was saying, what I was trying to do was document what these ladies had already told me.  So that gave me that opportunity to do that.
Speaker 1: Were there any other projects that you worked on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Early on I guess in my career, I go a couple of--I got one from the Whitney Foundation [Carnegie-Whitney Grant], which was part of American Library Association, and I think it was for a bibliography on the Harlem Renaissance women.  That was Zora Neale Hurston, oh, I can't remember the other two ladies that I did, but I did a bibliography on them.  I got another--I, I--when I was working on the WACs [Women's Army Corps], I also received a--one from the D.C. Commission [D.C. Commission on the Arts and Humanities], and that was to develop that slide presentation and present it at a public program, so I, I did that.  And I think I may have gotten another one at some point.
Story_ID: 628824
Speaker 1: And you worked on Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  One of the librarians at Moorland [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.], who was actually the oral history librarian, got--received a grant from National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH].  That's who funds almost everything, and we got a matching from the Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York].  She started a project--a voting rights project where we were going to interview legislators from the South that were elected because of the Voting Rights Act.  So she started the project but then her husband got a job out of state so they left the area.  And so, since I was an oral historian, they asked me if I would take over that project.  So, what we did was that we interviewed people out of--states out of the South, and the oral historian at that--for that project, I was, I was directing couldn't do the actual histories but Marsha Darling [Marsha J. Tyson Darling], who was an oral historian, she did most of the interviews for it.  I think I did one, I did one of the guys out of Durham [North Carolina] for the project.  And then one of the things that we did, we had a conference after that and we had to, to talk about some of the research that had been done on, on the project.  And, also, that became an issue--at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] we did an online journal and that was one of the issues of the journal that we did.  We did the articles that--from the conference and then we added, added more to it.  How this grant came about, one of the vice presidents gave Moorland-Spingarn this grant to start an online black history journal and it was called HU Archives Net.  And, basically, we would have--again, it was on particular topics and what we would do, we'd get a guest editor but then the rest of us would work on everything else.  We had a section in there called Young Historians where we'd do something like a word puzzle or something that the young, younger kids could do.  And then we'd have maybe one or two scholarly articles and we'd try to have a primary document in there that people could see.  So it was, it was a very interesting project that we did through HU Archives Net.  And for that particular issue, I was--we had--although we had Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] was the guest, I was the other guest editor for that particular issue.
Story_ID: 628825
Speaker 1: You spoke about your husband but you--first time we heard about him is at his death, so let's go back and when did you get married (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got married in 1980, I got married late in life and my husband was fifteen years older than I was.  But he was a very, very nice man.  And he was a carpenter by trade so he was a contractor.  And, again, contractors sort of work together so whenever a project would come up, they would all together and he would do the carpentry or something and then somebody else would do another part of the project.  So that's how they would get the funding to do these different projects.  In fact, he did in the old convention center downstairs [sic. downtown], he did all the woodwork on the stairways down there.  That was one of his projects that he did.  So, we, we had a really, really good marriage.  He, as I say, he was a lot older than I so we only was married a little less than ten years.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Raymond Wood, Sr., and he had, he had--so I have stepchildren.  And, so he had--we had five children in all.  One had passed when we married and then one passed after we, after he died.  So I have three stepchildren that, that I still have.  And one lives in Minnesota, he's a, a judge.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Raymond, Jr. [Raymond A. Wood], and Jackie [Jacqueline Wood] is his daughter, and she was in computers for a long time.  But Jackie wanted to become a teacher and so she went back in the last maybe five or six years now she's been a teacher.  And his other son, Reginald [Reginald Wesley Wood], is a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we still kind of keep in touch a little bit.  'Cause they were grown when I, you know, when we got married so I was never their mother.
Story_ID: 628826
Speaker 1: One of the sons [Reginald Wesley Wood] is a minister.  Let's talk about religion, what church do you attend?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I attend Spirit of Faith Christian Center [Temple Hills, Maryland] and I've only been there a couple of years.  I was--I spent thirty years at, at a Methodist church here in the city.  And the way I got to Spirit of Faith was they had a bible institute [Spirit of Faith Bible Institute, Temple Hills, Maryland], and I went to their bible institute.  It was a three-year program and I have a certificate in ministerial studies from them.  And I just kept going back and I, I just liked the way they talked.  And so, then I, I--after I graduated, I joined so I've been with them for a little over two years now.  And one of the things that we do--that I do with them now is, as part of the bible institute, we are trying to get a new accreditation so one of things we are going to have to do is set up a library.  So I'm in charge of setting up the library and the other thing that I do is I transcribe the pastor's tapes because he's on television.  And so I transcribe his tapes for that.
Speaker 1: And who is the pastor?
Speaker 2: Michael Freeman [Michael A. Freeman].  And the church is only about thirteen years old.  It's one of the megachurches (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he's a young, he's a young minister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's in his forties.  Yeah, young minister.  Yeah, so they do, I mean, lots of young people in the church.  They have a lot of nice programs for the children especially.  Last year he, he spent something like three hundred thousand dollars to have a conference for the kids, they brought in entertainers, they had games, everything outside, you know, little Ferris wheels, all those games that you'd have at a, at a carnival and stuff like that.  So, but they also taught.  So, it was a, a three day conference and it was, it was really nice.  I only went the one day, you know, I couldn't, couldn't take all that--it was a little loud for me.  So guess what I did that day?  Because church is, you know, we need volunteers to do everything.  My job that day was cleaning the bathrooms, so you know, we do whatever needs to be done.  One thing that you have in a church is, you know, that you--the pastor can't do it all so you--we have a very, very, very large volunteer staff that does pretty much everything that you need to be--that needs to be done.  So when you walk in there on Sunday mornings, it looks spic and span, everything, you know, that's because people have worked all week doing different things to make sure that it, it gets--say, the bible study classes, everything, you know.  So we, we, have a large--we, and he does a lot in the community.  He tries to do a lot especially with the young, with the youngsters.  You know, he may--for that one Thanksgiving we had a program and they give out awards and things, and so they had a couple of the kids come up and talk about they had gotten the scholarships from the church to go to, to, to go to school.  And this one gentleman gets up and he talks about the scholarship and he talks about how his mother, they didn't have any idea how he was going to college.  And his mother kept saying, "Have faith, you know, we're going to, we're going to get you to college."  And he was such a dynamite young man, pastor just jumps up and says, "We're, we're paying out of our pockets not the church money.  We're paying out of our pockets for you to go to school for the rest of the time."  So things like that, he'll, he'll do or he'll take a family 'cause we always, you know, churches always get calls, you know.  They, you know, provide food, clothing, furniture for, for families that need it, so just a lot of things.  And lots of things that I don't even know about that they do, that they don't even publicize.
Story_ID: 628827
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes for the library there [Spirit of Faith Bible Institute, Temple Hills, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, we're starting from scratch so what I have to do is to make sure that we get the books that correspond with the courses that we have.  So I'm--when I say we're starting from scratch, we don't have a room at this point so I'm, I'm having to deal with--do the furniture, the everything, the shelving, ordering the books, everything.  So it's, it's basically from scratch, so I have to do everything.  But, I'm, I'm enjoying it.  I, you know, I'm working with them, they just sent us to a conference.  The accrediting agency did a conference in February, so they sent us down to that so we could make sure we are on the right track with what we have to do.  So, and they're also gonna start having some online courses as well, so we're trying to set that up to do the online courses.  So I will try to--I hope to work with that.  And I'm hoping at one point--at some point to be the church historian, and one of the reasons again is because I--the church [Spirit of Faith Christian Center, Temple Hills, Maryland] is a young church and most everybody that started this church still there, we need to document that history.  So I'm sort of working on a package now to get the pastor [Michael A. Freeman]--and to tell him that and then--but mainly I need to get this library stuff straight first before I do too much else.
Story_ID: 628828
Speaker 1: So tell me about your job now, when did you come here to work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been here at Prince George's Community College [Largo, Maryland]--I think I came here part-time in 2001, so I been here about six years.  And, basically, I worked the reference desk.  Most of us part-timers that's basically what we do so that the full-time staff can work on the projects or whatever else, the collection development, anything else that they need to work on.  So we usually handle the desk and the students.  So, you know, students are, are very different now because of the Internet.  So one of the things we teach them, we have a lot of online databases that, you know, full text journal articles so, you know, kids don't have to go look for articles now in the actual magazines anymore.  So we teach them how to do that so it's, it's just very different in trying to teach students to use the libraries.  (Unclear) 'cause a lot of our students are online as well, and one of our librarians does mainly deal with the online students in, in teaching them how to do, to do the research.  One of the other things that I do here is something the call virtual reference.  And this is a--it's nationwide, it's 24/7, 365 days a year reference service.  So usually the person on their participating library--there's a, there's a little icon there that they can just click on and ask a question.  And what we do is give them websites that they can use for their research, so they may ask a question, any question.  I'm learning a lot because, as I was in black histories all these year, so I am really learning a lot.  But what I do once they ask the question is I go on and get the websites and, and send the websites to them.  And so that they'll have the, the means to doing their research.  So it's, it's very interesting, it's very interesting.  But a lot of times though we get people that think we're in their particular library, so I had--I did get one complaint.  A young, I don't know if it's a man or woman, wanted to--wanted me to tell the librarian there that the person next to them was making too much noise.  So I wrote back and said, "I'm, you know, that I was not in your library and that was something I, you know, was not able to do with this service."  So I made some suggestions, I say, well--because he was afraid that the person would know that it was him that made the complaint.  So I say, "Well, get up," and I'm, I wrote this back I said, "you know, get up, act like you're going to the bathroom and, and, and just go to another part of the library and tell one of the other librarians to tell them."  And so--but he was very upset with me because I, I would not call the librarians to say that they were--but we get all--and then some are flirting, you know, like someone wrote in one night, "Are you the cute guy that's on the desk in the yellow shirt?"  So they, you know, they actually think you're actually there in the library with them.  And a lot of times you're not, in fact, after midnight especially when the library is on this side of the world are closed, California, the West Coast have all the, all of the country.  So, you know, you might be talking to a librarian anywhere.  (Laughter) But it's interesting, its, it's really interesting.
Speaker 1: Have you gotten any weird requests?
Speaker 2: Oh, we get sexual requests, I got one of those the other night.  I can't even tell you what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, so we get those.  And we have a little message--we have a script through that we can send so we just send back that this is an inappropriate question to ask on this network.  We also have the number for the suicide hotline because we get, you know, we get some kids that are, you know, wanting to commit suicide.  We have most of all the homework help--we have the websites for all the homework help in the--every county in the, in the state.  So we, we send those to kids that are doing--especially if you get nine things that are on the same subject, you know it's a homework so we send them there.  We can also refer them if it's a law question or a medical question, we can refer them to one of the law libraries or one of the medical libraries.  'Cause we cannot give advice, and that has happened too, "You know, my boyfriend quit me and what am I supposed to do now," type things.  And, you know, you have to sort of tell them that you--that's not a question that you can answer on this, on this service.  So, we get all kinds of questions.
Story_ID: 628829
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you have not done that you really want to do?
Speaker 2: Other than travel for pleasure, I think some of the projects that I was not able to finish during my career, the Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was something I ended up having to stop.  I didn't finish that project and there were maybe a couple of other projects I did not finish.  One of the reasons for the early retirement was the fact that my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] is sick in North Carolina, so I spend part of my year, you know, two to three months at a time with her.  So I can give my brother [Frank Sims] and his wife a break and they can go back to California.  So this job has been a blessing because there's not too many jobs that will let you leave for that amount of time and come back and still have a job.  So, sometimes I'm gone anywhere from two and a half weeks to two or two and a half months.  So it just depends on when they can get back, you know, I wanna give them enough time to get some rest.  Caregiving is hard work so I try to give them enough time.  So, that's basically what I do now, so I'm trying to balance the two out and stay in this area if I can.  So, some of the projects that I just wasn't able to finish I would have, have liked to have finished.  And at some point in my life that, that might happen, you know, but right now my main focus is on my mother.
Story_ID: 628830
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to someone who is interested in oral history or African American history?
Speaker 2: Again, I think for trying to learn really how to do research especially in the primary documents, because that's where the meat is really, I mean, that's where you get the actual, first hand experience of what this organization or this person was about, so especially doing primary research.  Again, showing them how to use the library and how it can be to their advantage 'cause you find now a lot of students don't use the library that much.  So, it's trying to get them to see the importance of, of what's there in the--and, you know, if it's now on the Internet, it doesn't exist a lot of times now so, as far as the students are concerned.  So one of the things we try to do is to get them to look at the information and, and try to make sure that its--goes along with what's the written information, if it's saying somewhat the same thing, so, and trying to give websites that are authentic, you know, so if anything that ends in .edu .gov, most of those are pretty good websites that they can use.  So trying to steer them to the websites that they can use to get research from that's pretty accurate.  So, one of my jobs--one of my part--'cause I worked a lot of part-time jobs, one of my part-time jobs about five years ago before I came here [Prince George's Community College, Largo, Maryland] was I did work as a children's librarian which was an experience.  But one of the things that I would always try to do, because the kids would come in and, and, you know, they'd just something off the Internet and, you know, do a little title page, put their name on it, and they'd be ready to go.  So I'd say, well, why don't we check some books and see if the books say the same thing.  Well, most of the time they would say, "Oh, that's all my teacher wants," you know, and I'd say, "Oh, no, come over here and let's see if we can find us a book that might go along with that and you check it out and take it to school with you too 'cause that'll help add to your, to your grade when the teacher gives you a grade."  So, that's the hard part is trying to get them to authenticate the information that they're finding on the Internet.
Speaker 1: What are your concerns about documenting African American history?
Speaker 2: Again, that we just can't get the kids to come and, and actually, actually look for the information.  I taught for a year or two out of University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], I taught a black women's history course, undergraduate course.  And that second year--that first year wasn't too bad but that second year, I could not get those kids to go to the library for anything.  It was the most trying (laughter) semester I had, because it was just--it just--they just did not see the importance of it.  And, see, everything is not on the Internet especially the historical stuff.  If you're trying to go back and look at something that happened eighty years ago, that's--most of that is not going to be on the Internet.  So, you know, trying to get them to look at it and say, okay, you need to do the historical research as well, which means you are gonna have to look at a book or an actual magazine, or journal article.  So, it's just trying to get them to do the research (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 628831
Speaker 1: What about personal history, family history, how important do you think that is at this, this time for African Americans?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there is a genealogy society here, in fact, the main office is here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And they do a lot of research, I've spoken at their conferences a couple of times.  But it is very important for us to know who our family is.  Now my--on my mother's [Hazel Jeffries Sims] side, we don't do any history but on my father's [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] side, we've been having reunions for the last thirty years.  And one of my younger cousins is really trying to document that history of, of--'cause this is one of my daddy's sisters, that's one of her grandsons.  So he's really--he's been to the downhome to the historical society in Rutherford County [North Carolina], and so he's been searching out some of this history and trying to find some of the names and connect people and everything.  So, and I been working with him a little bit so, mainly to encourage him because he's really doing a good job of it.  And I'm very, very proud of him that he is trying to document our family history.  But on my mother's side we have nothing pretty much.
Speaker 1: So is that gonna be one of your undertakings?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna try, I've tried to do a little bit.  Most of the relatives are gone now, all of her, her brother [Joseph Jeffries] and sister [Amanda Jeffries] are gone.  And she had an aunt here who ended up being a hundred years old, who we were responsible for, we're the caregivers in our family.  So, I got a little bit of information from her before she passed but most of the relatives are now gone on her side.
Story_ID: 628832
Speaker 1: You talked about kids today using the Internet a lot to do research, but there was a project that you worked on just for kids.
Speaker 2: Yes, I started a project called Kids' Black History on the Net and one of the things that I was trying to do was to find appropriate topics in black history that were on the Internet, that they could use in doing their research.  So, again, I did a PowerPoint presentation where I, I went on the internet sites and took out some of the sites.  For instance, there was one on Harriet--a school did one on Harriet Tubman that was just fascinating.  So any site that I could find that did reliable information--that had reliable information on black history, that were, you know, basically from kids K to twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade] that they could use.  One of the things that happened, 'cause, you know, we fuss so much when kids get to college is about them not knowing their history but, you know, it really is our responsibility to make sure that they know that history.  So, we have to do our part too in, in seeing that they get it.  So, that was one of the, you know, one of the things that I would really like to, to start up again if I ever get a chance.
Story_ID: 628833
Speaker 1: There was one other organization that you belong to, a historical--
Speaker 2: Association of Black Women Historians, yeah, ooh, we started in the late '70s [1970s].  I'm a life member now and it's a history organization basically dealing with black women's history.  We meet along with the ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] so we are responsible for getting at least two to three sessions at the conference dealing with black women's history that we the Association of Black Women Historians will sponsor.  So, we, we get two or three panels together to talk about some--a topic.  And we also have a luncheon every year at the conference, and we have someone to come and speak like, for instance, this year one of the founders, [HistoryMaker] Rosalyn Terborg-Penn who just retired from Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] was one of the founders and she was our luncheon speaker this year.  Nell Painter [HistoryMaker Nell Irvin Painter] has been one of our speakers, Darlene Clark Hine, so most of the people that have been doing women's history over the years and their--we have men participants as well.  We have men members and the luncheon is always sold out.  It's, It's really very educational, it's very educational.  And this past year, 2005, I received their Lorraine Anderson Williams Leadership Award that year so--for all the research I had done over the years in black women's history.
Story_ID: 628834
Speaker 1: And you mentioned earlier that you pledged after--
Speaker 2: I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority but I pledged in the graduate section here in Prince George's County [Maryland].  There were like--of my group, we had fifty-three people that year that when I, when I pledged.  So, and we still stay very--I'm not really active because, because I work so much especially on Saturdays, that I don't get a chance to go to the meetings like I would like to.  But next year Alpha Kappa Alpha will celebrate their one hundredth anniversary, so I'm working with Bettye Collier-Thomas on a little project that she's doing for the anniversary.  So, I'm looking very--looking forward to that.
Story_ID: 628835
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, I hope that I will be remembered as someone--the person that liked to help people.  One of things I--and I loved working with the scholars, I really, you know, when they come and they're famous people now and, you know, to help them do their research.  But I also really liked working with students.  And I like to see that light bulb go off in their head when they finally--when they get a topic and finally find the information that they need, and you see their eyes light up and everything.  And, and just to know that you helped them to, to get that information.  And, again, because I was there long enough to see several generations of students come through.  And some of the early students were sending their students there, the fact that they trusted me enough and thought enough of me to say to come and, "You, you go see Janet [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood]."  And she'll help you get your, get your research, you know, information done.  So, that's, that's been a really--and I think working on SAGE [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women] was really--I really enjoyed working, working on SAGE because I got--I, again, got to meet a lot of the black women who were in the field, lot of the women writers, Mari Evans, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, Alice Walker, so a lot of the women that we got to meet especially that would come to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] a lot of times.  We would be there, so got to meet a lot of them and talk to them about their research.  So it's been a wonderful career.  I have, I--Moorland-Spingarn [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] I think was one of the best things that ever happened to me, was working there.  It has been--it was educational and it was enjoyable.  It was one of those jobs that you looked forward to going back to on Monday morning.  So it was just--and I, I miss it, I really miss that interaction 'cause we don't have as much, you know.  I interact with the students here, we actually had to do research there, you know, we had to do--and help them do their research so we got a little bit more intimate relationships with the, with the patrons that came in.  And, again, they came year after year, you know, as they were doing, doing their books and things.  So, and many of those folk are still friends today.  [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin is, is one of my heroes, one of the nicest men that you ever wanted to meet.  And the one thing I like about John is that, if you're a student and you're talking to him, it's like you're the only person in the world.  I have seen him sit and talk to students, John'll cross his legs and--even though the student may say something that--he may have his history wrong, he won't embarrass him.  He'll say, let me--write down a couple of these books and let's have this conversation again after you, after you read this.  So he doesn't do things to embarrass you or say, well, that's wrong.  'Cause, you know, when you say things to a student that can make or break their career.  So he's very aware of the fact that you, you have to nurture students even if their--have that wrong information, you sort of have to steer them to the right information.  So that's one of the things I really, really like--not just his, you know, his scholarship which is just tremendous but the way he treats other students is, is just phenomenal.  And I will always have a love and respect for him.
Story_ID: 628836
Speaker 1: You talked about generations--that you have helped generations of students, and because this interview will be available for future generations what message do you wanna send to them?
Speaker 2: I'm, I hope that again they will really find a love for history but I think we have to--just like with me when I was--I did not like history early on.  We have to find a way to make that history come alive for them.  And make them interested in, in their history because it's so much out there and it's so much that hasn't been tapped yet.  And that's what we're having to depend on them for.  You know, most of us are now retiring or not doing the research that we used to do.  We want some students that are coming behind us that will really do this research and get it out there.  So I'm hoping that they--we can find a way to--for them to find a love for what they do.  And a lot of times, it begins with their family history, you know, knowing who they are, who, you know, what their family--how their family struggled to, to get what they, what they've gotten.  You know, nowadays, you know, we get a lot given to us and, you know, we take a lot of things for granted.  So, I, I think that's what I want to be remembered for.  One of the other things that I'm really hoping that we would do with our children is financial management.  As I say, I belong to a megachurch.  We have some millionaires in our church, and they're gonna leave this money to their children.  If these children, and just regular everyday children--if we don't have a way to have them to know how to manage their money, it's gonna be gone before you know it.  And I think that it's vitally important that we start teaching our children money management.  Not just buying a sneaker but buying some stock in that company that makes that sneaker so that you will have something down the road.  So I'm really, really concerned about financial management for our children.  Because that's basically how all of us got into this credit card debt and everything.  You know, we bought, bought, bought and not as much thinking about, you know, I'm gonna retire forty years from now and what will I have to, to retire on.  So I'm really concerned about that.
Story_ID: 628837
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to say that we haven't talked about?
Speaker 2: You know, I just thought about this and I don't mention it a lot but I am a, almost ten year cancer survivor.  It changed my whole life, it made me appreciate life a whole lot more especially the little things, the, the little minute things that, that life is very, very precious.  And so I have been truly, truly blessed over the years.  There's a group here called Rise, Sister, Rise, it's a black women's breast cancer support group, and I was part of that when I--I went through that when I first came out.  And that was a group that really sort of helped me focus because you could come in and talk about anything.  You know, the first session, you know, your family could come but after that it was completely closed, just to the people that were a part of this particular group.  And they would have a nutritionist come in, they'd have a psychologist come in.  And, you know, we got the chance to talk, we talked about the fears, we talked about, you know, the future, you know.  So, we got a chance to really focus in on us as survivors and what that meant.  And that we were, you know, this is a battle and you, you know, it's a battle that you have to--you know, you have the medicines and things but you also have to fight yourself.  So it was really--and my doctor, Dr. Laselafall [ph.], who was my cancer doctor, he did my surgery.  One of the things that he said--he did a book here, his autobiography here (unclear) and one of the things that he said in that book was, that no matter how bad the diagnosis was, he always tried to give his patients hope because when you give up, it's really over.  And I appreciate that in him, and that he gave me hope and a lot of other people gave me hope.  I talked to other cancer survivors black and white, I talked to, you know, and they gave me a lot of encouragement.  And I had a lot of prayer partners across the country, a lot of prayer partners.  The fact, the first lady I called when I got home with the diagnosis was my prayer partner.  And so, prayer and faith has been a tremendous part of my life.  And, but being a survivor--and that's why I do try to tell people that I am a survivor so they can see that there are people that, that, that, you know, you can get through this.  It's not always a death sentence and that--but, you know, we have to keep going.  And the one thing I tell them is to stay positive, stay around positive people, and to try to do something for somebody else even though you might be sick yourself.  Try to do something for somebody else.  During my time right after I finished all of my treatment, my father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] got very, very sick and I had to go home and stay with him 'til he passed away.  So, but I was so thankful because I was still alive to do that, you know.  So, it's, it's a--I'm an extremely thankful person and very, very--I'm very glad, I have a lot of gratitude in my life 'cause, I mean, it's, it's just a wonderful life, it's a wonderful life to, to still be here, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, we're grateful that you would share your story for The HistoryMakers, and thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much for having me, I appreciate that.
Story_ID: 628838
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You can go ahead and get started now.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is the premier issue of SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women, which I was the founding editor of and this was 1984.  And our first issue was on black women and education.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: And that is our ending issue of SAGE, it was our tenth anniversary and we had decided that we would not be able to do SAGE anymore, so that was our tenth anniversary issue and the final--very final issue.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Time.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was a picture that was taken at Moorland-Spingarn and it was given to me at my retirement part on July--I retired on July 31, 2005.  And the picture is actually of me in the reading room at the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center [Washington, D.C.], which is where I spent most of my time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: Oops.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  180 degrees.  Like magic, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is our book, 'Double Stitch' ['Double Stitch: Black Women Write about Mothers and Daughters,' ed. Patricia Bell Scott] that was put out by the SAGE group.  This was--we had two issues on black mother daughter relationships and we made it into a book.  And it came out both as a hardback and as a paperback.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is the bibliography ['The Psychology and Mental Health of Afro-American Women: A Selected Bibliography,' Glenell S. Young and Janet Sims-Wood] that I put out through my publishing company, Afro Resources, and it was about psychology and mental health of African American women.  And my sister [Glenell Sims Young], who is a psychologist, and I did the bibliography together.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Got it.
Speaker 2: You need me to say what it was?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: It was a picture of me in the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center.  We had a museum there at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I did most of the tours that came through, and I was doing a tour of, of the museum on that picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on a second.  Move that around I may be getting a reflection on that.  Yes, I am.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my husband [Raymond Wood, Sr.] and I at my best friend's wedding, and we were the two people that stood up for her.  She said we'd been--our marriage had lasted so she wanted someone who marriage had lasted to come and stand up for them when they got married.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.  You just start talking as soon as the picture gets up.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  This is at one of my presentations, I think it was on Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] that I did at one of the community groups.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, again, that was another one.  I think that was at--in Delaware and that was again on Brown vs. Board of Education.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: This is the gentleman on the left is the--well, this was the group of us who were a part of the Associated Publishers, which was part of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History [ASALH].  And I'm in the middle, Ronald McConnell [HistoryMaker Ronald C. McConnell] is on the right and I can't remember the gentleman's name on the left, Edgar Toppin is his name, Edgar Toppin.  And we were president, vice president and treasurer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the house that my father [Marvin L. Sims, Sr.] built for us back in the '50s [1950s], so, basically, most of the houses back that time were ranch style houses.  So this is where we lived and where my mother [Hazel Jeffries Sims] still lives today.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a book party that was--Dr. Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] gave us at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] for the book, 'Double Stitch.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father at our church, Zion Hill A.M.E. Zion Church [Henrietta, North Carolina].  And they were doing some brickwork and they had him to come over and, and lay one of the bricks because he was a brick mason.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: These are my two great aunts; these are my mother's aunts.  The one on the right was Edna [ph.] and the one on the left is Myrtle [ph.] and these were the ladies that I stayed with when I first came to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], the only reason I got to D.C.  And the one on the left, Myrtle, just passed this past October, she was a hundred years old.  And my family was her caregiver.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture--the lady in the pink is my mother.  We're at the cemetery at my home, we do a service every year and we were at the cemetery.  So I brought her out that year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that very small picture is basically my whole family, it's my sister and my three brothers [Marvin L. Sims, Jr., Frank Sims, and Thomas Sims], my father and my mother.  And we were having Christmas dinner.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is my graduation picture from Union Institute [Union Institute and University, Cincinnati, Ohio] when I received my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you do the book, yeah, that was the Brown vs. Board of Education.  This is the Black History Month kit that I edited for the Association for the Study of African American Life and History for 2004, which was on Brown vs. Board of Education.
