Story_ID: 29127
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Name, Carl, C-A-R-L, Spight, S-P-I-G-H-T, Spight.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.  My father had a lot of particulars by which he walked the planet, and one of them was that he didn't want any of his children, my brothers and sisters, none of us have middle names.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He did not like nicknames, probably because he maybe didn't prefer his nickname, whatever that was.  And I never knew.  But no middle names because he wanted no nicknames.  So he wanted always the name and only the name.  So fetish of a kind, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have any thoughts about where the name Spight comes from?
Speaker 2: Actually, I know.  We've, in fact, I, along with some of my cousins in the Chicago area have spent a fair amount of time researching that.  In fact, a couple of years ago, we were down in Ripley, Mississippi.  And my family line goes back through Memphis, Tennessee across the border, essentially, into Ripley, Mississippi, which is, you know, across the border actually, literally.  And my great grandfather was a slave of a prominent family, white family, slave-owning family in Ripley, Mississippi.  And so that's the name, Spight, Ernest, no, Ephraim, I guess Ephraim Spight was owned as a slave by a prominent family in Ripley, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, September 8, 1944, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Are not easy to answer these days.  I do a lot of independent consulting where I've been a scientist, educator, gadfly, but these days I'm an independent consultant.  I try to keep a living going by providing a lot of fairly diverse consulting activities to buyers of statistical analysis.  For example, I'm an analyst.  Off and on I do small tutorial teaching kinds of things.  I'm a specialist in computer technology and so on.  So I sometimes get involved in some training with computer technology, database management, some data mining, that kind of thing.  So it's odd jobs these days.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're a physicist by training?
Speaker 2: Yeah, by training, yes, right.  I was an undergraduate student in engineering, and then asked myself, once I got the degree, whether this was gonna be something that would excite me for a job and for a career and for a life, and answered no, and decided to move into a more research-focused career and went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and studied astrophysical sciences, plasma physics was the particular specialty at that time.  So I'm formally trained as a physicist theoretician my formal training, but I've been an experimentalist researcher both in theory and experiment.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had, just one last question about that, and we'll get into detail as we go through, but what was the position you held at, what is it, the place, yeah, Jackson and Tull?
Speaker 2: Right.  At Jackson and Tull, boy, I've had a number of positions.  I was chief scientists, I was senior vice president.  I was manager of information technologies, information services.  So I've had various roles.  I was there almost nine, yeah, almost nine years, so in that space of time.  When I first joined Jackson and Tull, I was essentially there as chief scientist.  I was at one point, senior vice president for applied technology where they had a big activity in the space Program, looking at multi-spectral sensing of earth resources from satellite-based technologies.  There was a big opportunity to expand.  So I've had some very senior positions there too.  But essentially, it's always been a technology leadership role at Jackson and Tull, which is a minority firm based in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) July 23, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, interesting questions you're asking.  1900 South Michigan at the site-based offices, I assume, for The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 29128
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions I am compelled to ask you, and they only deserve a short answer actually.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I've got some particulars, probably some well-cooked lentils, yeah, odd choice, I know, but lentils or gold lentils.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably purple if I had choose one.  Yeah, purple, yeah, royal purple, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably late summer, yeah, early fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Boy, I've been so many places.  Something wishful or something where I've been?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess it could be wished for.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I'd like to get to Cuba one of these days actually, never been there.  I've been a lot of places in the world, but I'm fascinated by the music, by the whole history of African influence on Cuban music and so on.  I'm a big enthusiast of Afro-Cuban rumba and so on.  So, my wished for destination is Cuba.
Speaker 1: Okay, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Not that I've focused these days.  I used to talk about this whole question of the future of the future, and I, it's a quote from a work focused on futurism.  And so it goes something like "The future of the future is in the critical recovery of the present".  And for me, that's been a kind of a guiding motto as to how to think about the criticality of understanding what is the lived experience in terms of how it opens up opportunity for futures that are not currently over determined by the current, by the present.  So for me, that's always been a big issue.  An intellectual, as an activist, and have always been concerned that opportunity is something you create by deconstructing and reconstructing present experience.  So in that sense, "the future of the future is in the critical recovery of the present", summarizes and capsulizes that very well.
Story_ID: 29129
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  So I'm not gonna leave your father out.  So if you--in fact, if we start talking about your mother too much, you'll have to go back to pick that up.  But I'll ask you about them both.  The first, first, can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, maiden name, I'm sure you mean.  Erma, E-R-M-A, Mae, M-A-E, and White for her surname, Erma Mae White.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born Indianapolis, Indiana, let's see, December 2, 1926, I think.  I'm not, okay, you're gonna catch me there.  Oh, I should have looked at my list of particular data items.  My--
Speaker 1: Well, as close as it, will do.  And what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: We actually know, not as well as my father's side, but we know back to just after the end of slavery.  So we know family names and relationships for, through her mother and her mother's mother and so on and father and so on.  So we know fair details.  We've got a family tree.  We've never been a family to be involved in reunion, and either side, my mother's side or father's side as I was coming up.  So we have little sketches here and there.  Sometimes, little favorite stories and so on.  I don't have images, back beyond my grandmother on my mother's side, don't have any memories or any of that.
Speaker 1: No stories or anything about that side?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I know that my mother never finished grade school.  She married my father as a second marriage.  So we were not the first children on her side.  I've got two half sisters.  They're, you know, it's sketchy, but I mean I know what the names are and so on.  But it's sketchy.
Speaker 1: Now, on your mother's side, you say you can trace them back to slavery, I mean just after slavery. But were they, I assume they weren't slaves in Indiana.  But they were slaves in some southern state?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and in fact, let's see, I wasn't anticipating having to have that in current mind.  Let's see.  I'm sure it was the South, although there's a, some Native American Indian in my mother's side that goes back somewhere in there too.  It's not just African slave.  You're gonna find me not forthcoming here, not because I'm hesitant, because I just don't, don't have it in current mind.  Sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not sure whether, where they came from, what state they came from?
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm not sure, I've not had occasion.  I should have anticipated the question perhaps.  Let's see.  I know she was born in Indianapolis, and her mother lived in Indianapolis for many, many years, Lula Duncan.  Let's see.  See, I don't have a locale that I can really be confident in locating.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Sorry, I mean it's not as if I don't--if I were to consult a little family tree diagram, I'm sure it probably would pop out at me, but it doesn't do at the moment (simultaneously).
Story_ID: 29130
Speaker 1: (Simultanously) So did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, we, as children in Indianapolis, lived in my grandmother's, my mother's mother's, house for a good number of years before we ultimately ended up living in our own home, my father [William Herman Spight] and mother living in their own home.  So for a good number of years, we lived in her house.  So in that sense, we knew her well.  She was a personality of a kind.  They lived a very insular life.  I have distinct memories of the house always being dark, and they were ailing I guess at the time, but I remember it when I was coming up.  But the house was always dark.  That's the only I remember, and it seems like there was this long shotgun, style home in Indianapolis.  You'd go in the front door, and you can see out the backdoor.  But the shades were always either down or the curtains drawn.  Why that was, I don't know.  It's a distinct memory.  They had a vast garden in the backyard.  I do remember that too.  But it was very overgrown, and so that you couldn't see the neighbors' homes on either side.  It's a curious memory, I know, but I'm just telling you.  So, yes, I knew my mother's mother as a person where actually, literally lived next door in a home.  It was a two-family dwelling.
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother talk about how she grew up and that sort of thing, where she went to school?
Speaker 2: She didn't have a lot of schooling.  I guess there's a quick shorthand on that.  She didn't graduate from grade school.  So you can see even there that was not a lot of schooling to talk about.  She was married twice.  Again, we were the product of the second marriage with my father.  She used to say that she was very socially active and kind of a socialite at one time in Indianapolis.  So I moved in "fast", I think was her characterization of it I guess, social circles and so on, probably not focused on a lot of education things of the time.  But that's about as much as I really.  Again, it's interesting to me in retrospect and as I become a senior in some sense how little we talked about family history on either side and given that the family never had reunions, really wasn't social in that sense, you know, widely integrated, extended family.  There really is history only because of incidental comments as opposed to, you know, some sense of tradition or some sense of family heritage.  There was no sense like that at all.  Have not had occasion to really think about that.  And by the time it became relevant to remember, they had already passed and, you know, there was just no connection after that.
Speaker 1: When did she pass?
Speaker 2: Boy, it's been now almost twenty years ago, yeah, about twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: About '84 [1984], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But your mother and your grandmother spent most of their lives in Indianapolis, right there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, certainly, my mother for sure.  And all I knew of my grandmother was Indianapolis.  So I could be speaking out of turn, remembering your earlier question trying to look at roots on my mother's side.  I'm like to have spoken somewhat out of turn.  I understand that my mother's mother, my grandmother, has roots that go back, as I say, to Native American Indian, among other roots.  And so that vector, that laying out a family line could go almost anywhere at this point, I can't help you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you know your grandfather on that side?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I knew less of him because he was ill for much of my, he was also present, but would be, was very sedentary, said almost nothing, probably occasion, this house being dark.  I mean that's the memory I have, of very little liveliness or vitality in the house itself.  I remember he always had something odd to say, was usually concerned with folk being quiet.  So I knew almost nothing of him.  I have an image of him.  He was literally right next door, but because of the kind of oddness of the lifestyle and so on, I knew almost nothing of him.
Story_ID: 29131
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Herman, H-E-R-M-A-N, Spight, William Herman.  He went by Herman to most of his friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Memphis, Tennessee in 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace his--
Speaker 2: Oh, this is the side of the family that I indicated earlier was traceable back to slavery or being held as slaves in Ripley, Mississippi and the origin of the Spight name.  So I, we know it all the way back.  In fact, as I say, a few years ago we actually visited Ripley and saw the grave sites and, you know, the family plots and all that.  So there's a fair amount of detail.  Plus, we have photographs, we have a photograph of my father sitting on a porch in Ripley, Mississippi with his father's father, Ephraim Spight who was a slave at one day, and owned, and owned as a slave.  So we actually have photograph, poor quality, but photographic images going back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories about life in Mississippi that are passed down?
Speaker 2: I mean, you ask it in a particular way, passed down.  I know the stories now because we were, we, and a couple of my cousins who live in Chicago, decided that it was time to get to the root of family and so on and to find out a bit about the family.  So these stories are not stories passed down.  These are stories gleaned from census records.  These are stories gleaned from looking at old newspaper archives, some Internet searches, that kind of thing.  So I know, for example, that Ephraim Spight, who was at one point owned as a slave, ended up being a sheriff of Ripley, Mississippi, of all places.  He served in the Calvary [United States Cavalry, 1775-1951] in the Civil War on the Union side and so on.  So we know a lot about him in essence.
Speaker 1: So this, Ephraim Spight, I'm sorry, I--
Speaker 2: Ephraim is my great grandfather--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my father's father's father.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he served in the Calvary on the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the Union side, right, right, obviously during the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Do you know what unit he was in by any chance?
Speaker 2: I probably do.  You know, I don't have those things.  I mean I can tell, I mean we actually found the, we actually searched the records, and we know specifically what union--what unit he served in.
Speaker 1: Was it the unit out of Camp Nelson, Kentucky?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: If you--
Speaker 1: Does it sound familiar?  I mean we won't have to look it up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just bring them all.  Ask me that--
Speaker 1: I know there was a unit.  There weren't that many black Calvary units, but there was a group out of Camp Nelson, Kentucky, and maybe some other groups too, but they were a unit that fought in the battle of Yazoo City .
Speaker 2: Yeah, we actually have the records because there was, interesting perhaps, some pretty good recordkeeping of that.  And so, I have it written down and maybe we'll pursue that perhaps in a side conversation.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable thing though because you've a black man from Mississippi comes out of slavery, joins the Union army and there aren't that many stories like that where you actually get in the army and are able to fight, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Mississippi, you know.  It's a, there aren't that many stories like that.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure that's true.
Speaker 1: So a lot of the escaped slaves just became contraband and that sort of thing.  They didn't really get in the--
Speaker 2: No, he actually served, he actually served.  And we, like I said, we actually know what the unit is.  Actually, when you emphasize the question the way you just emphasized it, makes me think that there may be an interesting story there for me, just to pursue too.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's a singular thing.  It's not a usual thing, and Calvary is a--
Speaker 2: I never thought of it quite as unusual as you can see.
Speaker 1: --is a status, you know.  It's a step up in status from being a foot solider--
Speaker 2: Or,(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it's something that they didn't want black people to be Calvary men for the most part.
Speaker 2: Ah, hah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, so to even have a black Calvary unit, I was surprised to see them in, you know, in conducting some lightweight research on that myself.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Yeah, I'm getting more intrigued the more you're talking.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and equestrian, you know, even in the Roman, that's a big deal to have a horse and be able to move around, the freedom that comes with that and the power.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as best we can tell, he was also a minister at one time, a prominent minister to.  Ephraim was an unusual person.  I mean not to say that others we searched or otherwise weren't unusual persons, but the issue of leadership and the breaking of molds and doing unusual things apparently was something very particular to him.  He owned land in Ripley, Mississippi and in Memphis, Tennessee at one time, were, all lost now.  But--
Speaker 1: Is there any story about how he acquired that land or--
Speaker 2: I don't the story.  I--
Speaker 1: That's a singular thing too, to get land in those days, after slavery.
Speaker 2: That's true, and living in Mississippi and in Memphis, Tennessee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: It wasn't easy to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  I can't remember his age when he passed, but it was early nineteen-, something like maybe in the 1920s or something.  So that period from eighteen, whatever the date is, now, all of a sudden it doesn't come to me, until that time, I mean that was a period where disenfranchisement, dis--you know, being removed from the land, you know, all of it was the history of black folks though.  I understand.
Story_ID: 29132
Speaker 1: Yeah, so there's some history there.  Yeah, it's significant stuff.
Speaker 2: I never thought of it quite the way you say it, but maybe there are other stories.  My focus then was basically just to try to get to the bottom of something that just wasn't a part of our inheritance, me and my immediate siblings and so on because I mean it just wasn't talked about.  We didn't reunion, we didn't have that, that kind of connection, and a certain amount of impatience and a sense of un-rootedness was there.  And so, but part of the problem when you pursue it quite the way I supposed we pursued it there, that is, we wanted the factual matter, you know, all of the narrative, all of the anecdotal, kind of don't get a part of it, because you're looking at census records, you're looking at various documents, deeds, you know, that kind of thing.  And those have no life to them in some very important senses in the way that you just said there.  There're probably some real stories, real stories as opposed to just facts of history.
Speaker 1: I would wager there are.  So, well, at any rate, you said there weren't any real stories passed down about--
Speaker 2: No, my father was apparently alienated from much of the family for so many years.  And again, he was also a second--we were his, he started the family which I'm an immediate member in his forties, but he was previously married also.  And as best I can tell from the things that he would tell us, the few things he would tell us on the side, there were some family feuding and bad blood and disagreement that left him rather isolated from much of the family.  And so again, a tradition of storytelling where we would understand our roots.  He would tell us about his own early experience.  He was from a family of thirteen.  He was the oldest in the family of thirteen and ended up, during the Depression [The Great Depression], ended up having to be the person who brought the livelihood for the remaining, the other children in the family.  And he gave us the impression that he used to be prominent singer, kind of a traveling singer at one time, had a reputation for being a vocalist and so on, on the circuit, moving out of Memphis, Tennessee and around.  But those were scattered stories and so on.  We don't have any evidence and no articles, no recorded record that, you know, even in terms of, you know, actual, literal audio recordings.
Speaker 1: Now, you said your great grandfather was a minister?
Speaker 2: My great grandfather, right, Ephraim, who was--
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather?  What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was just a laborer.  He worked in a packing house in Memphis, Tennessee, nothing unusual other than just making a living I suppose.  He had certainly a large family, and like I say, my father was the oldest of thirteen.  And it appears that he didn't always attend to responsibilities, obviously, since my father describes his early years as a young man and a young adult of being responsible for essentially feeding and guaranteeing the housing and so on of his siblings.  So, but he worked as a pack, we know he worked at a packing house.  We got this from census records actually.
Speaker 1: Did they lose their land, the land?
Speaker 2: The land, yeah, the land is lost.
Speaker 1: I mean it wasn't lost then, I mean when your grandfather was working in the packing house?  Had it been lost already?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so because the picture we have has him as a young man, a relatively young man, where my father was aged six maybe or something like that, has them all sitting in a large, a vast front porch in Ripley, Mississippi which I presume was the homestead.  So the land wasn't lost when Earnest Virgil, my grandfather, was alive.  So I don't know, you know, all of those other associated, probably very important facts, are not a part of what I know at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was, they did own land in both Memphis, Tennessee, my great grandfather owned land in Ripley, Mississippi and in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29133
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you were just saying that some of the--
Speaker 2: Well, one of the reasons that a couple of years ago, I and my Chicago-based cousins so much invested ourselves in at least trying to get to some of the factual matters is that it just didn't seem to hang together.  You couldn't peace it together.  Names didn't seem to jive, the dates, locales and so, you know, it was a question of wanting to know on the one hand, but wanting to resolve, what just didn't seem to make sense.  Or even for example, the name, the actual, factual name as a given name of my grandfather, my father's father, is still at issue even now.  I mean that's an incredible thing.  We think, I think, as best we can tell from looking at the pictures, from looking at census records and so on, his given name was Elihu, E-L-I-H-U, I guess it is, Elihu Spight.  But I know him, and my father told us of him, and we know from Memphis census records--he was born in Ripley, Mississippi, but from Memphis census records, he went by the name Earnest Virgil.  But we can't link this up.  The picture, right, the picture of which is an (unclear) [amity?] of the picture, that is, the names written down by somebody who cared to capture all of those, couple of (unclear) people sitting on that porch in Ripley, has it that he has to be Elihu, but there's no transition, right?  How do you go from Elihu to Earnest Virgil, unless you said to yourself, boy, that's a antediluvian name. That's a name from some other time, some other history, and that's not a name of Memphis currency.  My father tells the story that gives me the sense that he was a kind of a cosmopolitan socialite, mover, shaker, singer, vocalist, golfer, member of the Masons [Freemasons] in Memphis, Tennessee.  So if I assume that he gets some of that perhaps from his father, you know, that is that sense of being a person with kind of social mobility, it may be that Elihu was considered too much of a Southern name--
Speaker 1: Kinda old timey.
Speaker 2: Yeah, old timey, right.  And he shed that name, and adopted Earnest Virgil.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed to be a tradition there, when you think about, it was Ephraim, being Ephraim --
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ephraim, well, that's a old timey name.
Speaker 1: Elihu or Elihu [Elihoo], you know, or whatever they'd call it.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm given the name to be Elihu [Elihue], by what I'm being told by folk who go back aways, but Elihu [Elihoo], yeah.
Speaker 1: You know how the country people--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --from what I understand.
Speaker 2: But the point that I was making earlier is that not only do we not have stories like that, but what we have, if anything, are these things that don't link up quite right.  And you have to try to make sense of what's going on.  Was he in fights?  (laughter)  I mean, for example, I mean that was one theory, that he left Ripley [Mississippi] to go to Memphis [Tennessee] and changed his name because he had other things to do or maybe he had reason to have changed his name.  He clearly abandoned a large family that, at some point, with my father, was living in Memphis, Tennessee.  And so something is going on there, change of name, essentially, not being available to father a large family.  And I have no story of an untimely death.  So just flight, but I don't know, you know, I really don't know what's going on there.  Anyway, there's a side.  So, rather than stories, what I have are constructions, trying to make sense of where stories or what stories might clarify.
Story_ID: 29134
Speaker 1: Well, did you father [William Herman Spight] talk about, you know, why he left Memphis [Tennessee] to come to Indianapolis [Indiana] of all places?
Speaker 2: Of all places, and especially--
Speaker 1: Not that there's anything wrong with Indianapolis, but just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Indianapolis has a history of being a highly segregated, southern kind of place.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Indiana has that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Indianapolis, the White Citizens' Council [The White Citizens' Council/Citizens' Councils of America], the Klan [Ku Klux Klan].  You know, there's a lot of bad history.
Speaker 1: When did he get there, to Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: It was, certainly, he was there when he was in his forties, so 1940 for sure, maybe earlier.  That I, okay, again, I don't know that.  I don't know that.  I know he was there by 1940.  He may have been there earlier from Memphis.  He was, like I say, he was married twice, and the first marriage, he divorced very quickly.  He told me just a little bit about that.  It was some real, very bad scene involved with ultimately the divorce.  I'm not even sure I know what the ultimate reasons were.  But I think, the first marriage was when he was in this vocalist, singer, roving socialite, member of the Masons [Freemasons], a golfer.  We have photographs of him with golf bag and so he looks like a very prosperous middle-class, upper middle class type person, but we have no experience of that at all.  Our experience of, meaning myself and my brothers and sisters, experience of my father is as a laborer, a janitor at RCA [Radio Corporation of America] where he worked till he retired.  And we were poor.  You know, we were, lived in the ghetto in Indianapolis even though we lived in, at one point, in the home of my mother's [Erma Mae White] mother.  We were, you know, always just simply poor.  They had very little income to speak of.  And there were five of us children.  What I have is that interesting, problematic of a kind, a man who lived a life of a socialite, a golfer, a member of the Masons, who became, at least for the larger of time of my own upcoming, somebody who worked seven days a week as a janitor at RCA and who had essentially no life; a person that used to write very literate prose, long letters about the social issues of the time to the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and saved them.  And even though self-educated, clearly wrote as if he was a very literate person, you know, had great command of the language.  So I don't know what's up with that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it raises a lot of questions.
Speaker 2: It's just an odd, very odd thing.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your father's personality like and your parents?  Oh, do you have a story about how they met?  How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: Let me think here.  Do I know that story?  My mother, they met in Indianapolis.  My mother was very socially active herself.  So it must have been, probably--I'm just constructing this, right?  I don't know this as a fact, but probably when and before he became this recluse, seven-day a week worker, he may have encountered her when she was in her very active socialite mode.  I had pictures of her at one time and this is clear.  She's a very attractive woman.  I can imagine he may have encountered her out and about.  But I don't know that as a, he's never told me the story, nor is my, nor did my mother when she was still alive, tell the story.  I do not know.
Speaker 1: Well, there's a considerable age difference between them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true, yeah, that's right.  Yeah, he was, he died in 1990.  He was ninth years old or eighty-nine actually, when he died, but there was always that gap.  Well, again, she had been married before and so had he.  So, but that was, yeah, fairly considerable, twenty or so year, yeah.
Story_ID: 29135
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your first memory of growing up?  What's your first memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, first memory?  First memory?  Never had somebody to ask me quite that.  Very first memory.  I have some vague memories of playing in the, when we were still in the home of my mother's mother, playing with my brothers.  Somehow it was at the side, on the side of the house, and I'm not quite sure why it stands out quite like that, but it's just a, probably a playful, something at play with my just older brother, Roy.  If you ask the earliest memory, that's about as good as it gets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how many brothers do you have?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, three brothers and a sister.  There's five of us total.  I'm in the middle, two older brothers, a younger brother, a younger sister, immediate sister, and then a younger brother.
Speaker 1: Can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Von, no middle names, so it's gonna be easy here, right, Von, Roy and then myself, Carl, then Lolita and then my youngest brother, Glenn, spelled with two "n's", G-L-E-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that comprises the household, I guess, with your grandmother while you stayed with her--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and your father.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we were all, yeah, and this was a, not a big place, you know.  It was a, it had two, how many were, I'm trying to remember whether it actually had been converted into a two-family dwelling.  In terms of size of the house, there were two door, I remember in the front.  But it was a, you know, one of these kind of A-frame shotgun kind of houses there, you know.  This was in the East side of Indianapolis, essentially in the ghetto of Indianapolis.  And this is not a sprawling kind of place.  It was crowded.  For much of my very young years, just before I left going off to school and so on, and I shared a bedroom with brothers, you know.  So this was, cozy (laughter), and not a lot of room.
Story_ID: 29136
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells?  We lived very close to a public park so we had relatively easy access to a swimming pool and baseball diamond and so on.  So even though we had almost nothing of a yard and so on, but because we were almost immediately in the vicinity of a public, I remember a lot of fun years there of being active on the swimming team, for example, along with a couple of my brothers, playing baseball.  Smells?  Smells, I've got no, no sense of smells, but I have a kind of visual thing of always being able to get to a park and being able to run and play and so on.  So I've a lot of memories like that.  Sights and sounds?  My father had a, probably dating back to his earlier period, had a vast collection of LP's [long-playing microgroove record], of seventy-eights [vinyl record, seventy-eight revolutions per minute] that he had jazz, blues, that kind of thing.  He would very infrequently play those.  Sometimes, when he was in the mood, you'd hear him singing, mainly to himself.  He unfortunately, had a problem with alcohol for many of the years when I was coming up.  And it was during those times, probably when he was remembering another kind of life that music would come to the house through those seventy-eights and through whenever he was singing.  He would always sing--it's interesting that you raised that question, he would always sing when he was, I'll call it drunk, a song that I could never relate to.  It was 'Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,' 'Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,' Now, how 'Carry Me Back to Old Virginny,' Virginia, gets constructed in something that's a favorite song of my father's from Memphis, Tennessee and Ripley, Mississippi, I have no idea.  But he would always sing that.  So, sounds, that's one of them.  And the other is the fact that he had this collection.  That's basically about as good as I can do at the moment.
Speaker 1: You say your father read a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he would read.  He had a collection of the 'Pittsburgh Courier' going back to (unclear) from the origin, I don't know.  He would keep clippings of newspapers--all that's lost now, and that's a tragedy too.  He definitely would read newspapers.  He would read newspapers from, obviously, the 'Pittsburgh Courier', and Indianapolis especially, it's not something that what could a normal read of somebody in the black community certainly.  I'm trying to remember had I seen books.  I don't, I don't have a sense, we did not have books in the house when I was coming up.  I don't remember encyclopedia's, for example, just didn't have those.  He was a very private person.  He had no close friends, worked seven days a week.  He would go to work early in the morning, very early in the morning, and would get off at about 3:00 o'clock in the afternoon.  He worked that shift, and he did that for years and years and years and years.  And when he would come home, he would eat dinner, read the newspaper, and just about the time sun would set, he would go to bed and get up again very early in the morning and he would go to work.  So I suppose he probably read things, but mainly, it was always the newspaper, is what I remember and that collection of 'Pittsburgh Courier'  and he would, in moments when he would become, when he was drunk, I guess, again, is when he would tell us about things and preach, I guess is the only way to characterize it, about issues, about the plight of the black man and, you know, that kind of thing.  He was bitter in some sense about a lot of things, I think, very concerned that we understood ourselves as being people who had to make a contribution.  I mean that was a theme that was always out of his mouth, that you needed to make the world different from the way you found it, some theme and version on that.  He was very concerned about that.  Yeah, he didn't do that directly with his life in some simple sense, that is, as a career person, as a person who got involved in organizations and so on, of taking leadership.  He was a very self-educated, but very literate person.  But I mean he expressed none of that in terms of leadership itself, interesting to me.  Sorry, I think I've gone--
Speaker 1: No, that's a good--
Speaker 2: --some distance away from what your question was.
Speaker 1: I mean did you mother read or anything?  Did she keep up with things?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  She, probably that's, you know, the age difference there, in part, she never finished grade school.  She was a beautiful woman, you know, in her adulthood, mature adulthood and so on.  He probably was attracted to her in that sense of things.  I've never heard them, never know of them having conversations, you know, about issues, for example, about the kind of things that he would preach to us about.  I've never known, and I have no memory at all of them ever having that kind of exchange, communication.
Story_ID: 29137
Speaker 1: So he didn't have any relatives in Indianapolis himself?
Speaker 2: He had a, an uncle and a couple of cousins.  But again, he was estranged from the family, and he made no effort to--in fact, one of them lived not too far away, within walking distance of where we lived in Indianapolis.  Very rarely would he go visit, and he was, and when we were very young, he would take us along and they would sit and talk for a while.  But he didn't clan together, didn't spend time.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of relatives on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: The only relatives I knew, relatives, my mother's brother and sister were in Indianapolis for a good number of years.  They lived pretty distant from us.  Of course, her mother and father lived, you know, and we were living with them at one point.  Let's see, she had two, my half sisters lived in Indianapolis for many years.  So, yeah, there was a kind of a family there.  But loosely-knit.  It was not the kind of family that came to the house, you know.  They were known to live in the city.  On occasion, we would go visit, not in a reunion sense, but just to buy some (unclear) I guess and so on.  But it was not a family that came to the house.  I don't know whether my father made it uninviting, given that he didn't extend himself at all to establish a kind of a homestead where folk would come in that sense.  And he wasn't present himself.  You know, like I say, most of the time he worked.  He ate breakfast and/or dinner and spent a couple of hours reading, and he would go to bed.  So there was no house like that, you know.  It just wasn't like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was no social life in that sense.
Speaker 1: Was there, did you all go to church and stuff?
Speaker 2: We, as children, went to church.  I was very devout at one time.  He was not.  In his senior years, in his last ten or so years, he became a deacon in a church in the immediate area where he was living.  But he was not, he didn't attend church at all.  My mother was really not a churchgoer either as a matter of fact.  My mother stressed that we should go to church interestingly enough, but they weren't, he wasn't a churchgoer at all.  I know of no sense of them having a sense of faith in that sense until he became, you know, he tuberculosis probably from the drinking and so on.  When he recovered from that, and when he became, you know, quite a senior person, like in the eighties, late seventies, early eighties, he would attend relentlessly.  You know, he became very devout in that sense, but that was not our experience.  So it was one of those things where you had to try to account for how that could be, and you assumed this because, you know, you're getting to your senior and your autumn years in life and you're, you know, trying to construct whatever it is.
Speaker 1: So what church did you all go to?
Speaker 2: We came up CME, Christian Methodist Episcopal, primarily because the church was a few blocks away.  It wasn't because there was any conscious choice.  There was no family background.  There was a short time when we, some of us would attend a Baptist church, which was even closer.  The CME church which was within walking distance of where we lived as youngsters, had a very dynamic minister, Reverend Cummings.  I was very active in the CME church or became very active in the CME church.  But so and as far as, you know, parents, neither one attended church.  I didn't know my father to be a Christian or a someone who would even profess a sense of belief in God even.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if his singing was related to church activities and all?
Speaker 2: No, no, he sang on the circuit.  You know, he was, he'd belt jazz, blues.  He was, in fact, he said, he used to tell me that his nickname was Memphis Slim so you get the idea that he was not a gospel, no, he sang in the other circuit, Memphis Slim.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 29138
Speaker 1: Now, now what kind of a little boy were you growing up?  I mean what did you like to do and who did you take after, do you think?
Speaker 2: I was the classic nerd probably, although I never thought of myself that way at all.  I was fascinated by science.  Beyond those earliest memories that you called me to reflect on, what I distinctly remember through TV is being just totally captured and awed by 'Mr. Wizard' ['Watch Mr. Wizard', 1951-1972] and there was another show that would always come on, 'Flash Gordon,' ['Flash Gordon', 1954-1955]  you know, all the little science fiction stuff and so on.  So I was, my earliest memory of wanted to do something.  I wanted to be something.  And then it seemed to be laughable--
Speaker 1: Captain United, something like that?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: It was 'Captain Video' ['Captain Video and His Video Rangers', 1949-1955], yeah, I think, remember--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Captain Video,' 'Mr. Wizard' and a show--do you remember 'Mr. Wizard?'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, he would always know how to do this--
Speaker 1: And Don Herbert.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Don Herbert, yeah, really that was my show.  I mean I didn't miss a one.  I had a little laboratory.  I used to be the neighborhood repairman for radios, black and tube radios.  I would scrounge stuff from junk, people would discard and put it together and take it apart and clocks, you know, all that.  So coming up, I was a gadgeteer, and a little junior Mr. Wizard.
Speaker 1: Did you have any real-life mentors or people that were--
Speaker 2: No, there was nobody in the family--
Speaker 1: --that did that kind of work or energy?
Speaker 2: --no, absolutely not.  There was nobody around me like that, literally nobody around me.  I mean the its just the influence from TV.  And every so often, I guess getting my hands on some book or something somebody would discard, you know.  In fact, I still have a physics book, that was something somebody discarded.  I can't even remember how it came to be discarded, some old dusty thing that I used to try to read.  And, of course, I couldn't read it then, but, you know, it was very early, a very early memory.  So there was no science person.  There was no--when I was in grade school, there was a science teacher who saw that I was really passionate about that and kind of took me under her mentorship in one sense.  And then there was a person who was a shop teacher who also taught phys-ed [physical education] who had, was a gadgeteer who could do things, you know, knew how to build motors and electrical devices and so on.  So until grade school, there was no mentors, no, no role models, no nothing in terms of, you know, immediate experience.  There's nothing in the family history that points towards science or technology or engineering, none of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was essentially nothing at home other than what I would bring in the door.
Speaker 1: Now, did your brothers and your sister participate in that kind of activity at all?
Speaker 2: No, I was the only, the curious kid who--now, I used to play baseball.  I used to swim on the swim team.  You know, I used to have a whole bunch of fun, but I also had this other side.  You know, I was one of these A and B sides, right?  I had the, we'll call it the B side, and the B side where I would hang with folks, and you know, we would have fun and play in the park.  But then I would switch over, a lot of times, into my A side where I would have my little cubby hole or my little fanciful construction in the house, you know.  My mother allowed and indulged, I guess, me to have at one time, a cubby hole and a little place in the attic where I could stash my stuff and so on.  So I had my laboratory.  So I had two lives essentially, two lives.  One was a playful kid who was like everybody else and the other one was this kid who said he wanted to be a nuclear physicist.  I used to say that when I was coming up after having watched enough 'Flash Gordon' and 'Mr. Wizard' and 'Captain Video' and so on.  I mean that was the thing to be.  I mean that was the highest possible realization of somebody who was into science, right?  And that was to be a nuclear physicist.  It sounded deep (laughter).  So that was it.  You know, I constructed that out of whole cloth, essentially on TV.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29139
Speaker 1: Now, this is a part of culture that's lost now, taking vacuum tubes to the corner store and testing them and trying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I say, I was Mr. Radio, I was Mr. Radio
Speaker 1: --to get them to work on the 'You Testa Machine.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the 'You Testa Machine,' that's right.  As I relating earlier, I came up in a ghetto, essentially a poor, very poor community where people had TV's and radios, but when they get broken, they couldn't afford to get them repaired, at least not quickly.  And most of the time, what was wrong, because this was the era of the vacuum tube where you had these filament heated devices which now have been totally replaced by integrated circuitry and so on.  You don't even see what, the active part.  There, you could at least look into the box and see the glass encased devices, some of them glowing and some not.  So at first pass, you could say to yourself, well, this radio or TV doesn't work because this tube is defective in some form or fashion, at least the cathode, this heated element, was not displaying in the way that it normally worked.  So you would take it out and you would literally, as you say, as we were sharing, carry it down to the corner whatever, drugstore, neighborhood grocery store and they would have a device in there.  And you'd plug the thing in, and it would give you a reading as to one, whether the filament, the thing that keeps up the kether (ph.) that would glow and you would be able to observe that it was functioning, if it was functioning.  It would test the filament, but it would also test other electronic aspects of it which was that next layer.  I mean that's one thing to establish as to whether it was blown out, as a vacuum tube element because you could all but determine that visually.  Then it's another thing to say whereas, it may not be blown out, but it has some absence of functionality, and it wasn't performing in a way that allows the radio or TV to function in terms of either the video display or the audio and so on.  So, it turns out, you know, there are a couple of layers of expertise.  A lot of my buddies got the kind of hang of it, especially when I got a little fifty cents here and a dollar there for being Mr. Radio, got the kind of hang of carrying the tube down to the corner store.  But then it's another thing to figure out, you know, that there might be other things that might be wrong, that there're other things inside the radio like capacitors and, you know, other little boxes and cylindrical devices and so on, resisters that might burnt out.  And to know what to do when that was true, essentially came from tearing apart, just literally tearing apart discarded radios and TV's and messing around and probably getting shocked electrically and (laughter) and destroying a few things here and there.  But that was my laboratory, you know.  So like I say, I was Mr. Radio.  But part of it was kind of just logical stuff, but a part of it was just being fascinated by, and then also like I said, seeing stuff on TV and figuring that this stuff is really interesting.  So I had a shortwave radio.  I had gotten one of these old, old shortwave--
Speaker 1: Did you make it yourself?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Well, I made, you know, crystal radios.  Of course, everybody does that.  You send off for this little germanium crystal and put a little safety pin onto the germanium and you get little earphones for it.  I saw it somewhere.  I did those little elementary things in terms of a radio, crystal detector they were called.  I don't know if that rings a bell.  These days people have no idea--
Speaker 1: I've heard of, by the time I came around, they weren't real, they weren't really--
Speaker 2: No, sure.  That's in an earlier day to be sure.  You had to put up a big, long antenna wire and barely hear.  You couldn't really tune it in the normal sense of the word.  There was no knob to tune it and so, it sounds like I'm talking about the eighteenth century or something, doesn't it?  And anyway, anyway, I had this big shortwave radio that I salvaged.  I mean I literally got that thing going by taking it out and destroying it.  The shortwave radio had maybe five or six bands on it, right.  And I got it, I got it going by spinning all that little ingenuity or whatever I came to learn by being Mr. Radio, of finding tubes and other discarded objects and so on.  And so I was able to tune to places all over the world, you know, shortwave is, people don't even know what you're talking about half the time unless you're an amateur radio person.  But I mean there's broadcasts, Quito, Ecuador and you can sit in your living room or bedroom at 2:00 a.m. at night and listen to radio broadcast on the shortwave from, you know, all around the plant.  And so I mean it was, this was miracle stuff to me.  I mean this was universes that opened up and so on, and so.  Anyway, again, roaming far afield (laughter) from whatever question you had asked.
Speaker 1: No, but that's it.  That's what we're trying to get at, you know, what inspired, what drove you to your interest in science (simultaneously).
Story_ID: 29140
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I had a dream life, I had an imagination life that was--
Speaker 2: So you add to this, part of your personality already and you just--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the interests, the enthusiasm, maybe the aptitude.  But then this constructed life which to me, as I reflect on it, was constructed out of fairly sparse resources.  I mean there was nothing bought.  You know, it was just scavenging and so on.  I wonder what it would be like to have been born in this kind of period, where everybody has computers and, you know, this marvelous technology.  I can't imagine what kind of person I would be had I been born in this period as opposed to the early '40s [1940s] in Indianapolis.
Speaker 2: Now, you were sort of bound and determined to do this anyway?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah.  Like I said, I had two lives and one of them was to be this nuclear physicist and to do these fantastic things that I saw on TV, that Mr. Wizard ['Watch Mr. Wizard', 1951-1972] could do casually.  So, yeah, I was bound and determined.
Speaker 2: Do you remember seeing Wernher von Braun on Walt Disney's show [Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color Episodes: Mars and Beyond (1957), Man and the Moon (1955), Man in Space (1955)]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, their early days of rocketry and so on, although I guess I never was, I used to mess around with, what do you call these matches that had the heads on them, that they're not like safety matches now.  Safety matches now require you to have a particular surface, and there was a time, possibly a very unsafe period, where there was an igniting head on kitchen matches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you'd just rub it on anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd rub it on anything, you just flick it or strike it and it would ignite because there's another chemical mix on the head.  But I would, using a little train set, transformer, you know, that would run the electric trains, I would bind together all of these matches in a little cylindrical can and wind some wire around it because I had plenty of wire because I was Mr. Radio, right?  And heat it up with the transformer from the electric train set and launch my little rockets and so on.  So whereas I did not idolize von Braun and didn't fair myself as a rocketry person, and so I used to do all that stuff.  You know, I used to have the smoke trailing out and, you know, these big plumes of, I used to do all that stuff as a kid.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any friends that had similar interests?
Speaker 1: Only one, and that was in grade school.  Yeah, Paul Burst.  As a matter, I'm in contact with him now.  But we used to do science projects.  He used to live down the street from me, and he was sort of science interested.  He didn't have the same kind of passion that I did, but he was, he sort of saw it, he saw it as fun.  So we used to do these things together.  Other than that, everybody was, you know, were off swimming or playing baseball or whatever, throwing rocks at people (laughter), you know, rolling tires down the, you know, all the wheel tires down the street.
Story_ID: 29141
Speaker 1: Now, what grade school did you attend in Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Boy, let's see.  It's School Number 56, but it had a name.  Oh, Frances W. Parker School, there we go.  Frances W. Parker, School Number 56.
Speaker 1: Named after Frances Parker, the Indian historian?
Speaker 2: As a, yeah, that person, yeah.  There are schools named all over the country by--
Speaker 1: School Number 56?
Speaker 2: Right, School Number 56, Frances W. Parker.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what was that like?  How did you do in school now?  You're--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was tremendous in school.  I was the only one.  I was a school nerd, no mistaking that.  I got the reputation, my brother tells me in later years that I used to read encyclopedias.  They did have encyclopedias at Frances W. Parker School Number 56.  They didn't have a lot of stuff.  It was a ghetto school, you know, inner city.  But they did have encyclopedias, and by the time I was in grade school we had moved down the street, across from the school, literally across from it, out of my mother's mother's house into our own home by then when I was in grade school.  We lived across the street from School Number 56.  So I never missed a day in eight years, for reasons that are probably obvious since we lived right across the street from school.  My mother [Erma Mae White] ended up becoming a school guard, a traffic guard, making a little money so that she could buy her cigarettes and play, gamble, I guess, that's the only way to describe it, with her friends at that time.  So we lived across the street from the school.  My mother was a school guard, known to the school by, you know, the principal of the school and the teachers of the school.  So her children then, because the teachers all knew my mother, and my mother knew all the teachers because she was a crossing guard, a school crossing guard, had immediate communication with how we were doing.  You couldn't act up.  If anything went wrong in the school, my brothers and sisters mainly because I was actually a good student, it became immediately known to my mother because they had to do was walk out the door of the school and tell her.  And then she could walk home, right across the street from the school and we would get our comeuppance if we were truant, absent, acting up, any of that, none of that, was liable for us because we were the children of the school guard, the crossing guard.  But the school had a science, had someone who taught science.  What was her name?  It'll come to me, probably jump out at me.  Anyway, she identified fairly early on, especially as I got up in the grades, that I was science interested.  And so she used to bring books and magazines. I mean she would loan them to me and I could take them home and so on to encourage me.  She gave me a chemistry book, I remember in particular.  I couldn't quite make out all that was in it, and so I used to start off reading it.  She really wasn't, you know, this is Indianapolis, Indiana in the '50s [1950s].  The kind of teaching that we probably commonly think of in terms of content, specialties and so on, really wasn't quite there in that time.  So whereas she would give me this chemistry book, she really didn't know chemistry herself.  She knew kind of physical science, bio-, you know, biology kind of stuff.  But she couldn't interpret it for me, couldn't help me to get through it.  She knew enough that she felt I needed to look at these things and become familiar with them and started it off, this kind of appetizing.  So, but she really wasn't, she wasn't, how else can I say it, she was somebody who picked me up and recognized and tried to facilitate me.  But she was not a mentor.  She was not a role model.  In fact, I usually answer the question whether I had role models coming up, that I didn't have any, even though there were people who obviously recognized, I think, an appetite and an aptitude perhaps, and tried to encourage it.  They themselves were not directly expert or able to facilitate it directly by teaching and schooling it.  Mainly, they encouraged it, which is important to be sure.
Speaker 1: Well, they did what they could do, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what they could do.
Story_ID: 29142
Speaker 1: So I would literally read encyclopedias.  There's no mistaken that I actually did read encyclopedias.  There was nothing else there.  I'd get to school early because I lived right across the street from the school and my mother [Erma Mae White]  is the school crossing guard.  So she had to be out there before school starts, right?  She had to be out of the house.  My father [William Herman Spight] was at work.  As I told you, he worked seven days a week, go in very early in the morning.
Speaker 2: Seven days a week?
Speaker 1: Seven days a week, literally, never took a vacation.  I have no idea what the mentality of that mold was, but it was something that he did religiously.  So anyway, so she would go to school and so we had to go to school too.  So I got to school early.  You know, we had to be out of the house because she was out of the house.  And so what am I to do?  I got to school early.  I'm Mr. Wizard, and there's encyclopedias there so I literally would kind of open them up and spend a half an hour or so just looking at them, and found it vastly fascinating, you know, just another world, another world.  So '56, in the early facets of the Parker school, in the early period, it was not a highly resourced school.  But it was a school where--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMER DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --where, it was a school where a number of people were prepared to recognize me and to encourage me.  And in the classes, you know, I was the "A" student, or whatever, the, and was kind of recognized all the way through as being the scholar and whatever, the wiz kid, in elementary school.  In fact, because of being the kind of school scholar, I ended up traveling to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on a trip that the school won from the Freedom Foundation [Freedoms Foundation of Valley Forge, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania].  This was kind of an American-ist organization that tried to make outreach to the schools in the black communities to develop patriotism in the Negro community or black community.  I mean that's the only way to describe it.  And they would foster trips to Philadelphia to see the, you know, the Bell [Liberty Bell] and go to Valley Forge [Winter encampment of the Continental Army 1777-1778, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania] and so on.  So the very first time I ever left home, literally, meaning out of Indianapolis [Indiana], was on that trip in the seventh grade, I guess it was, to go to Philadelphia to see all of the artifacts of Americana.  And so I got to do that kind of thing because I was the school, whatever, exemplary student, I suppose.
Speaker 2: This is about 1956, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right.  Let's see when I finished--
Speaker 2: And Eisenhower is the president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about '56 [1956], '57 [1957], right in there, right, right, exactly.  I'm trying to remember the climate beyond that.  Right, yeah, Ike [Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president, I think that's right.  So, anyway, I guess the, you asked a question that motivated all of that.  Basically, I was the school wiz kid, the scholar, the one who would answer the questions, who would get the A's, who would whatever?
Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to go to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution] when you were in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: No, you were Philadelphia, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in Philadelphia, right.  We went to Valley Forge.  And we went to see the Liberty Bell, that kind of thing.  You know, it was a tourist, it was a very tourist kind of thing.  There was some kind of a program where I think each school had to say something about the sense of what America represented to them, you know, you understand.  It was that kind of period.  And the whole idea of the Freedom Foundation fostering the trip was to foster the sense of patriotism and so on.  So, I don't remember whether I was the one that had to say, in fact, I think I do remember.  I had some kind of little speech to do at the ceremony, thanking them for, I'm sure, the sponsorship and something very pro-American, I'm sure (laughter), something very patriotic.  I'm sure I said something like that.
Story_ID: 29143
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you aware of, now, you being, you know, reading and more aware of what's going on than a lot of kids your age, were you aware of the Civil Rights Movement then, and what was going on?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I had no consciousness of, other than my father.  Remember, sorry, pardon me.  My father [William Herman Spight], in reading of the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and in his sense of wanting to make sure that we understood ourselves as black folk, would make me aware, but I didn't, I didn't read that kind of thing.  Remember, I'm the wiz kid, science interested kind of guy.  And I don't remember any sense of a civil rights activism or I mean there'd be things on TV and so, but it never, it never intersected my sense of that which, you know, focused me.  I have no memory of it in that way.
Speaker 1: Did you read 'Your History' by J. A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] in the 'Courier'?  Do you remember seeing that?
Speaker 2: That's interesting, yeah, that's interesting.  There are many who probably have memory of J. A. Rogers who comes before all these other folk who kind of popularized the sense of a anteriority, of prehistory of black folk and so on.  But I do remember J. A. Rogers.  I only found it more odd than anything else.  I'm sorry I didn't have a political consciousness at that time.  I'm not sure how much it meant to me other than it would ring, it would have resonances of what my father would talk about when he felt it important to talk.  But because most of that conversation would come from my father in a period when he was drunk--there's no other way to describe it, it didn't have the emotional currency and didn't have, you know, there's one thing to hear something passionate from some person who is integrating that into their lives and he did not, and who is communicating with you when you are conscious that he's talking to you as opposed to hearing this kind of passion and sense of concern and importance communicated to you when you know that person is not sober.  And you know that person is not involved himself.  So the link I think just didn't happen there.  And I'm a very conscious, politically conscious person now, and have constructed myself in that way in some sense and am very much concerned about these kind of issues.  But I didn't have that then, certainly didn't have that then.
Speaker 1: It almost sounds, and correct me if I'm wrong, it sounds like your father was almost doing penance or something, I mean he's working those long hours.
Speaker 2: It's strange.  Yeah, it's strange, it's strange.  I used to call it, I used to tell my brothers and sisters that my explanation for it was what I called the Depression [The Great Depression] syndrome of having the trauma of having experienced desperately, there's a sense of having almost nothing and having to struggle to have just a little bit, such that when you had a steady job, you held onto it fiercely as if that was the defining element in your life in some sense.  So you call it penance.  Maybe it is a penance of a kind.  It's hard to know.  I know he lived, and I know he wrote in that later years, you know, in my adult years when I was able to see some of the things that he wrote, he was very concerned about all of these things, outside of some sense of always surfacing only when we would know him not to be sober.  So I don't know.  I don't have a way to explain it all.  But I do know that notwithstanding having taken the trip to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so on, I neither had a sense of patriotism on the one side nor did I have a sense of being some carrier of the race or, you know, somebody who had a purpose and a motivation in that way.  Well, I basically was fascinated by science.  And so the whole of imaginative life outside of, you know, just being a kid, a young person, was captured by that.  That's the long and the short of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29144
Speaker 1: Now, in high school, now, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Arsenal Technical High School, Arsenal Technical High School [Indianapolis, Indiana].  It was on a different side of town entirely.  Sorry, it was a predominantly white high school, fairly large with a large race problem.  There would be fights on the high school campus, and it was probably called a campus because we had multiple buildings.  And it was a big thing.  My sense of Arsenal, A-R-S-E-N-A-L, Arsenal Technical High School, the sense I have of the high school was that it was a predominantly white high school whose neighborhood was in conversion and where the black community was slowly, but surely engulfing it.  So whereas, when I went there, it was predominantly white, there was a significant black attendance there.  And I used to, you had to ride the bus to get there.  It was way away.  It took me easily a half hour, maybe forty-five minutes going across town to get to high school.
Speaker 1: So what was it like a magnet school?  I mean in a sense--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Was your attendance unusual for people in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, because there weren't many high schools.  There were a couple of high schools that were elite high schools, Shortridge High School, now predominantly black, then had .05 percent black attendance and was considered to be one of the best high schools in the country, in the country, not just in Indianapolis or in Indiana.  But that was out of bounds, you know, it's just not, not accessible.  Arsenal Technical High School, I think, was probably one of the big high schools within the region, you know, within the, it could have been assigned on some kind of aerial basis.  Oh, I'm sorry, it just occurred to me.  I'm not speaking factually here.  There was another high school that was a little closer that was predominantly black, Crispus Attucks High School which my sister attended.  My father [William Herman Spight] was, okay, this I do remember now, was very particular that I not go to that high school, Crispus Attucks High School, because it was a ghetto school.  You know, I'm sure he, you know, and all the negative senses of that.  And I think I had the option then in not attending Crispus Attucks, a few options to go, sorry, to Arsenal Technical High School.
Speaker 1: Because it was a technical high school or because--
Speaker 2: Well, that name, frankly, I never took, sorry (unclear).  I have no memory of that name being, although, it must have had some significance now that you say that.  I have no memory of it being a technical high school.  It's not like Lane Tech [Albert G. Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] in town here.  Lane Tech is clearly a different kind of place.  It's science focused, engineering where it sends a lot of its youngsters.  In fact, I sent my son deliberately, sent my oldest son to Lane Tech when I moved to Chicago, knowing him to be, at that time, at least science interested because it was known to be, Lane Technical High School, excellent in science and so on.  I don't have a sense of Crispus, I mean of Arsenal Technical High School of being like that.  Now, they did have a fairly substantial campus.  They did have physics.  They offered physics.  I mean you can be sure that Crispus Attucks, the black high school, did not.  They had chemistry and so.  I took all of those courses.  It was a big school, but I don't think it was a specialty.  It was not a magnet school for science.  It, sorry, it was definitely not like Lane Tech is in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but it was a, it had a lot of racial tension?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  That I remember distinctly, and experienced on a daily basis.  There would literally be many race riots around lunchtime, fights in the lunch room.  Those were routine, I mean literally routine on a daily basis.  There was a lot of racial tension.  I can remember for the first time being called a Nigger.  Because I lived in the black community, I didn't come in contact with it and didn't really roam around Indianapolis.  Indianapolis was a small country, back-water place when I was coming up, and you know, you, where everybody kind of knew their place.  Black folk didn't go roaming in the white neighborhoods and vice versa.
Speaker 1: There was a clear black side of town?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely, definitely.  So I had no contact with this kind of direct experience of racism until I went to Lane, to Arsenal Technical High School.  And there it's, you know, like I say, it was a daily part of the atmosphere.  I was, again, a good student, was the only one, you know, that kind of thing, the only one in class A, B and C.  I have a memory of being the only one in algebra, only one in chemistry, only one in physics and so on.  I did well there to be sure.  I got the math medal and the science medal, but I had the experience of always this sense of race being somewhere here.  You know, I was never treated quite the same way.  When I expressed an interest to do a science fair project in physics, I didn't get the encouragement.  I had to kind of decide that I was gonna do it whereas my white counterpart at Arsenal Technical High School, I could see that they were getting resources, you know, right?  So, when it came time for me to think about college, my advisor--I got the science medal and the math medal, along with a couple of other white students.  I wasn't the only one to get the science medal and not the only one to get the math medal, which sort of asked, kind of smacked of, wondering what was up there, right?
Story_ID: 29145
Speaker 1: So all right, your high school at Arsenal?
Speaker 2: Arsenal Technical High School [Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: It sounds dangerous.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  I'm sure there's some history there.  I'm a Hoosier.  You know, all those things have histories.  We used to have--I've got a couple other (unclear) having to study Indiana history in high school.  I do remember that.  And you had to study the Constitution of the State of Indiana, boy, boy, boy.  That was required stuff, you know.  That's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Is your perception of Indiana, after you've left it, is it, I mean a lot of people who go through Indiana from other Northern states, you know, perceive it as almost a southern state, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 1: I think it's the only state in the union that had a Grand Dragon [Knights of the Ku Klux Klan: Grand Dragon was the highest ranking Klansman in a state] for a governor [sic, Edward L. Jackson, 32nd Governor of Indiana, close friend of David Curtiss "Steve" Stephenson, Grand Dragon of the Indiana Ku Klux Klan].
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, Indiana is backward.  I mean it was backward.  Certainly when I was coming through and I'm sure before, it was, it was pretty bad.  It was a southern state, no mistaking.  It may be slightly up North, but it was very southern in consciousness.  You know, downtown Indianapolis, we used to have a black section, a place where black folk, you know, knew they could go and there's some places where you, you know.  No, it was, it was backward, it was backward.  And they sections in town, you know, where you were expected to be and not be.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that fountain downtown?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the War Memorial, or you're talking about the big thing (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, with the pioneers and all that and everything--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, yeah.  That's the War Memorial, War Memorial Monument [Indiana War Memorial Plaza, Indianapolis, Indiana] or something or another.  It has some, I used to know the history of the thing.  I mean we had to study this stuff in school.  But go ahead, you were asking a question about it?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just asking (unclear) your reflections of it because I know I've just seeing it as an adult, I just kind of reflects on--
Speaker 2: Well, it certainly had nothing to do with black folk, that's for sure.  It was clearly a symbol of something, but it had nothing to do with me.  I remember that.  No, (unclear) I was telling you (unclear) study and the other, you know, history and the Constitution of Indiana and all of that stuff and the history of all of that had nothing to do with me.  I mean that, that I was clear on.
Speaker 1: Did they ever mention black people in any of that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember black people in the (unclear) (simultaneous) or Indiana history?  Nah, I have no memory of black folks being important in the history of Indiana.  I'm sure we must have had some significant contributions just because, you know, the discovery and exploration of that area.  But--
Speaker 1: Oh, in terms of the local lore, I was asking you about Oscar Robinson [Oscar "The Big O" Palmer Robertson, National Basketball Association (NBA) player 1960-1974] too, I mean him being such a tremendous influence on black, young people all over the country at that time.  How did you all feel about him in Indiana?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were very proud of 'Big O,' no mistaking.  Like I say, he was the equivalent, let me see who could you identify with now like?  You know he was a towering figure just because of his prowess and so on.  And because he was a manner of being supreme over what was thought to be, you know, the beginning and the end.  Whereas the Indiana basketball was white, Oscar Robinson made it clear that they didn't own that at all.  And so we were all very prideful in the same way that at one time you might have been prideful about a Joe Louis [Joseph Louis Barrow, world heavyweight boxing champion from 1937-1949] or a Muhammad Ali [Born Cassius Marcellus Clay, Jr., world heavyweight boxing champion 1964, 1967, 1974, 1979] or a Tiger Woods [Eldrick Tont "Tiger" Woods, American professional golfer] and so.  I mean, you know, we right now see him as being somebody who for us made a point, right?  Made a point.  Not just that he was good, and that we enjoyed basketball, Hoosier, you know, Hoosier's always enjoy basketball, of course.  But he was the best, simply the best.  So, and it was nothing they could do about it, right?  And like I say, you know, and Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana] was the best in the whole state, nothing they could do about it, entirely black, right?  Nothing they could do about it; didn't do anything else, but in basketball, they were, they were towering over the rest of them.  So, you know, there was a lot of pride in that sense, very simple, since you know, the calculus there is very simple.
Story_ID: 29146
Speaker 1: Now, how was your social life at Arsenal [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].?
Speaker 2: Social life?  I had a few white friends sort of.  I don't have any, I didn't have any buddies that were white.  I'm not sure how social I was, depending on what you mean by that.  I used to have friends, of course, you know, mainly folk who went to Arsenal Tech like me on the bus from my neighborhood.  So we were, in essence, kind of cubbish, you know.  And there were blacks from Arsenal Tech from other areas in town, but we didn't really mix with them.  In fact, there used to be a lot of gang war, wars going on, sort of like the Blackstone Rangers [currently The Almighty Black P. Stone Nation, a Chicago-based street gang 1959-present] and, you know, the Chicago stuff.  The East side, black East side of Indianapolis and the West side of Indianapolis used to war.  So even though they may be, the gangs, so even though there may be folk from various areas at Arsenal Tech because it's a big school, mainly you kinda hung out with the folks that were from your neighborhood.
Speaker 1: It was turf conflicts?
Speaker 2: They, the turf conflicts was black, white at Arsenal Tech.  In the neighborhoods, you don't go from the East side to the West side without expecting a fight.  So back home, there's turf, but not at, we just didn't hang, didn't mix, you know, and you mainly stayed with the folk who you knew in your neighborhood who were at Arsenal Tech in this predominantly white high school.
Speaker 1: How were you accepted in the black community?  You know, recently Bill Cosby talked about how nowadays if a black student is serious about his studies, they call white, you know, you're trying to be white, you know, what's wrong with you, you know?  Was that kind of thing going on then or?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, nah.  I had friends.  Well, a couple of things.  Bill Cosby probably knows this, but he doesn't say this, and the folk who criticize and Ogbu and the whole thesis of acting white [John Uzo Ogbu, 'Black American Students in an Affluent Suburb: A Study of Academic Disengagement'] know it well but don't always effectively communicate it in a way that's important, and that is, you can be interested in things, ideas, in science, for example, in literature, in knowing and learning.  You can be interested in that.  The thing that you can't do while being so interested is to think of yourself as therefore better than or higher than, of having something over, of being raised up, you know, lifted up above those who are not interested in that.  You can't carry yourself in certain kinds of ways and be accepted.  But I never had the sense of the, like I say, I was Mr. Radio, Mr. Wizard, wiz kid and at Tech, plainly the guy who was into courses that no blacks even thought about taking.  But I had friends, and they never, they never talked to me about why are you doing that?  I mean that's un-cool.  That's not black or any other such thing.  If anything, they took some pride, I think, and asked for help. A couple things were true of me, I was a sad person always in coming up.  But I had another side, all right?  And that is, I grew up in a community and neighborhood and in an environment, I had brothers and sisters, and we lived across the street from a public park where stuff was going on all the time, baseball, swimming and so on.  So I knew and was in communication with and had skills there and had enthusiasms for stuff that everybody else did, right?  I just had that other side, right?  I had an "A" side and a "B" side.  And I didn't flaunt my "A" side, what I'm calling my "A" side, this "I want to be a nuclear physicist".  In fact, if folk didn't know it already, they would have no way to know it cause I didn't bring it up, you know, in the general circuit of things.  I didn't flaunt it, I didn't bring it up, I didn't talk about it, I didn't try to bring other folk into it.  I did what they did, right?  I did what they did.  I, my "B" side was everybody else.  My "A" side was this relatively private passion, but a very high passion, which I didn't think of as making me different from everybody else in the sense of being able to kind of be around them, hang out with them, offer them assistance if they wanted, and so on.  So the acting white is acting socially white, of thinking yourself better than.  It has nothing to do, or if anything, I got encouragement.  If any, I got "wow's" and I got respect.  I was called Mr. Wizard, you know, or whatever, right, by my friends, my friends who really knew that I was, I had my "A" side, right.  They didn't put me down for that.  I didn't put them down.  I didn't parade around.  I liked to play baseball just like they did, you know, and so on, right?  Tried to listen to a little music, you know, and that kind of thing.  So, the notion of acting white fails to get to the heart of what is at root being challenged by folk who bring the challenge against academic prowess and investment in learning and academic achievement, and that is, you can't get yourself, you're still a Nigger, right?  You're still a black person and you're still a Negro, and you're still like me.  You still are gonna be called Nigger by some white person who is uncivilized.  And their notion is, you know, don't think of yourself as being other than that.  You know, the common denominators are still there.  You have perhaps some contribution to make, and if you're moving yourself in the world in a way of making contributions, giving and sharing, then you're accepted.  If you're distancing yourself, right, if you're priding yourself, right?  If you are articulating yourself and in that sense distinguishing yourself from Willie Shabo (ph.), right, by the way you speak, then you got a problem.  And, you know, from my vantage point, even as a mature adult, you ought to have a problem.  You ought to have a problem.  You'd probably have a problem from me, Mr. Wizard, right.  You ought to have a problem.  It's simple.
Story_ID: 29147
Speaker 1: Okay, you said when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, they were telling you that you ought to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I was talking about it, being interested in science or doing something, and remember, I'm wanting to be a nuclear physicist, right?  But they said, you know, you're good in science, you're good in math, and you're good in history.  You've got some, you know, good grades.  Howard is a good school.  That was the horizon.  That was it, period, boom, period.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your perception of Howard at that time?
Speaker 2: I knew nothing about it.  You know, again, I didn't claim, I have a different consciousness now and an awareness, you know, the broad perimeters and gauges of the world, but then I had heard about Howard only remotely as some school.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think I knew it might have been a black school, but that's, you know, I knew nothing.  I did not, I did not know then that Howard was a flagship institution in the black community, for example, was a highly respected academic institution among other things, has its problems, its limitations and so on.  But it also had its assets and its legacies and its history.  I knew nothing of that.  I knew the name, so I knew it was a Negro school, speaking of that age consciousness, right.  I knew it was a Negro school.  My father [William Herman Spight] sort of knew it because remember he's a 'Pittsburgh Courier' guy, right.  But he worked at RCA at the time, RCA, Radio Corporation of America, right, radios, TV's, engineering.  He talked to his white friends, and got the impression from his white--he was a janitor, but the people who work as technicians or engineers and so on, that Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], you know, that I ought to think about engineering, he probably maybe related the story that I would always talk about of being interested in being a nuclear physicist.  His, as best I can tell, because he became so passionate about it, his working colleagues, he janitor, they technician or whatever, would urge him to have me think about engineering.  I'd never thought about being an engineer.  It just never crossed my mind.  I probably didn't know what they did either.  I wanted to be a nuclear physicist.  But the next thing I know, as I was starting to get serious about college applications, he was urging me to apply to Purdue.  In fact, the single strongest and most salient reason for me applying to Purdue, because I don't remember applying to anything other than Purdue, and maybe I applied to Howard just because my advisors at Arsenal Tech [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] were putting some pressure on me,  I don't even remember getting admitted to Howard.  Maybe I did.  I have no idea.  I have no memory of it.  You know, I applied to Purdue because he said, hey, that's what his work buddies told him would be an opportunity for me, and so I did.  My father didn't have any money to send me to Purdue.  That's for sure.  I ended up getting a General Motors scholarship that paid a lot of the freight.  It was about a thousand dollars [$1,000] a year.  Then, that was a lot of money.  It was a whole lot of money then, far more money than my family could provide.  That's for sure.  So I ended up going to Purdue in engineering out of Arsenal Technical High School and not because they were giving me any encouragement to apply to a white engineering or science college or university but because my father had been influenced to think about that for me by having, by happenstance to have been working at RCA.  So I put my dream of being a nuclear physicist on hold, and since it was something, it wasn't on the radar screen, he wasn't into, he had no calculus, no place for such a dream, my father.
Story_ID: 29148
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of what the next step was to be a nuclear physicist if you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Nah, probably not.  I don't know, I had no memory of having perused catalogs.  I mean I came from a family where I was the first one who even went to, or thought about going to college.  I mean it's not a, you know, it's not a two-parent family where they both graduated from "x" and you know the ropes and you know how to apply or think about applying.  There was nobody, there was nobody to advise me.  My high school counselors and whatever weren't advising me.  My friends, you know, that wasn't even on the radar screen.  So, plus, I didn't have the self, whatever it was, invested resources of having to look at stuff, you know, about college applications.  You know, I was novice to all this.  All I knew was that I wanted to go to college because that was a step in being a scientist.  It was clear that you had to go to college, right?  So there were only two, two plans, and one was the notion of going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia], coming from advisors at Arsenal Tech [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], and then the other was my father [William Herman Spight] who said he had understood that there was an opportunity right up the road.  Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] is about fifty, is fifty-eight miles, about sixty miles from Indianapolis.  So, you know, it was a hop, skip and a jump in one sense, but a giant leap, you know, depending on how you think about all these things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, West Lafayette (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was reachable.  Well, West Lafayette, boy (laughter), Lafayette, Indiana and West Lafayette was another kind of place then, you know.  When I was an undergraduate student at Purdue University, the notion of a black student being in engineering, I mean, they--now, they have a black student union, not a black student union, well, they probably have that, but they have the National Society of Black Engineering [sic, National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE), est. 1975 at Purdue University], which is one of the strongest chapters.  In fact, they may have started at Purdue, but back then, you know, black students who were at Purdue were football players or they were majoring in speech therapy in terms of the coeds or other miscellaneous stuff.  So, so anyway, I went up the road, primarily because my father said that was a good place for me to start the process.  And that literally was the reason.  I had no other sense of Purdue and had no sense of engineering as such.  I did very well there, graduated with highest honors and so on.  I was the president of the electrical engineering honorary society, which you probably have been in the resume and so on.  I say all of that only to say in a context where black folk, you know, just didn't do those kind of things, I was able to find some way to get in there and even find some support.  I couldn't have been elected to be president of the engineering--, electrical engineering honor society without some white engineering students somehow at least recognizing me as a person, as a co-student and so on.  So, Lafayette, Indiana and West Lafayette, Indiana was a racist piece of the world, just like most of Indiana was then.  I got called Nigger there too, to be sure.  But it wasn't only that.  It was a vast engineering school, of course, and so I'm going where you probably don't wanna go at this point.  I'm gonna stop, sorry.
Speaker 1: No, that's fine.  I'm just agreeing with, okay.  So at Purdue, now, what was--had black students organized themselves at all at Purdue at this point?
Speaker 2: Not at the start.  When I was, I was there four years, of course.  Every year it got to be more and more black students there beyond just the football players and people who, or the coeds who majored in speech therapy and the few scatterings and so.  By the time I left there was a fair number of us there.  They had some active sorority and fraternities by the time I got out of there.  I'm certainly not aware of that when I went up there.  In fact, I, along with a couple of my buddies, started the Kappa chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Incorporated] at Purdue just as a way of, you know, finding some way of getting a social life going.  They had an A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated] chapter there mainly of folk we didn't hang around with, I guess.  Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated], I think, ultimately ended up being there.  Like I said, many of the coeds were there because of their strong speech therapy and communications program they had there, black coeds, I mean.  So, when you say organized, there was organizing in that way, certainly, not in the way that it's organized now.  Now, they have entities like, National Society of Black Engineering Students that has a consciousness.  They probably have some kind of a black student union or caucus or maybe have a black house.  I mean none of that was remotely on the horizon.
Story_ID: 29149
Speaker 1: SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was trying to organize when I was an undergraduate student there and having very little success in organizing among the black students.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in, you were there when they sent people to Mississippi in '64 [1964] and '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Right, right.  (Unclear) just how far I was from some of all that, they tried to approach me to become a member of SNCC, and I told them that I was already doing my part, that I was already being a role model.  I wasn't thinking of myself saying that arrogantly as much as I was in communicating with the notions and the way they were thinking about being in contribution.  So I pushed all that, I didn't do any of that, wasn't involved in, was not involved in any of that kind of political activism and so on.  So I was involved in a fraternity, which we basically got going there, had some friends and so on; was not involved politically, no political activism even though there was a lot of rising political activism in that period, like I said, SNCC, for example, and maybe some other activity there which I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Do you remember your reaction to things like the March on Washington?  Did you have very much reaction?
Speaker 1: No, not, I had no conscious sense of much of that.  The, I need to remember, let's see now, when did King [Martin Luther King, Jr.], see, there's a lot of stuff that happened.  Let me if I get my dates straight here.  I was there from '62 [1962] to '66 [1966].  Let's see, March on Washington, somehow, I don't know--
Speaker 2: That was '63 [1963], and then you have, you know, the Democratic Convention '64 [1964] when they had the Mississippi Freedom Party.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I probably was struggling to be a serious engineering student.  That's a tough school.  My first couple of years, I lived off-campus, so I was isolated.  I was very invested in trying to get, in fact, I--okay, I remember.  That was a very challenging time for me because I came from Arsenal Tech High School [Arsenal Technical High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] to Purdue.  Whereas I was an excellent student at Arsenal Technical High School, those folk who were engineering, first-year students at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] were pretty tough competition.  And I remember having a lot of, I'll call it, shock, of what the benchmark was for, because I had never, you know, I was always the best.  I never had to compete and never had the experience of having to struggle to learn something, of having to work to get an "A" because I was the one that set the curve.  You know, I was the one who defined what it was to have the "A", whereas there, all of a sudden, I was in a chemistry class, of fast, lecture hall of 500 students.  And I remember the first grade I got on the chemistry exam was a "D".  So in that early couple of years, I was going to some changes of trying to figure out how it is I could get a "D" on anything, not to mention the science course where, in fact, I had been the one to define what, you know, what was exemplary before.  So I had to do a lot of resetting of my whole approach to that.  I mean I did very well in that class, but I ended up getting an "A".  I tell that story to my own children and to students that I've told over the years because I want them to understand something, and that is, you know, you don't have to be (unclear), you don't have to be traumatized to be turned around by the first, you know, challenge.  You know, you can overcome that if you're willing to work.  And I had to work for a change.  So I actually kind of bumped it up a notch, to actually pay attention to the fact that I needed to study.  You know, I had already read all the books before.  I mean, what do you mean study?  But I had to study there.  So, you know, I learned the work ethic there in that first couple of years that probably had me kind of underground.  I was outstanding freshman engineer at Purdue, and that's not outstanding black engineering student, I was outstanding freshman engineering student at Purdue.  And I say that only to say again, in a place where, you know, I was always, you know, this is Indiana, right?  This is Purdue.  This is West Lafayette, this is Lafayette.  You know, there was a possibility to do some things you could, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, I understand.  This is no small accomplishment, what you're talking about, but I was asking about the political stuff because I just know you now, you know-
Story_ID: 29150
Speaker 1: That consciousness came from the '70s [1970s] (simultaneously).  My essentialities' were pretty much consumed by being in engineering school, thinking of myself as being on a trajectory and try to get somewhere.  By the time I finished at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], I was no longer interested, I was clear that I was not going to be an engineer.  First of all, I didn't even go to Purdue because I wanted to be an engineer.  You know, it wasn't my dream, if you understood me.  It wasn't my dream.  I was fulfilling my father's dream, and the dream that was given to him for your son, who is a good science student.  By the time I got to the end of that, I had to start rethinking, okay, where am I?  I looked at these folk who were my engineering students, colleagues, and I said, boy, I'm not interested in doing what they do.  You know, I had excellent grades, I was doing very well in class, but it just didn't, it wasn't happening. It wasn't inspiring me.
Speaker 2: Right, so you figured out you needed to be on a path to be physicist?
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly, exactly.  So then I said, this time, this time, although my advising, right, my advisors, when I said, I want to go, I wanna leave engineering, these are my engineering advisors, who are white, engineering advisors, nothing but white folk there, my engineering advisors, when I told them that I wanted to go to graduate school in science, expressed shock.  First of all, that, you know, it's not easy for you to get into a graduate in science with an engineering background, first thing, first response, stupid.  The second one was, I told them that I was, I had looked at some catalogs, and that I was excited about what I saw to be going on at Princeton [University, New Jersey] and at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], to which they told me--I had a 5.84 GPA out of 6, right?  I was setting the curve in all the engineering classes, you know, and so you get the idea, right?  And they told me that it's not likely that you'd be able to get into Princeton on Stanford, my advisors, right, from Purdue and that Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia], right, right, you get the idea, much like the 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison] (laughter), that Howard would probably be a reasonable place for me to think about going to graduate school because they have an engineering program and so on.  I ignored them totally, ignored them totally, not because of the political consciousness, because I mean at that time, I was clear that I didn't wanna be an engineer.  I was also clear that I competed against the best they had there at Purdue, and that I shouldn't be setting my horizons by what these people were telling me, you know.  I was not black conscious at that time, but I was certainly pretty astute to what it was that I was experiencing from a standpoint of black boy with big aspirations, right, in a predominantly white school.
Story_ID: 29151
Speaker 1: And so you'll see me while I was at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I was in Africa, right, at the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland trying to help the Princeton University establish a link with, you know, a progressive enclave state university in Southern Africa.  So I mean, even though I was at Princeton, I was doing all these other things that has nothing to do with--
Speaker 2: Okay, let's roll with it.  So you--
Speaker 1: So I mean I've done a whole bunch of stuff like that.  That's all I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: So you went to Princeton, and got accepted--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got accepted at Princeton in their Astrophysical Sciences, in the Department of Astrophysical Sciences.  See the reason I--
Speaker 2: In 1967 or so?
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], well, the fall of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If I, let me explain again, may be belaboring something you may not really wanna visit.  I applied to Princeton, first of all I had this dream, right?  Remember my dream.  I wanted to be a nuclear physicist.  Princeton, at the time, was the place in the world, not in the country, in the world, in the forefront of controlled thermo-nuclear fusion research, control thermo-nuclear fusion research, and that's the whole notion, of course, of capturing the nuclear, combining processes that regularly go on in the suns in a controlled environment to extract energy and so on, right.  So notice the magic for me already, right.  This was a facility, best in the world, major federal investment and university draped around it, invested in looking at nuclear processes.  I said, wow, this is my dream.  I discovered it, and they're doing something important, right, that is, they were concerned about harnessing the energy of nuclear fusion to use for human application, not bombs, for example, not bombs.  So anyway, I applied to Princeton because that was, as far as that's concerned, the best of all possible realizations, nuclear stuff, doing stuff important and human, you know, implication for humankind so they can succeed and excellent university, right.  I also applied to Stanford just as an aside.  I called myself applying to Stanford because they also had a plasma physics program, but not a controlled thermo-nuclear fusion research program.  I applied to Stanford, thinking that, well, if I don't get admitted into Princeton, then at least I'll be admitted into a program that's doing nuclear, the kind of stuff that I was kind of excited about, and that is, this notion of applied nuclear energy research in the case, in this case, fusion, as opposed to fission, breaking apart, bombs and so on or standard nuclear industry and stuff.  Anyway, so I applied to Princeton and got admitted to Princeton.  I got a fellowship, a research fellowship to Princeton based primarily on the fact that I had excellent grades and excellent, and ultimately excellent recommendations, I hope; never saw them.  I assume I did since I had all these other credentials from Purdue.  Princeton was a whole different universe.  I mean it was a, I mean as Purdue was an engineering school, Princeton was a university, right.  It was an intellectual environment.  It was a wholly different kind of place.  I mean Noble Laureates all over the place, brilliant speakers of all kinds, black, white, green, yellow, railing in music repertory, theater, a library that's fabulous and a technical library that was also fabulous, not to mention just the general library of the, of humane letters.  It's just one of the best in the world.  So it was an explosion for me intellectually, and that's what it was.  It was, I made the break finally that I had been kind of dreaming about all of this time.
Story_ID: 29152
Speaker 1: Did you find intellectual mentors at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Mentors, no, colleagues, yes.  I need to be careful.  Of course, now there are teachers there, you know, instructors, professors, who rarely got in the classroom, who have Noble Laureates and are the best in the world.  So I'm not suggesting that they could not have been my mentors or were not mentor capable.  They weren't my mentors.  They were people in the classroom, talking heads.  I was about, had about five other black students who were in the graduate school with me at that time.  Princeton is a vastly different place now in terms of undergraduate students and black graduate students, but at that time, they were few and far between, black students in the graduate program.  There was two in political science, no, one in political science, Biddy Foster, whose name you perhaps know, one in Economics, Vernon, what is his name, last name, (unclear), oh, boy.  I can't believe his last name doesn't come to me; another in Chemistry, who ended up dropping out, myself in Astrophysical Sciences, Plasma Physics and one other person in History, Bill Scott, William Scott.  That was it, but, you know, these guys were brilliant, you know.  And, you know, we formed what we called the Committee on Black Awareness.  You know, the '70s [1970s] was rioting about that time.  There was a whole lot going on in the country, and so we kind of articulated ourselves as a kind of think tank, you know, a little progressive, intellectual group of folk, committed to, you know, being about more than just being Princetonians, you know, being black folks in the world with ideas and energy and brilliant.  It sounds arrogant to some extent but, you know, it was clear by now and by then, we had covered a lot of territory.  And we felt important to be about these things, and we set ourselves about them, truly challenging the boards of trustees around Apartheid, you know, that whole Apartheid movement that was raging in the Ivy League.  We were the instigators of that at Princeton and so on and so on and so on.  So Princeton for me was this opening up, this flowering intellectually into an arena that was big enough for what I had as a dream on the one hand, but also it was a time in which my '70s [1970s] consciousness, you know, the notion of myself as a progressive, as an activist, was developed and ultimately matured, I guess is the only way to say that.  By the time I left there, it was clear what I wanted, it was clear in my mind, what I wanted to do.  Even though I had gone there with the aspiration of being one of the forefront innovators of controlled thermo-nuclear fusion research, and I was gonna do all these great things scientifically, by the time I got to the end of the journey, I said to myself, I have mastered a fair amount of technology skills and techniques and understanding.  And I wanna to find a way to invest this in the black community.  So I had a ninety degree turn in the road.
Speaker 1: So you were recruited by a gentleman from Southern [University at Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right?
Speaker 2: No, it's ironic, James Mayo, who was on the faculty who had a Ph.D. from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was on the faculty at Morehouse College, Atlanta [Georgia], was up at Princeton speaking passionately about the fact that you guys are the best in the, the cream of the cream, you ought to be thinking about returning to the black community and making a contribution.  So, he was there, recruiting for Morehouse.  It turns out, he had no budget and ultimately, when I applied to Morehouse for a position, because he had convinced me, he couldn't hire me, right?  And that's the plight of a black school, that you have no money for doing a lot of stuff.  So he couldn't hire me so he had set my head on becoming a professor, teaching science, physics at a black school.  And all that kind of integrated together the other that I had some masterships in science, teaching was a way to make a contribution to the black community and black schools were the place to do that.  I had all that hooked up.  I applied to Morehouse and a couple of other black schools, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, Southern University, Baton Rouge, a couple of other places, can't remember now.  But the very one that I went, and thought that I was going to, couldn't hire me.  So I got an offer from Lincoln, I got an offer from Southern, and I accepted the one at Southern University, Baton Rouge.  So the first job out of Princeton was not to work at some controlled thermo-nuclear fusion laboratory, but to work at Southern University, Baton Rouge campus.  So that's the other trajectory of my life.
Story_ID: 29153
Speaker 1: Now, what was that like, you know, coming from the (unclear) circus--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the circus, I mean, you know, Southern University, Baton Rouge then, and maybe now too, let me be careful here.  You've got video going (laughter).  That is not an academic environment to fit the word university.  They had aspiring students, I'm sure.  In fact, many of the majors in the departments were students that I took great interest in and felt some strong relationship with from the standpoint of trying to be mentor and advisor and catalyst and so on.  But the university, boy, it was all over the map, you know, just all over the map.  It's not clear what its mission was.  It was down on the Mississippi River, hot as hell in the summertime and autumn, but in the wintertime, I had no respect, you know, having--you know, one of the things that happens when you go to places that are in the elite of the academic world, you get a sense of how things can be done, of how things perhaps even ought to be done.  And then you go to other places and you have to ask yourself, what is this?  What am I seeing here?  My first job interview was at the dean of the school of construction of arts and sciences.  I was gonna take the job as a member of the faculty at Baton Rouge campus, Southern University, and the dean interviewing me proceeds to tell me how good looking the coeds were.  And there were some good looking coeds on the campus, no mistaking it.  You know Southern (unclear) and so on, but I mean that wasn't what I was ready to hear from him.  I was a Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] graduate, you know, science interested, on a mission, talking to the dean of the school of arts and science, and he tells me how good the coeds were.  I mean I had a hard time constructing, what was going on here?  I mean this didn't compute.  I mean why was he not talking to me about, you know, the possibility, you understand, right?  Why was he not excited about what I do or perhaps had the dream to do or the possibility of doing in his science program and so.  I mean that wasn't where I was coming from.  So, you know, it was an interesting place to be.  I was there three years.  I left in a context where the black students who had organized themselves in protest of the dorms, the condition of the dorms, which were abysmal, the way they were being treated in terms of student rights and so on.  I left at a time when they had organized themselves in a strong protest movement and where there was a shooting by the Louisiana State Police on the campus, right, killing a couple of students and causing a near riot, not a near riot, a riot on the campus.  So this was a very turbulent time down there from the standpoint of rioting, student activism in protest of pretty parochial issues.  They weren't protesting, you know, Apartheid.  You know, they were protesting the fact that they were not getting a square deal as students and so on.  And their movement was being squashed by gauntlet of, you know, the usual state authority.  They were talking a kind of black consciousness because that was a, you know, the blow roof of the time.  And they were utilizing an activism which up at an Ivy League school might, you know, end up with them being, what's the word, told that they were gonna be given a, what's the word, overnight stay in the jail.  But in this case, they had police on the campus.  You know, they had state authority on the campus, acting like it was Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] or something, you know, same kinda thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Southern, though a black school, it's a state-run school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, state-run school, oh, yeah.  And so they brought state authority straight up, straight up, when the students moved to lock in the board of trustees or whatever it was, separate board.  Remember Louisiana State [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] is the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] of the South, right, as opposed to Southern University which is the black school in that configuration.  They have separate boards and so on.  The brought state authority to squash it and you know.  So I had enough of that as a bottom line in the end and other things going on in the department.  And so I ended up leaving there and getting to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the end.
Story_ID: 29154
Speaker 1: That was the irony of all things.  I was recruited for Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], went to Southern [University at Baton Rouge, Louisiana] --
Speaker 2: So what year is this that you go to Morehouse?
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]?
Speaker 1: I was at Morehouse from '72 [1972] to '78 [1978].  The irony is that the guy who recruited me from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to think about black schools as a place to commit, at least some early part of my career, ended up leaving Morehouse, right, leaving Morehouse and going up to the National Science Foundation.  So I left Southern University and took his place.  And that is, he was department chair at Morehouse College.  So I ended up leaving Southern University and became department chair and member of faculty of physics at Morehouse replacing James Mayo who ended up going to the National Science Foundation.  At first he was up there, I think on some kind of sabbatical, but then I think he decided ultimately that he had a way of making a contribution up there.  So I was department chair and professor of physics, ten years ultimately at Morehouse by the time we got to 1980.  So I was there from '72 [1972] to '80 [1980]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and had a lot of students who came through who now have PhD's.  No, I had a very successful and positive sense of being a member of faculty and having students who have gone on to graduate school and to have done very well.  I feel very good about that.
Speaker 2: Okay, you also got involved with some of the activities around the campus with the Center for Black World and so forth, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  I was very much involved in Atlanta University Center Community and Institute of the Black World, you know, Vincent Harding [Vincent Gordon Harding] and, you know, Howard Dodson [Jr.], all of that, strictly, you know.  I was very much into, by then, you know, my consciousness was clearly there, right.  So I was not just an academic, not just a member of faculty, not just a department chair, not just an intellectual, but I was an activist.  And so I systematically got involved in those things.  I was in, became a part of study groups, trying to work our way through, you know, some fairly complicated and dense material, just to try to understand the nature of the world, you know, the black world in particular, and the possibility of reconstituting a black world, in the world.   You know, these dreams and you end up, different kind.
Story_ID: 29155
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at this point too, we skipped over this once we started rolling.  You had gone to Swaziland when you were at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Princeton, they had a noticeably endowed, richly endowed university, had bank holdings, major banks that had straight, big capital investments in Southern Africa and in the Apartheid, ultimately in the Apartheid and in the benefit structure, created by Apartheid, diamonds, gold, you know, uranium, precious metals, rare metals and so on. And I was black conscious then, you know, and it was outrageous to us to think that here we would see on a daily basis on TV, you know, the trauma and the horror of Apartheid, because there was a lot going on, on the continent, and to think that Princeton had major investments as a university in those who had major stakes in that.  So our arguments were focused on trying to force Princeton to divest.  Probably, a naive calculus in retrospect, but it was one that fit the way we were thinking.  So we organized ourselves in, sorry, in direct challenge of the investment of Princeton in these First National Bank, for example, was primary on our list.  We did not succeed in getting them to divest even though we locked the board of trustees in.  We had all kinds of major rallies on the campus, protests marches and so on.  Princeton offered an alternative to us, after we had locked the board of trustees in and they had to decide whether they were gonna send us to jail or try to figure out a way to work with us on that.  They said, well, we are a university.  There is an enclave state in South Africa, Lesotho, that has a university that is a consortia institution for the whole Southern region, University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, UBLS.  We are a university.  They're a university.  They're struggling.  They serve students from the whole of the Southern region, Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland.  We're willing to, their offer, you know, they gave us a counter offer.  Now, we won't divest, but we'll establish university relationships, sustained student relationships.  We'll send books.  We'll send faculty on, whatever, sabbatical.  We'll send you along with some of your student colleagues to look at the place and establish a link with the students there and so on.  So that's the context.  For being away one year before my comprehensive exam for the dissertation of being on the continent of Africa, we spent three weeks going and coming and in Lesotho in the process of helping, of trying to help Princeton establish this relationship with UBLS.  So we traveled down from Kenya through Tanzania into South Africa, Lesotho, back out through Ethiopia and, you know, all of over the, all over that part of Africa, over a fairly intense period.  So that was all part of that mix, a very interesting experience, because I'd never been out of the country, not to mention to Africa.  So that was a whole nother thing (laughter), whole nother thing.  And you see stuff on TV, but you have no idea, you know, especially, the complexity of the diversity and the fact that it's not TV and jungle, and that it's not, you know, any of those things, but there are major cities and cosmopolitan areas.  Students are struggling in the same way students struggle here.  Anyway, all of that aside.
Speaker 1: So we'll take you back up to, now, you're at Atlanta U, no, I'm sorry, Morehouse, right, as chair of the department of--?
Speaker 2: Right, for eight years.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, and from '72 [1972] to '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: I got tired, I got burnt out, frankly.  I mean it's a struggle to keep a program going at a small black college, not university, black college.  And the administration was, as far as I'm concerned, primitive in many of its thinking.  And I--
Speaker 1: Is that right after they got, right after the retirement of Benjamin Mays or?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, Benjamin Mays had long been gone.  Hugh Gloster, this is the era of Hugh Gloster [Hugh Morris Gloster], the English major from NYU, who has a doctorate from NYU.  No, this is the Hugh Gloster era.  The building, the bricks and mortar man, Hugh Gloster, who presided over, this is video, isn't it, who presided over faculty meetings, extraordinary.  A president of a university or a college in this case, not attending faculty meetings, but presiding over faculty meetings and setting the agenda for what was on the meeting topical list.  I mean an extraordinary kind of institution.  Our institutions have extraordinary complexities and aspects and so on.  And Morehouse has, Morehouse is a great, a great college, a long history and so on, excellent faculty, but you get burnt out when you try to mount certain kind of struggles, and I got tired.  And I said to myself, well, maybe there's another way to skin this cat.  And the other way that I thought about was let's bring resources in.  I struggled to try to work from the inside to build, have little institutional support and incentive, let me try to find a way to bring significant resources into the institution, still focused on trying (unclear) develop it.  And so that notion was, well, let me become a mini capitalist here, a little petty capitalist and go to work for black enterprises, see if I can make a little money and/or help these black businesses to think about black schools as having a synergistic existence together and so on.  So I spent another ten years, all but another ten years after leaving Morehouse in 1980, in black businesses, in one form or fashion.
Story_ID: 29156
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what, some of the business--I know you worked for AMAF Industries, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right, right.
Speaker 1: Sonicraft [Inc.] here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  The single, common denominator of all those is that they were black enterprises, high technology engineering, advanced technology, small business enterprises.  And the first, the very first one I worked for, sorry, I worked for them because I knew the president as a personal friend.  He was my last year roommate at Purdue, roommate, when I was still at Purdue, and he had gone on since then to form a black business in Columbia, Maryland.  So I worked him for a couple of years, and I worked for a number of black businesses since that time, always in the same capacity.  They all were, they all were businesses that depended on the federal R and D [research and development] dollar.  They were all minority, 8A small businesses, being a small business set aside.  They, their existence mainly was predicated on not having a independent product or something that they sold in the marketplace, but federal contracting.  And that probably says enough already right there because the comment for black, small business, high technology business, federal contracting is like white water rafting, right, you know, up's and down's and sort of.  So my career over these businesses from about 1980 to almost '90 [1990] kind of rode the waves of the highs, like Sonicraft having the largest federal contract ever awarded to a black business, only to see it go into the gutter in a couple of years.
Speaker 1: They made like computer chips or something?
Speaker 2: Sonicraft at the time had a contract developing software, actually, AIDA (ph.), that language that you've never heard of since, right, the one that was going to be the proprietary language for all the Department of Defense critical missions, right, has disappeared from the radar screen.  They got a contract to develop a mission critical system for the equivalent of an Air Force One in AIDA, only for that contract ultimately to tank.  You know, because I mean there was a lot of, in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], if you think about the political Washington regime, the team that came in and went out, there was a lot going on, for black businesses in particular not going on as they were.  So anyway, in many cases, I was there at a time when things were working very good only to find them retrenching, re-engineering, downsizing, laying off, all of it.  And usually my exits were around that kind of, the fact that they could no longer afford, no longer have, no longer mount what I was calling myself trying to do there, and that is, to be the leader of a high-technology arm, winged division group within these entities.  They were so precariously dependent upon federal contracting that when federal contracting went down, then they went down.  That's the long and the short of it.  So I got a list of companies I worked for, always black-owned, always minority, always small, always high-technology engineering, invested that has relatively short careers attached to them.  But a lot of experience there.  I did, in fact, manage to get a lot of federal dollar contracting when they were in their high moments into black institutions.  I can name people, principal investigators, faculty members, centers whose significant dollars came from directly my efforts and/or energies around refocusing these company efforts and investing that money in there.  So I accomplished some things and didn't accomplish others.  I did make a difference for a lot of programs.  I could name them, but it's no point in doing that.  So I didn't just work for black businesses in that period.  I helped many of those black businesses through federal contracting and advanced technology programs to invest in black faculty in our institutions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The good news and the bad news of it.  Some success, you know, measured.
Speaker 1: What's the last one you worked for?
Speaker 2: Jackson and Tull, here in Chicago.  Jackson and Tull and Graham, actually a hyphenated name, right here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that was a black, that's a black firm, Jackson and Tull?
Speaker 2: Oh, Jackson and Tull is one of the, it's been in existence twenty-five-plus years now.  It's a modest sized, maybe does, did thirty million dollars a year.  Jackson and Tull, headquarters in Washington, D.C. (unclear) had an office here in town, right downtown Chicago.  In fact, that was how I came to work for the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I was a subcontractor to City Colleges of Chicago district office as manager of (unclear) services under a subcontract to Jackson and Tull through the City colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but they, it's a black company.  Yeah, black, in fact it has, it was singly owned, even though the title and the name was Jackson-Tull and Graham, the owner was Tull, Knox Tull, 100 percent owner, had a history of having other owners but it was 100 percent owned by Knox Tull.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29157
Speaker 1: You were talking about Jackson and Tull being the last of the black companies that you worked for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and all of them rising and falling on government contracts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, small business, 8A, so-called set-aside contracting and the vicissitudes, as it were, of that, highest high and lowest low.
Speaker 1: And Jackson and Tull's fortunes fell when satellite crashed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were certainly, they were poised to be enormously benefited by the launch of a satellite that used Star War technology to look down on the earth and to identify rich resources remotely.
Speaker 1: That's the Star Wars as defined by the Ronald Reagan administration--
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean it's not the same Star Wars.
Speaker 1: --a term pertaining to it.
Speaker 2: That is the notion of putting up very high sophistication, observing platforms to look down on the earth.  Part of that technology involved the development of what's called hyper-spectral sensing, that is, you don't just look at the visible.  You look in, you know, a whole sweep of emission ranges or colors, the equivalent of colors.  And the visible color is a manifestation of so-called frequency of the emission.  Heat, radiant heat is another kind of emission, x-rays and other such ultraviolet emissions and so on that you cannot see by the human eye is a part of that same kind of spectral region of electro-magnetic emission.  Anyway, Star Wars in the process of trying to put together the technology to view remotely the launch of and identify perhaps lethal weaponry systems, also spent a lot of time developing observations platform technology of various advanced, you know, of very advanced kinds including, so-called hyperspectral, that is, being able to integrate the information across all those emission bands or colors.  So, a part of the post-Star Wars era was a notion of being able to apply that same technology to looking down on the earth, looking at geology and identifying, much like they do now on the Morris Rover missions, when they use their spectrometers to look at rocks and so on and being able to tell what kind of rocks they were, you can do the same thing from space.  Anyway, Sonicraft, not Sonicraft, Jackson and Tull, sorry, was, had access to one of those two platforms that was ultimately launched.  The one that was unsuccessfully launched and maintained in orbit, unfortunately, was the one that Sonicraft--sorry, I keep saying Sonicraft, that Jackson and Tull was the principal investigator for.  And so all that technology capability, and the implications that it would have for investigators and historically black colleges went down when the satellite went down.  And so that's the way it went.
Speaker 1: And so, now, you have a patent on a--
Speaker 2: A vision system, (unclear) vision technology?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was developed when I was still at AMAF Industries, when I was chief, what was my title then?  Vice president for corporate research, that's what it was, vice president for corporate research.  Then I was looking at the possibility of getting some of the money from the Small Business Administration.  They had a special program in high technology.  And I wrote a proposal to utilize some of the very advanced optical processing technologies, rather than (unclear) computer-based processing.  It turns out there is another way of carrying out very fast processing that does not use electronic signal communications at all, that uses light signals, optical signals.  It's called optical processing.  So I wrote a proposal to the Small Business Administration which ultimately was not funded but because I had done enough work to conceptualize this approach, AMAF Industries decided to approach a patent attorney to see whether this idea, whereas the government didn't fund it, might be something that could be patented, and it ultimately was, in fact, patented, with the idea of getting a proprietary position on a very important approach to machine vision, you know, robotic vision using very fast optical processing and so on.  So, I, in the end, end up having my name attached to an interesting, I'll call it interesting, optical robotic vision system technology which unfortunately, netted me no money, no financial benefit because it was ultimately never converted into a technology.  So I have a patent on something that was not reduced to practice, although one never knows whether it would have been a useful product or not.  It was a very interesting intellectual activity to be sure in terms of trying to think my way through all of that.  The patent process went through very smoothly and was described by the patent attorneys at the time as one of the most complicated patents they've ever written, for what it's worth.  Whether that means a bunch is another matter, of course, but--anyway, it was part of the journey.
Story_ID: 29158
Speaker 1: Okay, since that time, you've been, since you left Jackson and Tull, which was about 1990?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, well, for a short period, right about the time, the end of 1990, I was approached by Tom Cole [Dr. Thomas W. Cole, Jr.], then president of Clark College [Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] in consolidation activity at that time, to form something called Clark-Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  I was approached by Tom Cole to help him build Clark-Atlanta University, I mean, by giving him some consulting guidance as to how to merge some of these departments together.  Clark College was an undergraduate institution wholly, Atlanta University a graduate institution wholly, both a hundred years old, both with long histories.  Atlanta University with an enormous historical legacy and reputation, then was facing financial exigency, and had to do something.  And they merged as a part of that financial exigency with Clark College to form Clark-Atlanta University.  And so I went down initially to join Tom Cole who was then president of the combined entity in constituting or constructing the entity, merging departments, deciding on programs, making facilities' judgments, you know, (unclear) business, building schools.  And I stayed for a couple of years, ended up being dean of the School of Arts and Sciences, acting in a consolidation period, was his executive assistant, the man about, you know, basically the gadfly and the one who basically was where the buck stopped, when it wouldn't stop on his desk.  It stopped on mine.  That's the long and short of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: So I was doing a lot of those kinds of small, short-term activities.  I've been, since that time in a consulting mode, independent consulting, doing a lot of trying to parlay whatever skill sets I have, where there are customers, statistical analysis, program management, data mining, you know, data discovery kind of things, a lot of small customer activity, which is what I do now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is, this provides a living and everything, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it provides a living.  I'm at this point trying to ask myself where am I?  I guess, as always, you know, you still have dreams and you want to have a certain focus and independent consulting does not provide focus because you go where your referrals carry you and where the customers go.  So I'm trying to think my way through and behave my way through, act my through and propose and apply my way through the next stage of my life, I supposed, where I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are your ideas now in terms of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been telling myself that I've got all kinds of skill sets now, and I've been any and everywhere, major universities, high-technology businesses; I've traveled the world.  I'm trying to find a place where there's a logic for that kind of skill set.  I'm looking for senior positions, basically, had been looking for the last year or so.  I tell myself, I mean I have the skill set and experience base of judgment and history that I ought to be able to talk about being a provost somewhere or a dean somewhere or a vice president for something in something.  And so, I'm not looking to own something as much as I'm looking for, you know, a senior position where judgment and skill and experience is still valued.  In this day and age, you know, facility of mind and youngness and quickness and energy and appearance of youth is sellable, you know.  Age and gray hair and experience and judgment, not so sellable.  So it's hard.
Story_ID: 29159
Speaker 1: But on the positive side of all that, now, you are known basically as a community man, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know what you mean, I mean--
Speaker 1: Black community, okay.
Speaker 2: People see you that way.  I mean you do a variety of things in the community--
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you live in and the larger black community and about black people in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, black parent advocacy.
Speaker 2: All of it, yeah.  Now, you're married?
Speaker 1: I'm married.
Speaker 2: When did you meet your wife?
Speaker 1: Let's see, I met her at Princeton when she was visiting Princeton on an exchange, what they call, what do they call those things?  A mixer, there we are.  A mixer.  She was a student, undergraduate student at Marylon College, Tarrytown, New York, traveled to Princeton when there was a big confab there in sixty, well, let me see, I met her in '67 [1967], I guess.  We got married in '68 [1968] and have been married since.  So we're now thirty-five, thirty-six years, well, soon thirty-six years.
Speaker 2: Okay, you've got three children?
Speaker 1: I have three children, three adult children, two sons and a daughter.  My oldest son got a chemical engineering degree from University of Illinois, Champagne-Urbana and an MBA from Michigan and is now trying to make big money as a real estate developer.  My second son is chief resident doctor at University of Cincinnati Hospital, surgery, and my daughter lives here in the city [Chicago, Illinois] and works as an account manager at Carson Pirie Scott, three adult children.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  And I trying to establish here that you're invested in the community in a lot of different ways.  You're a sought after public speaker as somebody who was shy and you're sought after a public speaker.
Speaker 1: No, I gave up shy a long time ago.  I gave up shy when I became an activist.  You can't be shy and be an activist at the same time.  I gave up shy.  Yeah, I'm, yeah, I do a lot of public speaking.  I'm very much an activist around black studies, have been active in the black studies conference.  They just recently celebrated the twenty-seventh annual event of a major national and international confab of black intellectuals at Olive-Harvey College Chicago [Illinois], twenty-seven years and I've been active since--
Speaker 2: That's sort of an anomaly because here's a junior college to host this major conference.
Speaker 1: Community college.
Speaker 2: Community college, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, exactly because you don't see this kind of tradition at major universities, you know, the highly celebrated or infamous think tank up at Harvard and other such places that even come close to this kind of legacy.  And it doesn't come close to this kind of notoriety for the kind of people that it has brought in, I'm talking about Olive-Harvey College black studies.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The who's who of black illuminati, literary has come through here.
Speaker 2: And at that, let me just say, you're the highlight or one of the highlights of this--
Speaker 1: Very active.
Speaker 2: --of this major conference.  People wanna hear what you have to say about black studies, not history and analysis of the black situation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, I've been (unclear) (simultaneous) serious in trying to be a student of black social thought, of black historical and political thinking.  I spent just years and I've been serious about being a student.  I have been able to enter the discourse, you know, to be a contributor of a kind.
Speaker 2: Right, (unclear) and it's something to see you analyzing the works of Harold Cruse [Harold Wright Cruse] or--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I had (unclear) debate with Harold Cruse actually, yeah, interesting debate to be sure.
Speaker 2: This isn't the kind of activity you expect of most physicists.
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm an interloper too.  I'm sorry, I guess I should have said that at the very start of all this.  I'm shameless about some things and one of them is to move into pieces of terrain that, for which the boundaries historically and traditionally would say you wouldn't be integrated.  So I'm shameless like that.  As I said, I treat myself as a, and think of myself as a serious intellectual where there are no boundaries. There are no boundaries (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 29160
Speaker 1: Another aspect, you're a percussionist?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm a drumming percussionist.  My passion has been a passion for, since I was a graduate student.  I owned a set of bongos when I was still a graduate student at Princeton and have had a passion for the music and that kind of activity since.  In the last ten years, I've been very serious about being a student of Africana musics, African music and otherwise, African music in the diaspora.  I know at this point, because I've spent the time, a fair amount about the cultural context of it, and I'm not a bad performer.  I hang with the best of them.
Speaker 1: You've got a brother, now, your brother, Roy?
Speaker 2: Roy, yes, my older brother.
Speaker 1: He actually makes drums.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he makes drums.  He is a craftsman.  He worked for RCA.  My father worked for RCA [Radio Corporation of America].  He went to work for RCA eventually, and was a cabinet repair person, master cabinet repair person at RCA.  You know, he would be the ones who would refurbish all these consoles and people have these ten foot long console units for hi-fi stereo, and get a ding in it, and they can send it back.  And he would make it look like it had never been damaged.  So he knows all the wood craftsman and stuff, joinery and so on.  And he has a passion for music too, which he kind of gets from me because hanging out with me, as we are close now, he kind of picked up the infection of being interested in African and Africana music, but he has this craftsmanship that he has in terms of wood craftsmanship.  And so he makes tongue drums, cajons, slap drums, you know, all of kinds of, anything made of wood that has tonal and rhythmic potential, he knows how to make, and does make for sale.  And we perform on occasion together, exhibiting what these things can do.  And we sell a few of 'em here and there.  But he's the guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're very active in Oak Park [Illinois], I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm very active in a number of regards.  I was--
Speaker 1: We searched for you on the Internet.  In Oak Park, you pop up at all these meetings and stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it definitely pops up.  There (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Carl Spight says this or he did this.
Speaker 2: I unfortunately have a lot of notoriety in Oak Park.  I'm, and whatever residual shyness I have, I don't like to see myself in the newspaper quoted, but it happens all too often, primarily because I'm involved in black student and black parent advocacy activities there.  I used to be a sharp critic of the school systems, both the elementary school and the high school but recently have joined with the high school as an analyst in looking at the so-called, the infamous achievement gap, the black-white achievement gap, this spectra and horror of the fact that even upper-middle class black families have children whose academic outcomes are significantly differentially disadvantaged relative to an equivalent white family and white student context.
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: It's a complex of things, no mistaking it.  Some of it is expectation.  Some of it is investment or absence of it in some cases.  You know, many of the black middle-class families are black-middle class only because of that most recent generation and because both parents work and have vectors outside of the home, don't always translate that into the same wealth, wealth in the simple sense and wealth of resources that historically wealthy and high-income white families have over time and so on.  You know, it's the absence of that sedimentation of being middle class and settling into cultural and value and resources, resourced experiences that makes a difference there in part.  And some of it is just plain, perhaps unintentional and perhaps inadvertent, but racism in probably the least accessible sense, and that is, well intending low expectation or other expectation based on image of our black young folk.  Our black young folk aspire to have the hip-hop pose, the hip hop style, rap or hip-hop, the ghetto gang vernacular.  If you were to approach a young man in Oak Park, Illinois, upper-middle class community, predominantly white, highly professional black family income, higher than white family income aggregate, if you were to approach a young man, that young man would look like somebody you would see over at Cabrini-Green [a Chicago Housing Authority public housing development on Chicago's Near North Side, 1942-2011] or Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes was a Chicago Housing Authority public housing development in the South Side of Chicago, on State Street between Pershing Road (39th Street) and 54th Street, 1962-2007] or, in terms of how he looks, how he dresses, how he acts, how he talks when he's in his pose, and a lot of time carries that same dress, same attitude, same style, black female and male, into the classroom for white faculty that are used to seeing the best and the brightest white students aspire to be in AP [advanced placement] courses and honors courses and aspire to go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], talk the language and the literature of culture, Western culture.  They look like black ghetto, and come from upper-black, middle class, get seen as other than, right, white middle, upper-income middle class, wealthy and are expected not to do, right, get treated, get the vibes, the feedback, get disciplined, right.  The discipline ratio rate for black students at Oak Park High School, upper middle-class community, is twice, population rate and population, black students represent about 25 percent of the student body at Oak Park High School, 50 percent of the suspensions and expulsions were black, right.  I mean what's up with that?  I mean these students, I mean you look at the parents, they look like you and I, you know, whatever that is worth.  They talk like you and I do, right.  They talk investment in education, they talk vision, they talk goals.  (Unclear) the student look like they may have come from, like say, Robert Taylor or Cabrini-Green or, it's precisely the same discipline rates that you see in major inner city, impacted high-risk communities that you see at a place like Oak Park-River Forest High School.  In part, like I say, it's the absence and sedimentation of the privileges of being middle class.  Some of it is the culture, the provisions of this culture that we see, that they casually access, right, and just digest.  And part of it is racism.  And when you combine all those together, it's a potent mix, right.  It's a potent mix.  It works to keep our students failing like they fail at, you know, any high impacted inner-city school.  It's a tragedy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you fight against, you know.  You try to get the faculty, the administration to think differently.  You try to get black parents to rethink their strategic investments and what they say about themselves, and where they put their time, and you try to get to students, to have them rethink just how cruel to be cool.  Anyway, that's a long-winded response there.
Story_ID: 29161
Speaker 1: But there's another thing you're involved that's, I think, is significant.  I mean I heard about this about ten years ago.  You started something, you were at the start of something called the New Wave Computer User Group.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Boy, you're a man who gets around into all kinds of little intrinsities and little areas and cubby holes (laughter).  I just thought that New Wave Computer User Group had been existence before.  They date themselves maybe ten, twelve years now.  The folk who did start it, Jaami Dawan and Edwin, what's his name?  Whitfield [Edwin Whitfield], and so on are the ones to be credited with that.  Now, I have recently, for the last three, four, five years, have found them to be an aspiring group of folk, and I've been investing some time and helping them to organize various symposia and I'm now serving interim acting whatever, director of education or something or another, technology education for their very exciting activity.  But I'm a little cog, little small player in that mix.  I, they do count on me on occasion to do things that can be exploited as interesting to some of the young folk they try to attract.  I taught a workshop on how to use computer technology, digital processing for the composition of hip-hop, you know, stylized music and so on.  So I've done that for them a couple of times and it's been pretty popular because I have an interest in music and know the technology and don't like hip-hop, but I wanna get these young folk thinking, tool sets and skills.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I mean, we always ask this question of people, and this is (unclear), what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, boy, such a question.  Well, certainly my investments have always been about finding ways to empower and realize our own power and be self-empowering.  If we have a hope, I'm not an optimist about this stuff by the way.  I'm, as Jesse [Jackson] likes to say, I'm a hopeful person but not an optimistic person.  I don't take it for granted that the kind of racial differences and differentials and social traumas and stresses that we have in American culture are solvable.  I don't take that as a given at all.  I'm one of those who is not afraid of fighting for efforts at solving some of those things.  So I guess my hopes and present anticipations is that more of us, especially out of this current generation, will find a way to pull two things together.  One, some sense of being black, but also being powerful, being skillful.  Some of that will come from people like us being role models, being both enabling and empowering and powerful perhaps, either by position or knowledge but also being invested.  The challenge for our young folk, of this generation that we see, is that skill and mastery and knowledge seems not to be the currency of commercial liability and popularity.  You can be a rapper and not know how to talk coherently, not know how to poet and so on and make money.  I mean this is scary stuff.  Somehow we've got to fight that back, and I don't know how to do that.  The Simmons' [Russell Simmons] of the world just wanna pretend that they are about utilizing that platform, that short-term. as far as that's concerned, platform that they stand on, to do some of that, but I don't know.  The Cosby's [William Henry "Bill" Cosby Jr.] of the world, of course, and perhaps people like you and I have a lot of critical things to say about some of, and maybe much of that, but I'm hopeful only in the sense that it's still worth fighting for and there's still folk I know and see that fight.  And I'm gonna be one of them.  And that's the long and short of it.  I don't take for granted that we will succeed, that is, to throw back and to overcome and to replace ourselves and reposition ourselves in our proper place in this culture and this society, as major players and contributors and beneficiaries.  But, you know, small steps can help, and I'm about small steps.
Story_ID: 29162
Speaker 1: Okay, very few black people who talk about change talk about our focus on science as such.  You hear a lot of people talk about spiritual interference or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Or capitalism or some self help.
Speaker 1: Very few people talk about science.  You're committed to science and have a definition of it that doesn't, I don't think it includes a lot of speculation about divine interventions and so forth, I mean from what I understand.  Correct me if I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: No, I think you're right.  Whereas, I'm certainly one who believes in the long arc of history as it's called, that ultimately justice has the possibility of triumph and that if you stay with it long enough, you might get there.  I don't think, don't believe, I have no sense of, no knowledge of, don't operate from, don't depend on, don't call forward, an intervener of that kind, be it Jesus or otherwise.  I mean that's just where I come from.  I think there is something called justice.  There is something called ethics and ethical practice.  There's something called value and it resides certainly in people, especially people who share as opposed to take and exploit.  I don't think we got a lot of recourse to interveners outside of the human sphere and outside of the struggle that humans engage in, in that sphere.  So, that's where I am.  You know, I was baptized.  I presented myself for baptism in the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church in another age and another time.  But I'm not there now.
Speaker 1: Do you think that you're sort of anomaly?  Do you think there're other black folks, significant people that think similarly to you?
Speaker 2: I'm a little iconoclastic I suppose on the one hand, but there are people who I can talk to, don't always share communications, don't share the majority of the things that I perhaps have emphasized here, but enough to work to find them to be colleagues and collaborators and so on.  My mix comes from all this curious and crazy history that we've spent hours now talking about.  You know, I've got all of these colorations and timbre that come from, the way I've kind of bumped up and rubbed up against the world.  So, and I kind of feel pretty good about my own uniqueness in that way.  I don't apologize for it on the one hand.  I don't put it up in folk's face, and I delight and celebrate the uniqueness I see in folk like yourself, you know, who come at it sometimes a different way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29163
Speaker 1: If you had certain aspects of your life to do over again, is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: Until recently, that's a, I'm gonna be short, if I can be short, because I had two answers, have two answers actually.  One of them is my historical answer, and the historical answer is and has been that I've been very lucky on the one hand and very deliberate on the other.  And whereas I've chosen not to do some things and have done others, in the end I am very satisfied--that was my historical answer, very satisfied with where I have arrived and am still trying to go.  But now, the last year or so has been very sobering.  I've been in the process of trying to say to myself, I've got skill sets, still some energy, some ambition, and I want to be of service, but I want to focus, right.  And the frustration I have found in trying to find institutional settings, college, university, business, administrative or otherwise, apparatus that's prepared to take me for what I take myself to be, have been sobering.  And so I'm in process of asking myself, did I make some strategic errors in quite so willing to choose not or to choose other or to leave as opposed to staying and fighting for and building and then holding onto.  So where I am at the moment is I have no seniority anywhere, right, no institutional position anywhere.  I don't control anything, and that's a very uncomfortable feeling when you think about yourself as still being able to do things and having lots of energies and think of yourself, as I do, as seeing a way when some people don't see a way, seeing an option when other folk don't see that option.  But there's nothing I can do about it, right.  And I can't get on the inside because the twenties or so generation of folk don't even care about all this that I've talked about for the last many hours.  And the thirty, forty folk who are kind of well established and have positions are not in any sense inclined to give it up and open it up for me.  I'm old, I'm past the prime age.  I have gray hair.  They have secure... they are comfortable, and I'm just somebody in need or the experience of being at a place where at one time I had tenure, at one time I had senior positions and to find myself wanting a possibility of being on the inside, I'm being very candid right now, and very in the moment, of being outside, it's not comfortable, it's not comfortable because I don't see a path back in.  And so I think I may have made some strategic mistakes somewhere when I had tenure or when I was senior vice president for "x", or when I was dean of "y" or executive assistant for alpha and beta, to perhaps not have recognized that I need a secure position.  I don't have any of that.  I'm an independent consultant.  I come and go with the vicissitudes of work opportunity or the absence thereof.  I make a living, but I can't command anything at this point.  You know, I don't know what my future looks like because it is subject to the vicissitude of the next referral or the absence thereof or the next job opportunity and so on.  That's not a good position to be in when you're sixty.  I'm almost sixty, very soon to be sixty, because when you're sixty, you are used up as viewed by most of the places where you would want to find senature (ph.) and position and role.  You're used up to for them.  At the moment, sorry, visibly a sixty year, and I have the energy and the imagination and the creativity and the vigor of somebody twenty years, maybe more younger than that.  So, you know, I'm facing the prospect of being a senior citizen (laughter) and to be superfluous.  I think that's the reality.  And that's a sobering reality.  I'm not complaining because I willfully walked this life that I've walked.  But now I can't say so clearly that I haven't made mistakes--
Speaker 1: Well, you spent a lot of time really delving for the meaning of what was going on around you--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --only to find now you've (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and get in position on (unclear) (simultaneous), yeah, right.  And only having steak, you know.  I've done none of those things.  So, it's not a good feeling because even though I have all these other, what I think to be, take to be in myself, all these assets, ain't nothing I can do with them.  It's as simple as that.  It's as simple as that.  So, you know, I'm in the process maybe of converting myself into a musician and maybe just enjoy the music and try to retire gracefully.  That's my vision for what's happening now.  Maybe there's a lesson to be learned, and I say that so candidly perhaps for this video because you've got to be careful what you do, right, you know, how you envision the long pull and the long run.  So and I've not been focused on the long pool and the long run for me, right.  I've not focused on that.  But that might have been arrogance and youthful impudence and not wise.  And I try to think of myself as a wise person, but I probably have failed in wisdom that is important to me.  So, that's probably my muses for the moment.  I'm getting even more candid than I probably should (simultaneously).
Story_ID: 29164
Speaker 1: --integrity versus self-preservation on some level down the line, if you look at it like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and it's hard to know.  You can fool yourself.  You got to be careful on these things as to whether you really are sacrificing as against self interested.  And the illusion of thinking you do things important when they may not be important at all (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: And certainly--
Speaker 2: --I've done a lot of stuff though, so, in that sense.  Some of my, pardon me, some of my investments, I think were important and others possibly not.
Speaker 1: That leads us to this question, and you're thinking deeply about what you do, so we'll keep a answer, I'm sure.  What would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: To the extent that people who know me see me, they see me as an intellectual, somebody relentless, somebody bold, audacious, courageous, serious who has tried to get to the heart of a bunch of things.  And that model of practice as an intellectual is something that I'd like to be known by, remembered by, recognized by.  It's not always easy to detect some of the many things that I've done perhaps, but that certainly has been my intent to show that you can come to know, right, come to understand and you can make those knowings and understandings efficacious, effective in changing things, right, in not accepting as given what seems so powerfully arrayed as given.  You know, I'm somebody, hey, I, like I say, I'm somebody who believes in the future of the future, that not everything is over determined by what seems to be powerfully, seductively, overwhelmingly in place.  So I hope I've given at least a glimmer of what it looks like when you're trying to be serious about that, in my life and how you go about doing that, and what it looks like when you do that.  But, you know, we'll see, we'll see.  I'm no ways tired, as they say, still got a lot of energy.  So maybe it's not finished.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How does your family feel about your success?  Did they expect you to be as successful as you've been?  I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've got three adult children now.  They probably are a little puzzled by some things.  You know, a lot of my friends and colleagues are wealthy.  I'm not wealthy, or have big-name titular positions at big-name places, and yet I  went the same corridors and down many of the same roads.  So my guess is they give me a sort of measured respect from the standpoint of knowing me to be a serious person, but maybe not agree with many of my judgments.  But, you know, hey, when you have children, adult children, particularly, you've got to be prepared to come to own, you know, their judgment on your adjustments and I don't have a problem with that.  My sense is that they would like to see me more successful, respected, wealthy and so on just because they think some of the things that I say are important, but they're not quite so sure how I've constructed success out of all of that.  Maybe, as I say, that's probably disturbing because one of the things that my children have not been able to escape is this kind of conversation, is this kind of intensity, you know, because I mean that's my life.  You know, and that's what I bring to my married life and my parenting as I do in my professional life, you know.  So they probably try to figure out how to make sense of all of it.  But that's okay because they're doing pretty good so far, and we'll see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We'll see.
Story_ID: 29165
Speaker 1: Can you see your influence on them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  My marks are all over them, and so is my wife's marks all over them.  Even in the moments when they would try to be least like me, they're probably more like me than they think, right.  They certainly like me, for the better or for worse.  Their sense of what I could have done versus what they choose to do is rather different, so.  But, hey, like I say, you know, that's the judgment of the fact that that's their life, their track; this is mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is the last question unless there's something we've left out that you want to say.  Is there something we've left out, do you think?
Speaker 2: No, nah.  We've said far more things than I would ever wanna talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but it's, we're told to ask it anyway.  And that's, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  See, I'm wasn't successful in saying what I was just saying a moment.  I called myself responding precisely that question.  Oh, okay.  I've got a quick shorthand.  Here it goes.  Carl Spight, the black technosapien, it's come to mean something in my province, who agonizes about the future of the future, master of technology, somebody who is black who agonizes about the future of the future.  And that's it.  It's simple as that.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 29166
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Who's in the photo, when it was taken to the best of your knowledge, and where it was taken, if you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I think the day of this photo is, it's like 1908.  It's a picture first of my great grandmother, Phyllis Spight and then my great grandfather, Efram Spight for whom and to whom the line of the family goes when we try to history of the Spight name.  Efram Spight was a slave at one time, owned by a prominent white family in Ripley, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Yes, right there, right.  This is a grade school picture at the graduation time from School Number 56.  So the classic grade school picture.  In fact, that was the first (unclear), I hadn't look at this thing in a long time, and boy, it brought back all kinds of memories.  All of a sudden I started remembering personalities of some of the people in the picture. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You want to point him out one more time, Larry?
Speaker 2: Okay, he's right here.
Speaker 1: This is Frances W. Parker School, School No. 56 in Indianapolis, Indiana. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: We want to have, the original is owned by somebody else.  This is a picture of my father as he would often appear at work as a janitor at RCA, Radio Corporation of America, Indianapolis, Indiana. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How old was he?
Speaker 1: Let's see.  How old does he look to be there?  I think 40's, 50's, somewhere there.  So it has to be about 1950.  He was born in 1900 so however you date the age of this, yeah, it's probably about 1950. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Of course, this one, yeah, my baby picture.  It says right on there, a couple of months, yeah, two months old. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this one with the false color or color that's arrived there, is a picture of my immediate siblings.  Let's see.  Do I need to point myself out there or? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  If you would just go left to right, top row, left to right and then--
Speaker 2: Oh, and then the bottom row.  Okay.  The top row, left to right, that's my brother, Glenn, my younger brother, Glenn, and he's the youngest in the family, in fact, then that's my oldest brother, Von, oldest in the family.  There I am.  Then there's my brother, Roy, who is two years older than I am.  And the bottom row is my sister who is younger than I, one year younger, Lolita.  So that's, so I have to call the names, that's Glenn, Von, Carl, Roy and Lolita. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Oh, about what year was that?
Speaker 1: Roughly, let's see.  That was at the time of the funeral of my father who died in 1990.  So it was around '90' [1990], '91' [1991], somewhere in there. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.
Speaker 2: This is a wedding picture up in New York, New York, my wife, Marcia, at the time of our wedding in September 1968. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: This is the governor, let's see, what's the date on that?  1959?  There was an article that goes with that.  I forgot the date.  It has to be fifty, not fifty, '60's [1960s] because I was at Purdue.  This has to be sixty--I've got, could I look at the stack there, picture of me achieving an award from the governor of the State of Indiana as outstanding Negro student of Indiana, male student, actually, there's a technical, let me see how they construct that.  Okay, it's 1965 as the "Outstanding Male Negro Student in Indiana College and University" during the scholastic year 1964 to '65' [1965] given by the governor of the State of Indiana, Governor Branigan (ph.) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture 1969, I think Christmas, of going from left to right, my mother, Erma Mae Spight, then that's me, Carl Spight, and then that's my wife, Marcia Spight, about a year after we were married, obviously, at somebody's Christmas occasion.
Speaker 1: How old am I there?  Let me see.  That must be, what do you guess, that's about a three or four year old?
Speaker 2: Two?
Speaker 1: You think two, could be two.
Speaker 2: Two or three.
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere in there.  I don't have a date on it unfortunately, but I know it's relatively young. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right and this one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my senior year at Purdue University.  That would be 1966, I guess it is. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Well, there we are.  This is a picture of me striding down the streets of Philadelphia.  I must have been in the eighth grade, I guess it is, Francis W. Parker School, School No. 56, grade school, there for a conference, sponsored by the Freedom Foundation. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So that's you with your back to us?
Speaker 2: No, that's me with this hat on and bag on his, over my arm and with the trench coat on. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, well, probably not worn with any style, yeah, that's a full brim hat. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: More dressed up than I'd ever been by the way.  Let's see, this is a picture of me exhibiting a certificate and the first place award for placing in the Indiana Science Fair Junior Division, First Place in Physics or Science, I guess it was.
Speaker 1: And that's not the Negro division?
Speaker 2: No, no, that's the Indiana Science Fair, the whole of it. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 1: Let's see, seventh grade, so I graduated '58' [1958]--
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], it must be '57' [1957], yeah. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: And what age is that?  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: About nine (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably somewhere in there, undoubtedly in grade school.  It looks like sort of like a nine year old, probably one of those school pictures.
