Story_ID: 196459
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Abbott Sengstacke, R-O-B-E-R-T, A-B-B-O-T-T, S-E-N-G-S-T-A-C-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that Sengstacke is an unusual name in black circles, and so can you tell us something about the name, Sengstacke?
Speaker 2: Well, the origin is German.  And that comes from a German first mate [Herman Henry Sengstacke] who sailed between Bremen, Germany and Savannah [Georgia], and married an African woman [Tama Melrose] during slavery and had two children, a boy [John Herman Henry Sengstacke] and a girl.  And she died when, when they were still fairly young.  And they were brought back to Germany and raised by his sister.  We refer to him as Captain Sengstacke, but he was actually a first mate.  During his life which--well, he also passed before they, they were adults.  He had acquired quite a bit of property along the waterfront in Savannah, Georgia, which is now a tourist area, and many of those buildings were cotton warehouses.  Anyway, he passed at some point.  And it went into an estate managed by a couple of friends of his--the way the story is told, and somewhere in there, the estate began to be mismanaged.  So the son, his name was Herman [sic. John Herman Henry Sengstacke], came back over here when he was an adult to Savannah to settle the estate.  And, of course, he was like any other European, although with being a mulatto, but he was--spoke several languages, played a number of musical instruments, and was highly educated by European standards.  And, of course, he was looked as (unclear) an uppity Negro at the time.  But, anyway, he was eventually able to salvage some of the estate.  In the meantime, he met a widowed woman whose name was [Flora] Abbott who had a son [Robert Sengstacke Abbott].  And so, that's why some people ask me why Mr. Abbott who founded the [Chicago] Defender's name is Robert Sengstacke Abbott, and mine is Robert Abbott Sengstacke.  My grandfather [Herman Alexander Sengstacke] was Mr. Abbott's half-brother.  And so, he was raised as a Sengstacke in Savannah.  But when Mr. Abbott came to Chicago [Illinois] to practice law and later set up the Chicago Defender, he changed.  He went back to use the Abbott name and used Sengstacke as the middle name, so the founder of the Chicago Defender is my grandfather's half-brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That clears that up 'cause I--
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Family background.
Speaker 1: I'll ask some, some more questions about family background, but that's--and that explains all your names actually in, in one fell swoop.  What is your birthdate and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 29, 1943, Chicago, Illinois, Provident Hospital [later, Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm executive editor of the Chicago Defender and president of the Sengstacke Enterprise [Inc., later, Real Times Media LLC].  I spent just about the entirety of my career either working in my family business or in my own business.  I kind of have a back-and-forth career within--sometimes with the Sengstacke Enterprises, and sometimes on my own--mainly in photojournalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 19, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] at The HistoryMakers' studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 196460
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.  First one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy (laughter).  I don't know--I have to give that some thought for a second.  I guess I'd have to say fruits and vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth tones, browns, sun colors, browns and, you know, orange, yellow--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: It's been Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The one I say the most is the two most important things in life is a person's--a person in his relationship to God.  And number two is money.
Story_ID: 196461
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  And you know quite a bit about it, so I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [John H. Stengstacke] side of the family.  First, your mother's side, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us first?
Speaker 2: Maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Myrtle Elizabeth Picou.  She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Her mother died when she was about two years old.  And about that time, her aunts and uncles had migrated to Los Angeles [California], and she was raised by an uncle and an aunt in Los Angeles.  She comes from a--as you might know, particularly, New, New Orleans.  It was acceptable to have a mistress living in the same--under the same roof as a master and his wife.  And her grand--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is during--what time period is this?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It's in New Orleans, back during slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's far back as I can, you know, as my mother told me.
Speaker 1: And your mother was--what's your mother's birthday?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What is your mother's date of birth and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, her grandmother was a child of a relationship of a Frenchman who had an African mistress, and he had a French wife.  He never had any children by his French wife.  All the children were with the African mistress--why, I'm not--it was never explained.  But they were both raised by the French woman and the African woman.  And all of my, my grandmother--I don't know it--how many other children there were, but I did meet my--she was my great-grandmother.  She was not only highly educated and spoke French, but she was also educated in the African traditions.  She was a healer--I understand a very great healer.  She knew--she understood voodoo.  She understood African mysticisms.  When my mother told me when she was a little girl--that when they moved to Los Angeles, people would be lined up down the street to see her with, you know, medical and physical problems.  And one day, the City of Los Angeles told her that she would have to stop because she was practicing medicine.  And my mother said that she--I remember my mother telling me that she used to--"Grandmother, you know, teach me, teach me the things that you know."  And she say, "I no teach you what you can't do."  And she never--once the City of Los Angeles told her that she could no longer heal people, she never did it again--never spoke of it.  My uncle--well, this would be my great-uncle, and aunts were basically all self-made people in Los Angeles.  And my Uncle Lewis who raised my mother--by the time I was old enough to be aware and who he was, and I lived with him.  I went to Los Angeles--school in Los Angeles for a couple of years.  He had acquired a mass--quite a fortune in real estate, as well as the other great uncles and aunts that I had, were all fairly well-to-do--mainly bootstrap people out of New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay, you caught me by surprise.  I thought there was more (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, well--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, that's a--
Speaker 2: --I mean, you know, other than that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, Picous in Louisiana, New Orleans based?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were related to--there was a very well-known jazz musician.  He played trumpet out of New Orleans and had reached a certain amount of acclaim.  I remember he was well enough known that when he died some years ago--it was, it was printed in Jet magazine.  He was a distant relative.  There was also, what links I don't know, but Cherokee Indian and Chinese also in the Picou background.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?  And before, but before you do that, can, can you give us some kind of a range when your mother was born--some kind of, you know?
Speaker 1: She died in what, 1990--I think about 1990 at seventy-six, if you want to do the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --her birthday was in March.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's good.  We can--
Speaker 1: So, if you want to do the arithmetic on that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we can do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That puts us in the ballpark--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, so--
Story_ID: 196462
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your father.  Give us his full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: John Herman Henry Sengstacke, J-O-H-N, H-E-R-M-A-N, H-E-N-R-Y, S-E-N-G-S-T-A-C-K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, you want me to go through what I said before or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, his--first of all, his birthdate and date and place?
Speaker 2: Again, he was born on November 27--okay, he died in 1960-, nineteen, I'm sorry, 1997, at eighty-four years old.  So, again, I think it was nineteen--oh, he was born in 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do remember that on--and it, November 27th [1912].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was he born in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what do you know about that side?  You, you've told me some things now about the order of the Sengstackes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Well, okay.  The original Sengstacke [sic. John Herman Henry Sengstacke, son of the original Sengstacke], who came back from [Bremen] Germany, became a minister and he was also a printer.  So, not only my father, but Mr. Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott] was raised in the printing family, and my father was raised in the printing family.  So we go back in printing for a number of years in--under, under my grandfather, Herman [Alexander] Sengstacke, who was also a minister--that was a son [sic. grandson] of the original Sengstacke.  Well, the son [John Herman Henry Sengstacke] of the original [Herman Henry] Sengstacke who married the African woman [Tama Melrose].  They were both ministers, Methodist ministers.  My father's father, my grandfather, also being a minister and a printer, the church organ or the, the church program--I'm not sure of the exact terminology (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, they're, okay--
Speaker 2: It basically grew into a newspaper [Savannah Echo] in Savannah which I, I don't remember the name of, but it's--it can be looked up.  So my father actually came up in printing and publishing.  Both my father and Mr. Abbott studied printing in Hampton University [formerly, Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia].  Mr. Abbott later, I think, I'm not sure, but you gotta, even though he studied printing, he was a lawyer.  And when he first came here, he, he practiced law in Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: So, Robert--I'm sorry, Robert, just to be clear, Robert S. [Sengstacke] Abbott is the son [sic. stepson] of Herman, Rev. [John] Herman [Henry] Sengstacke or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was two, two--both were Herman.  My great-great-grandfather--no, my great-grandfather [John Herman Henry Sengstacke] and my grandfather [Herman Alexander Sengstacke]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my great-grandfather was the one who was the child of the African woman [Tama Melrose] and the German seaman [Herman Henry Sengstacke]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who came back over here to settle the family estate.
Story_ID: 196463
Speaker 1: In the meantime--I didn't mention this, but the--his [Sengstacke's great-grandfather, John Herman Henry Sengstacke] sister stayed in [Bremen] Germany, married German, and their name is now Bodiker [ph.].  But Mr. Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott] was mainly the--and my father [John H. Sengstacke] were the--kind of the--what do you call it, when somewhat the head of the family in the sense that Mr. Abbott helped put them back on their feet in World War I [WWI].  And my father did the same thing after World War II [WWII], so you have this, for all practical purposes, a white German line of the family, except it--my current cousin says that he tans faster than most Caucasians (laughter).  But and then you have the African Americans strain of the family, and we've been family ever since.  I've never been to Germany, but I have an aunt, who's now deceased, who went to school in Germany--had to leave when [Adolf] Hitler came into power, and then went back to Germany after the war, and again stayed with the family.  I don't know whether she finished her education or not, but she did write a book about her experiences in Germany.  It's quite interesting that prior to World War II, the family had a picture of Mr. Abbott, the German family, over the fireplace.  They received the [Chicago] Defender through the mail.  And most of the people in Bremen [Germany] knew of the mixed heritage of the German family.  Of course, during the time of Hitler, they had to cut the subscription and took Mr. Abbott's picture down.  The woman who stayed in Germany, who was the original child from the African-German [Tama Melrose and Herman Henry Sengstacke] union, had two sons.  One of the sons left Bremen, blended in, went to another town, and changed his name and blended in and rejected his heritage.  The other one stayed in Bremen and their family suffered.  They were, they weren't persecuted, but in the sense of like the Jews were imprisoned and what-not, but their children were not able to go to school.  They were unable to get food ration, unable to get food rations.  And they had to survive on whatever they could and the kindness of neighbors.  So it's kind of a flip-flop story in the sense that where you have in families, like in my mother's [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] side of the family, she--most of the, her family, were very light-skinned.  And she always spoke of an uncle who had moved to Detroit [Michigan] and passed for white.  So, you have in Germany a similar situation where one of the family members left Bremen and changed his name,  And, you know, hid, hid--covered up or, you know, his mixed heritage, whereas the other one--so we, we, we also recognized the side of the family that took the hard road.  And whatever happened to the other lineage, I don't hear much about.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's an interesting story.  It's the kind of story you don't hear every day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's kind of a flip-flop (unclear) story in a sense that the two African American members were somewhat the head of the family and that we had the resources here.  And we were able to put the German or the--I'd hate to say white because I mean, but they, they look, they don't look, you know--I mean, my cousin, I'm sorry, I didn't bring some photos for you to shoot.  The last time Fred--they call him Little Fred, although he's about my age now Bodiker [ph.] from Germany--he was over here about just three or four years ago with his son.  And they came through Chicago [Illinois]--
Story_ID: 196464
Speaker 1: So, yeah, it's kind of interesting that you had this situation where the African American line of the family had the resources to help the German side of the family back on their feet.  It wasn't like they constantly needed help but after the war [World War II, WWII], we were able to help them out.  And I remember my mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke].  When I was a kid, she used to, every--I'd go to the grocery store with her once a week or so.  And she would always buy this, at that time, you could buy five-pound bags of sugar [sic. pepper].  This was back in the late '40s [1940s], maybe early, late '40s [1940s] when I was just maybe six, seven years old.  And it would always disappear and I asked her one time.  And she said--well, this would probably--excuse me, around nineteen, maybe '46 [1946], '47 [1947], she said that she sent them to Germany to the relatives because pepper was a valuable commodity after the war.  And--
Speaker 2: Oh, so it was five-pound bags of pepper, you said?
Speaker 1: Pepper, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: You could buy, you could buy pepper in the late '40s [1940s] in, in a grocery store in five-pound bags.  And as I said, she would buy one every week and it, you know, it would disappear.  And so one day as a child, I asked her.  And she explained to me that she shipped this pepper 'cause pepper was a valuable commodity in Germany after the war, so not only in financial resources, but things like that, I'm sure they were able to turn into either--I'm sure, sell or give goodwill within the community over in Bremen [Germany].  As well as for years, she would send clothes, sometimes new, sometimes used--well, sometimes my brother's and I old clothing, pajamas, things like that.  I remember we'd outgrow them--clothes that we didn't wear out, she would pack up and ship to Germany.  So what exactly my father [John H. Sengstacke] did, I never saw.  This was just things I remember my mother doing.  And I was never too enthusiastic, but they would--we would--who they referred to as Little Fred [Bodiker (ph.)], but he and I would--he's my age now.  He would write letters in German and we would write back in English, so there was somewhat of a communication.  I didn't keep it going throughout the later years in life, but I was made aware, and there was a communication of family in Germany.
Story_ID: 196465
Speaker 1: But going back to my father [John H. Sengstacke] and Mr. Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott], they were both educated in--at Hampton University [formerly, Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Now, are they, they--what's their relationship?  I mean, just to be clear?
Speaker 1: Mr. Abbott was my father's uncle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a half-brother of, of his father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right so--
Speaker 1: --of Rev. [Herman Alexander] Sengstacke.  And, then of course, the--he, Mr. Abbott was raised in the sense that household because his--as I said before, when the, the son [John Herman Henry Sengstacke] of the original union of the African woman [Tama Melrose] and the German seaman [Herman Henry Sengstacke] came back here to settle the affairs of the estate, and salvage really what was left 'cause the estate had been mismanaged and, you know.  They have, they have letters that lawyers wrote in [Bremen] Germany, going back to that period where they were trying to, you know, salvage whatever they could.  And, and, because he--they knew that the estate had been, was being mismanaged and actually being ripped off.  So, as I said before, when, when he came over here, the son--when he was an adult while he was salvaging what he could.  And at that time, as I mentioned it, a lot of the waterfront land in Savannah [Georgia] was owned by the family.  And the city had expanded to the waterfront.  And they wanted to acquire the land, so what was left, he made a, they made a tradeoff for acres of land that was on the edge of the city and it, for the land that was along the waterfront.  Although some of that land--I don't know, I always jokingly say, I'm going to give them to my cousin one day and come back and (laughter) claim my property that was, you know, stolen from us because we do have documents to prove that, that it was owned by the family.  But I don't know if that'll ever happen.
Story_ID: 196466
Speaker 1: Anyway, there was a woman named, a widow woman named [Flora] Abbott.  And let me go back a little bit because the Abbott family, Robert S. [Sengstacke] Abbott, the founder of the [Chicago] Defender was born on St. Simon's Island [Georgia], which is kinda in the Sea Islands off the coast of Georgia, about a hundred or so miles south of Savannah [Georgia].  And they come from what you would refer, refer to as house Negroes.  Mr. Abbott's father [Thomas Abbott] was a servant in, in the mansion of a plantation owner in Savannah [Georgia].  And when he, when--after the Civil War at some point--I don't know exactly why, but he distributed a lot of his riches or his holdings to some of the slaves that were on the plantation.  And Mr. Abbott's father, being a, a house servant, acquired enough to actually open up a store on St. Simon's Island.  So he was born in a somewhat well-to-do family after the Civil War because they had resources.  His father married a woman [Flora Butler Abbott] who came from a family of beauticians after the Civil War.  And they also, mainly African American beauticians, did the hair of white folks and back in that period.  And so he, he married into a family that also had resources, so they weren't necessarily rich, but they, they were more well-to-do than the average African American shortly after slavery.  So anyway, Mr. Abbott's father died while he was still fairly young.  And this is where--now the other--oh, the other thing was he, after he died--the Abbott family, they were, I guess somewhat bougie [bourgeois], and had this superior kind of attitude, even over the mother who was a beautician and didn't have, you know, came from a family with some, some degree of resources.  They were trying to take the son away from her, and this was about the time that my great-grandfather [John Herman Henry Sengstacke] arrived over here.  And while he was dealing with the estate of his father [Herman Henry Sengstacke], they met.  And somewhere along the line, they met, and he was able to assist her in going to court and helping her keep this child.  And they, in the process, fell in love and married, okay.  Then that's--from that union, my grandfather [Herman Alexander Sengstacke] was born.  My father's [John H. Sengstacke] father and so, Mr. Abbott and my grandfather were half-brothers.  And as I said, they were both raised in a printing family, and my father was raised in a printing and publishing family.  And I am actually fifth--let's see, I think fifth generation printing, fourth generation in publishing.  And they both went to Hampton [Institute, later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] to study printing.  Of course, Mr. Abbott, as I said, he got a--went to law school, and first published--I mean, first practiced law in Gary, Indiana, and later decided to publish his--moved to Chicago [Illinois] and he published the Chicago Defender--as I'm told, to help the suffering masses of his people.  And he started the Chicago Defender.
Speaker 2: That's in 1905, right?
Speaker 1: Nineteen [zer]o five [1905] and he started out with a--what I understand, a typewriter and in a woman's kitchen, whose name was Wimp [sic. Henrietta Lee].  And I don't know if you know the Wimp family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Wimps in Chicago that--
Speaker 1: You know, opened McDonald's and so forth.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: That was his [Edward D. Wimp Jr.] grandmother.  And she provided the first--in other words, the Defender was started in her kitchen.  And he had--from what I understand, he had twenty-five cents, a typewriter.  And how he was able to get it published, he sold it himself on the street.  And I understand that's one of the reasons they said he had ill health was being out there in the early days, in the winter and what-not.  And actually, the Defender grew into what it, you know, became.  And so, on the other hand, my father, of course, he used to come up here during the summers and work with Mr. Abbott.  And he studied printing, but he had a degree in business management.  And he always used to say, and if there's any regret, I never asked him why, that when people would ask him questions, he would say, "Well, I never really wanted to go into the Defender business.  I'm going to run the Defender, but Mr. Abbott became ill, and I was the only one in the family at that time."  He was the oldest son qualified to take over.
Story_ID: 196467
Speaker 1: We're talking about Robert [Sengstacke] Abbott and your father [John H. Sengstacke].  And you had an interesting kind of anecdote about Robert Abbott, you know.
Speaker 2: You mean, about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: What I just, okay--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because of the financial resources that the Abbott family had, even though they came from a very dark-skinned background--family, they were able to attend a mulatto church when Mr. Abbott was a young man.  And at a certain point, he fell in love with a young lady who was a member of the church.  But when he attempted to court her, it was--the lines were drawn very, very clearly then that he was too dark to ever hope that he could, you know, court or marry anyone of her color.  And so, my aunts tell--told me when I was a young man that they felt that this was one of the things that was a driving force behind Mr. Abbott to achieve and to accomplish because--I mean, apparently, this had a very, very profound effect on him.  And he had two wives during his life who were both white, so all this story was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was at a time when it was--you could really get hurt, you know, being married to a white woman--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the--at the turn of the [20th] century, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't hear too much about how that happened or how he was successful.  Of course, he, he lived right in the--on 47th [Street, Chicago Illinois] about two doors off the corner of 48th [Street], and what is now Martin Luther King [Jr.] Boulevard [sic. Drive].  So he lived in the black community.  And I don't know if, you know, he stayed within those confines.  I never heard any stories about problems he had, having these two white wives, and never really heard too much about any difficulties in those relationships.  Of course, he never had any children.  But he, he, he educated my father, all my uncles and aunts, anyone who wanted an education, including giving support to the family in [Bremen] Germany, and even helping the daughter of his father's [Thomas Abbott] former slave owner [Captain Charles Stevens] because he was grateful to the fact that the plantation owner had provided his father with enough resources to give them a fairly comfortable, you know, life.  And I mentioned earlier that Mr. Abbott's father had a store on St. Simon's Island [Georgia], and the family and so, he--
Speaker 1: Can, can you give us the name of the, of the slave owner--I mean, the former slave owner (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I really don't remember.  I need to re-read my uncle's biography ['The Lonely Warrior: The Life and Times of Robert S. Abbott,' Roi Ottley].  It's been years--
Story_ID: 196468
Speaker 1: Actually, my mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] read it [Robert Sengstacke Abbott's biography] to us when we were kids--'The Lonely Warrior' ['The Lonely Warrior: The Life and Times of Robert S. Abbott,' by Roi Ottley].  Now all that information is there but I currently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's the autobiography of, or--
Speaker 1: This is Robert S. [Sengstacke] Abbott, yeah--
Speaker 2: Was a--
Speaker 1: 'The Lonely Warrior'.
Speaker 2: Is it his own--I mean, is it an autobiography or a biography?
Speaker 1: Well, it was an auto--what happened is it was written by Roi Ottley.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What happened, it was done after his life.  I don't know what you'd call it--biography or not, because Mr. Abbott did manage during his illness to translate his entire life story to a secretary, but it was never published.  Then my father [John H. Sengstacke] contracted with Roi Ottley, who was the first African American columnist with the Chicago Tribune, and he wrote the biography and this--it's called 'The Lonely Warrior.'
Speaker 2: So he dictated a lot of it and it's basically a story of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was about.  It was all dictated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a story of Robert Abbott in his own words a lot of it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in his own words.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And so it was--he did manage to dictate everything before his death, but it was pretty much on his death bed when he was ill.  And he had his secretary--I'm not sure if it was Daisy Dickerson whose husband was a, a fairly well-known--she--I know he--she was his personal nurse.  He is now Major Dickerson [sic. Brig. General Spencer C. Dickerson]--what was it, I can't remember his first name.  But he--some of--he's memorialized some of--his portrait, and some of his effects are at the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  And it, of course, that was out of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: That's Dickerson?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --I think she was also the one that he transcribed his history too, but she was his personal nurse.  I know that.
Speaker 2: And she was really--her, her relationship to Major Dickerson was, she was--
Speaker 1: His wife--
Speaker 2: --his wife, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --his wife.  And so, but anyway, he was able to transcribe, you know, orally, his entire history from his, you know, when coming--he was basically bedridden at that time--
Story_ID: 196469
Speaker 1: Robert [Sengstacke] Abbott, so we would--in the Chicago Defender, there's this commitment to integration, you know, that seems to be profound, you know.  And so, I mean--I guess in his, in his life--
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was a platform.  And I can't, I can't quote all of it, but some--most of the platforms that Mr. Abbott set up--it's still the, it's still there today.  Membership, in all unions--the, one of the points as far as, you know, anti-lynching, that has been removed.  Most of the--I think it's a seven point.  They added one to it recently, but most of what he set up is still there.  The Defender is responsible, of course, most people know from the northern migration [Great Migration]--had a lot to do with the anti-lynching laws.  If you go back through the pages of the Defender--during it's early years, there, there was a page in the Defender--it almost took up a whole page, and it was, what you call oversized, you know, it was a big, like the [Chicago] Tribune today is called full size.  The papers at that time were even, oh, several inches larger.  And it would encompass an entire page of black each week--blacks were lynched all over the country.  And so, that was one of the things in the Defender platform.  Let me see--I'm trying to remember which--there, there were two, there were nine.  Only two have been accomplished, and one was the lynching--I can't remember the other--the one with, but the other seven are still like full membership and participation in unions that's still--hasn't been achieved to our satisfaction today, so--
Speaker 1: The old issues of the Defender are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  But it wasn't--I don't know if he advocated total integration in terms of the things that, you know, came about through the Civil Rights Movement, but certainly equal opportunities in unions, police, and certain oppor--you know, equal opportunities as far as, you know, being able to have an opportunity to achieve economically.  I don't remember crusading against the segregated South in terms of the drinking fountains.  The--Mr. Abbott more advocated, you know, African Americans coming north, and taking advantage of the opportunities in the industry.  I mean, like in Chicago [Illinois], during those days, you could come, you could come, come to Chicago, and within a day or two, you could have two jobs--one at the stockyards, one at the steel mills.  If you wanted, you know, you could, if one so wished, you could easily get hired almost immediately in one or the other, or both.  So that's the other reason that you have the large black populations today in most northern cities.  And it was the resulting African American mayors, politicians, and the significant African American population in terms of politics.
Story_ID: 196470
Speaker 1: Just to look at those days, we're talking about a town--I mean like Chicago [Illinois], other northern cities where there's lot of work.  And business people needed the labor and so, with--I suppose they, they would be in favor of the [Chicago] Defender, you know, calling for black folks to come north, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So there's a competition of some sense between whites in the South, and whites in the North in terms of the, the black labor pool?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the Defender, you know, helped to bring people up from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause they were definitely better opportunities.  I mean, it, it wasn't a total utopia, but they were definitely, as far as the segregated South and the plantation system, sharecropping system, as opposed to African Americans getting jobs in, in industry.  You could certainly fare better in, in that area, and this is, this is why during that period, the Defender was banned in the South when the--prior to the--well, even with the, you know, before the northern migration [Great Migration] when the Defender would speak out against lynchings, and things like this.  When we attempted to--my family attempted to ship the Defender to the South, you know, through the railroads through the postal system, most of the white postmasters were in the--through the shipping system in the railroad would take the Defender out back and burn it.  So this is where--if you know anything about the history, the Pullman porters became significant in that they would smuggle the Defender into the South.  And from what I have heard anyway, that even from publications, they were lynched, but this is how the Defender got down South and was distributed.  The Pullman porters would drop the Defender off throughout the stops along the railroad because the Defender was pretty much banned as far as normal distribution routes.  There's even a story where this one, either county--I guess in Alabama, actually sent a sheriff up here to Chicago to arrest Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott.  And somehow he got wind of it.  And he found there was some great big black man in Chicago who had no fear about saying anything to anybody because, you know, in those days, even if in, in the North, there were certain ways and certain respects you paid to white people when you address them.  And he was one of these that said that he had no compunction about saying whatever he had to say.  And he, Mr. Abbott, actually got this man and put a suit on him, and set him behind the desk.  And when the sheriff came up there to arrest Mr. Abbott, this dude got up and just, you know, "Look--you gotta--you, you better get your (unclear) down, back down in Alabama, and get the"--whatever it was.  And Mr. Abbott, in the old Defender building on 34th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], which is now a ward headquarters--there was a, the office, there was a little bathroom right off to the side 'cause my father [John H. Sengstacke] had that same office, I remember.  And they say Mr. Abbott went in the, in the bathroom while all this went on.  So--
Speaker 1: So the, the sheriff thought that this other, this big bad dude was Mr. Abbott?
Speaker 2: Yeah, was Mr. Abbott, you know.  So I don't know what, what he said, but I understand he raised hell.  And this guy I mean--they said he couldn't get out of that fast enough, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And (laughter), so it was kind of funny.  And my aunts and uncles used to talk about that, you know, with humor.  So, yeah, but that was how the Defender got distributed--
Story_ID: 196471
Speaker 1: There was also a man I remember from the biography ['The Lonely Warrior: The Life and Times of Robert S. Abbott,' by Roi Ottley] who actually would be invited.  He was an orator.  He was actually supported by Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott, but he would be invited by southern whites to come down to discourage blacks from coming north.  But it was kind of a--what, what, from the way the story was told, he would say things to the effect of, "Just because, you know what I mean, you can get better jobs and opportunities," (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "That's no reason to leave the South."  And he would flip it around.  And actually, white folks were inviting him down there, but the way he would say it is that blacks would just hurry up more and get out of there, you know.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his name?  Do, do you remember his name?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 1: I, you know, I don't know if it were something like Roscoe Conkling Jones [sic. Roscoe Conkling Simmons], and then some name like that.  It (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, there's--
Speaker 1: These were old (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I, I know there was a Roscoe Conkling Bruce--
Speaker 1: Maybe that was it.
Speaker 2: --who was a famous businessman--
Speaker 1: He was an orator?
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That must have been him.  I know it's Roscoe Conkling something.
Speaker 2: Roscoe Conkling, okay, Roscoe Conkling Bruce, probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We'll, we'll, you know, historically, we'll have to check that out but--
Speaker 1: These are all the stories, yeah.
Speaker 2: --right now, I just can't check it.  But, but I know there was a Roscoe Conkling Bruce that was associated with newspapers and business deals and so forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's got to be the same person.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: That's got to be the same person then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause these are old stories that people would tell me like Marjorie Stewart Joyner.
Speaker 2: Now she's a fascinating figure, too, in this whole thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that's an interesting story.  When my father [John H. Sengstacke] first came to Chicago [Illinois]--see, actually Mrs. Joyner was one of the executives with Madam C.J. Walker, who she loaned to my father, along with--I don't know if it's the same gentleman, Roscoe Conkling Bruce, but it may have been because my father sent--Mr. Abbott sent my father around the country to be introduced.  And, you know, to be exposed, and if it was him, I, I know whoever the gentleman was, and Mrs. Joyner--he told her to get the country out of my nephew.  And Mrs. Joyner and this, this gentleman actually educated my father in certain social graces and, and how, you know, to present himself as, as a business person, and to kind of weed out the--as Mr. Abbott said, "Get the country out of my nephew."
Speaker 2: So, 'cause your, your father was raised in Savannah [Georgia] and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: --and went to school in Hampton [Virginia, at Hampton Institute, later Hampton University], right, which is a--
Speaker 1: --and this gentleman traveled with my father and went everywhere and schooled him on, you know, actually how to become the person that, you know, the successor to Mr. Abbott.
Story_ID: 196472
Speaker 1: I--it may have been Roscoe Conk [Roscoe Conkling Simmons]--I'm glad you said Bruce 'cause I was, I always said Jones but that's got to be the same person [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he definitely worked closely with Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott.  And I'd like to know--you seemed to know more about his history than I do.  Maybe I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: I meant as it's Roscoe Conkling Bruce [sic. Roscoe Conkling Simmons].
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's some books that he appears, 'Voices of a Black Nation' ['Voices of a Black Nation: Political Journalism in the Harlem Renaissance'] by Theodore [G.] Vincent, about the black press in the early days.  They talk about the Chicago Defender, and the Chicago Bee, and the national rivalry between the Negro World, and the, and the [Chicago] Defender, and the Pittsburgh Courier [later, New Pittsburgh Courier], and the Norfolk Journal and Guide [later, New Journal and Guide], and [Baltimore] Afro-American [later, Afro-American Newspapers].  Those, those were the big national papers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [The] Cleveland Gazette on some level but, but the Defender and the, in the early days, the Negro World were the two biggest ones.  And then, when [Marcus] Garvey's demise took place in 1927, then we're talking about the Pittsburgh Courier and the Defender being the two big forces and the Afro on some level, too, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Afro-American, and some people throw in the [New York] Amsterdam News (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it just didn't get the distribution.  Yeah, the Amsterdam News is big in New York but didn't get the distribution (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all over the country like the Defender did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was the Afro, Courier--that's an interesting story, too, how the NAAPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] came about because when my father [John H. Sengstacke] was a young man, he used to say that Carl Vann [sic. Robert Lee Vann], and the Murphys, and Mr. Abbott hated each other's guts.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And he wanted to bring the black publishers together.  And Mr. Abbott said, "Well, you can try, but it will never happen," you know.  So he arranged--he sent out an invitation to, not only the Murphy and the Vann family, but other publishers of that period to come to Chicago [Illinois].  And at that time, he said, all of them sent younger representatives, but none of the publishers showed up.  And there's a photograph.  Of course, they had the first meeting at the Wabash Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois].  And I have a photo, you know, from that meeting.  That was also the day Mr. Abbott died.  And my father, that morning, when they were convening the meeting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what year is this and--
Speaker 1: Oh god.  I can't remember.  Sometime in the '40s [1940s] [sic. 1940].
Speaker 2: Was it in the '40s [1940s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About four years ago.  Let me see--he died in '60 [1960]--'97 [1997].  I think in '98 [1998], they had the sixtieth anniversary--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --here in Chicago.  The year my father died so you can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So in '48 [1948], I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '48 [1948].  Anyway, that was the--was it '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: 60th anniversary would be--
Speaker 1: No, no, would be '38 [1938]--
Speaker 2: --Thirty-eight [1938], yeah, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, in '38 [1938].  Mr. Abbott died around 1938, '39 [1939], something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: So '38 [1938], '39 [1939].  Yeah, 'cause, let's see--anyway, I can't pin it exactly.  But anyway, that--they were convening the meeting when they got the word that Mr. Abbott died.  And to show the kind of man my father was, he left but he was back there that afternoon, you know, within a few hours and continued the meeting.  But anyway, he wasn't satisfied because he did not bring the major publishers together.  So, what he did was he, he was very close with Mary McLeod Bethune.  And as a kid, I remember every time she came to Chicago, she came by our home and I remember seeing her many times.  But anyway, she, of course, everybody knows she had a relationship with Eleanor Roosevelt.  So, at that time, there was the Black Cabinet [Federal Council on Negro Affairs] by a guy named [Walter] White who said or, you know, who said who got to see [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt.  Okay, and at that time, he was known for blocking certain people from getting in to see the president (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Walter White or--
Speaker 1: It might have--was it Walter White?
Speaker 2: Is this somebody in the Roosevelt administration (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think his name was White.  I don't know he would--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: In other words, he--it--they call it the black cabinet or something.  And this is one particular man had the say--so as to who got it in to see the president and what-not.  And so, you know, it was kind--I don't know if my father tried through him or not, but he wasn't successful if he did.  But what did was he had this relationship with Mary McLeod Bethune throughout her life, but back then, see, he got Mary McLeod Bethune to get Eleanor Roosevelt to get her husband to have a meeting with the African American publishers of that day.  And that meeting was scheduled, and he sent out another invitation to all the publishers to come together in, in Washington [D.C.].  And on the agenda was the meeting at the White House [Washington, D.C.].  That's when Carl Murphy and the Vanns, and everybody showed up.
Speaker 2: So, just a item on the agenda was a meeting with the president (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This and all the publishers showed up this time and they've been together ever since.
Story_ID: 196473
Speaker 1: So, and later, my father [John H. Sengstacke] founded API [Amalgamated Publishers, Inc.] for the same reason because all of the African American newspapers were out there fighting against each other trying to get advertising, putting one another down, and he founded API for the same reason to--because we weren't getting anywhere.  I mean, especially, when you talked about the African American [sic. Afro-American Newspapers], you know, and the Murphy family, the [Pittsburgh] Courier [later, New Pittsburgh Courier], and the [Chicago] Defender which all had national circulation going in trying to get national advertising and putting each other down.  And so, API was a combined body of African American newspapers, which allowed us to go to a national advertiser with a combined national circulation, which actually was equal to the circulation of Ebony, and, you know, other, other national publications.  And that stayed together for a number of years.  Unfortunately, as my father, he kept it going for years, but as he got older, he eventually was voted out.  And that began the demise of Amalgamated Publishers.  And then there was eventually an establishment of an NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] ad [advertising] committee, which then started regional ad committees, and you're almost back to the same situation which you have today, where you have a regional ad committee so, you know--everybody's again out there kind of going for themselves.  And you have no unified voice, and API is almost dead.  That's Amalgamated Publishers, but these were some of the innovative things that my father did.  And even though he used to say he didn't want to get--initially take over the Defender, he brilliantly understood and used the power of the press because, you know, its history--
Story_ID: 196474
Speaker 1: He's [Sengstacke's father, John H. Sengstacke] mainly credited for the integration of the [U.S.] Armed Forces baseball, which is another interesting story, if you'd like me to--
Speaker 2: Oh, well--
Speaker 1: --because if you, if you look at the, like Jackie Robinson's story, in there you see Branch Rickey who every--they, they say that, you know, this white man stood up.  And, you know, led the cause for integration of baseball, but what actually happened was the black press had, for a number of years, had been publishing and had, had been, you know, advocating the integration of baseball.  And, again, my father knew Paul Robeson.  And one time he said he was in Chicago [Illinois] and he knew that Paul Robeson was--had a close relationship with a man named [Kenesaw Mountain] Landis, who was the commissioner of baseball, and he got Paul Roberson to get to Landis to agree to have a meeting with baseball managers and the black press.  And during that meeting, Branch Rickey did stand up and say, if you find a qualified player, I'll hire him.  But history and the movies and so forth never tells the story.  And even some black documentaries--I hate to say, one that I knew, knew the story having been totally passed over that.  And then Wendell Smith, along with at that time the sports editor for the [Pittsburgh] Courier [later, New Pittsburgh Courier], Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode], and a number of the sports editors, went around the country and screamed black athletes.  And I don't know if, if Mal Goode tells it--it was he and Wendell Smith that found Jackie Robinson.  But it was a general consensus of sports editors from all of the African American newspapers that finally boiled down to Jackie Robinson, and brought him to Branch Rickey.
Speaker 2: Had they set up a set of criteria that this candidate would have to have to have to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --be acceptable to Branch Rickey?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And I don't know if Branch Rickey--
Speaker 2: 'Cause there are a lot of good ballplayers--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --that were better than Jackie Robinson but--
Speaker 1: --but I mean he had the, you know, make-up to withstand--I mean, they knew that there were, you know, the--being called nigger and what-not and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all of the racial slurs, and probably even had things thrown at him, you know, just like goes on the baseball today, so that, that was--I mean, that criteria, yes, came from, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That meeting with--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) African American sports editors.  Wendell Smith did have a major role in it but I, I was fortunate enough that when I lived on the East Coast for a few years in Teaneck, New Jersey, Mal Goode was still alive and lived in Teaneck.  And I was fortunate enough to--and, and spend some time with him.  And history may never tell it, but he said it was he and Wendell that actually first discovered Jackie Robinson.  And, of course, I mentioned before, he was the editor [sic.] of the Pittsburgh Courier at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But these are all things that a lot of people don't know.  And there are so many things that my father was responsible for, in terms of using the press, even some that probably I don't even know because one of the things I admired about my father was that he was a man who did what needed to be done and kept his mouth shut.
Story_ID: 196475
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mentioned the fact that my father [John H. Sengstacke] was the kind of person who did what needed to be done and kept his mouth shut.  And that also is why a lot of people don't know it, but when it comes to civil service in the [U.S.] post office, for years in, in your major cities, and even smaller towns where you have black populations, blacks have generally dominated the positions at the post office.  And this was achieved under [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt through my father and Congressman [William L.] Dawson who had a working relationship where they built the black voting bloc here in Chicago [Illinois].  And that might have been--hopefully, that story will be told one day.  I'm working on producing a film right now called 'Chicago Defender,' and that's one of the things I hope to bring out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, the, the building of the black voting bloc--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was significant in, in the rise of the, of the Democratic power in the city, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, actually--let me, if you want to back up a little bit.  At that time, there were no black committeemen.  And the black community wanted Earl [B.] Dickerson but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As congressman?  And its, yeah--
Speaker 1: And I think.  I think it was mixed up--I think it was (unclear) Canelli [ph.] and a man, [Mayor Edward G.] Kelly.  I think--I don't--I think it was Kelly came first, or was it Canelli?  Anyway--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: --at the time, whichever one it was, did not want, did not for some reason, wanted Earl Dickerson.  But he told my father--he said, there's a man who's a Republican, and if you can get him to switch to the Democratic Party, I'll make him committeeman.  And that was William L. Dawson.  My father took him to lunch and they met, and Dawson agreed to switch to the Democratic Party, and became the 1st [sic. 2nd] Ward committeeman.
Story_ID: 196476
Speaker 1: And throughout their lives, my father [John H. Sengstacke] and [William L.] Dawson worked.  I remember even I hearing this as a young kid.  My father used to take me with him sometimes.  In fact, he took me to the White House [Washington, D.C.] for the signing of the integration of the [U.S.] Armed Forces [Executive Order 9981] when I was just a little child.  And, but I remember that incident with--'cause President [Harry S.] Truman was somebody whose face I'd seen in the newspapers.  But I remember riding on the train from--'cause we went to New York [New York].  My father and Dawson met in New York, and then we took a train ride down to Washington [D.C.].  And, you know, they used to have the saying that, "I don't want to be a newspaper man."  And then, Dawson would say--my father said, "Yeah, and I don't want to be a politician."  They laughed, you know, but which was true.  But, together, they were able to build this black voting bloc here in Chicago [Illinois] which wielded power all the way to the White House.  And some people, you know, I even heard this recently in New York about all the legislation and the things that Adam [Clayton] Powell [Jr.] had, you know, put before [U.S.] Congress, and that William L. Dawson didn't have a record of--almost zero or very little.  And I said, "Yeah, but he wielded a different kind of power."  And then I told him about the civil service--my--so, but a lot of people don't realize that getting blacks to shift to the Democratic Party--that was pretty much financed on my father's pocket and William L. Dawson, they trained people to go throughout the country, and teach people how to register to vote, how to set up voter registration drives, to encourage people to vote for Truman.  And when, you remember back during that period, all the polls said that, you know, [Thomas E.] Dewey was going to win.  But all these people without telephones came up and made the difference.  And a lot of those people were African Americans who were directly, you know, influenced by Dawson and my father.  So Dawson may not have wrote a lot of legislature, that was put before congress, but when you talk about getting--opening up civil service for the post office-- Dawson was the same way, he did things, and both he and my father--I mean 'cause if they'd had a press conference about the integration--I mean the civil service and making that exclusively for African Americans, it never would have happened.  It was done, it was quietly done, and it was achieved.  So, that's another story of how power, political and, and power in the newspaper power were combined.  And it may be the greatest story, you know, in, in this generation of two African Americans working together, and what can be achieved by the, the combining of power which I don't see today anywhere.  Everybody seems to be, you know, a lonely voice in the wilderness by themselves.  And that's why I said, I hope to be able to--I am going to tell that story before I leave the planet.
Story_ID: 196477
Speaker 1: And there were many, many more things that the two of them [Sengstacke's father, John H. Sengstacke and William L. Dawson] were able to achieve.  They were the ones--one of the things when [President Harry S.] Truman got elected was to--before Truman, blacks used to have to sit behind a curtain at the inauguration.  And the president, whoever was president, would come around the other side.  And the inaugural ball was separated in some of those ballroom by an actual curtain.  And one of the deals with Truman was that, that curtain would come down, okay.  And so, my father just happened to be in Washington [D.C.] the day that Dawson got enough calls from around the country--people saying that they had not got their invitation to the inauguration because there were certain blacks who throughout the country, who knew they were supposed to be invited.  And Truman had issued the order to the inaugural committee, but it wasn't followed up on, okay.  So, there wasn't enough time to get these invitations back in because when it was discovered that the whites in the inaugural committee had--
Speaker 2: Sabotaged, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sabotaged it.  And so, my father just happened to be in Washington and came by Dawson's office, and learned about this.  And because you still had to buy a ticket, so my father wrote a check for all these black people and gave it to Dawson.  He later got his money back, and it was taken to the Democratic National Committee [DNC].  And this is how blacks were first seated in, in an, an integrated atmosphere.  Of course, the seating had to be worked out.  They couldn't put them next to Strom Thurmond who was probably in--a young, you know, politician at the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but they hadn't been seated--
Speaker 2: --in, in light of recent news about Strom Thurmond, that's kind of funny, you know.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And you couldn't see with the southern politicians, but these were somewhat unknown things.  And I just happened to--I was in Washington, and Congressman Dawson was about, a couple of years ago, and Congressman Dawson's secretary who was still lucid, I went by her house--Christine Davis, and interviewed her, and learned a number of interesting things like that, that were--she'd be a good person to interview, too.
Speaker 2: I'm writing her down right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I got her number in my office.  I mean, and she's still very--I mean, a couple of years ago anyway, you know, she still got all her faculties.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: She was his secretary from the day he became congressman to the day he stepped down.  So, that, that, that--I, I think from what I know about history, and I might be wrong.  It was probably the most significant relationship of any two African American men working together to use power unselfishly for the good of the African American people.
Story_ID: 196478
Speaker 1: And it seems to be the [Chicago] Defender, I know put a lot of pressure on the [U.S.] government to integrate the [U.S.] Armed Forces as well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that was one of the big projects of--
Speaker 2: That was another--after [President Harry S.] Truman got in, and he had agreed to integrate the Armed Forces, and actually issued the order.  But it got back to him that, you know, just issuing an order all over the world didn't, doesn't mean it's going to happen.  So he set up a commission [President's Committee on Civil Rights] of several people, you know, to go around and visit these bases in Germany and Japan, and other parts of the world to monitor the progress of the integration.  And my father [John H. Sengstacke] was on that commission.  And he told me that after these commissioners came back in, and Truman brought them all together, and everybody sat there, and, you know, basically gave a report that everything's fine, and integration is going on.  There was one white man--I can't remember his name, who I guess my father had communicated and knew before.  And they didn't say anything during the meeting, but they got together and agreed that they, they were giving Truman a crock of crap, and requested another meeting.  And this, this white man--whoever he is, he's kind of fell through the cracks.  And my father has gotten most of the credit, but it was the two of them who went to President Truman, and let him know that he was being lied to, and gave them the facts of what was happening.  And that's when Truman called the Joint Chiefs of Staff together and said, "Look, I integrated into something--in order to integrate the Armed Forces, I understand it isn't being done, and if it isn't, then heads are going to roll"--some kind of statement like that.  And that was really--I think the--it--the order had been issued, but it really hadn't happened.  Even after that, my father was on the same commission--I remember under [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy.  And he was sent to Japan, and blacks were still had--they had, they had separate officers' clubs, separate gates.  The Japanese people believed that African Americans had tails.  I mean, all this was still going on under Kennedy.  And, you know, he had--my father had top secret clearance under the federal government.  I mean, the, the highest, you know, clearance you could have in, in terms of--one time, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was going around checking on my father.  And he had a farm up in, at that time, near South Haven, Michigan.  And his neighbor told him that the FBI--this Polish farmer had come by to question him about my father.  And the--this farmer said after they got through, the agent said, he's, you know, I got to file this thick on John Sengstacke.  And there's not one wrong thing in there about him.  And so, of course--what was his name?  I think--I can't remember now--this farmer.  But anyway, he told my father this some years later so.  But he continued to serve--I think, I, I don't know, under [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson.  But I know under Kennedy--his commission still existed because the integration process still had to be monitored, even down to Kennedy.  I don't know if it still is.
Speaker 1: It's almost twenty, twenty years after the fact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I don't think--probably today, you probably got--I know you don't have those kinds of problems with separate officers' clubs and gates--and I mean the--if there is much--remember, and you got blacks throughout the ranks today.  I'm, I'm sure there's some discrimination going on, but it, it's, you know--not, you know, that blatant.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a significant change from World War II [WWII] days, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you know, but that's an interesting relationship.
Story_ID: 196479
Speaker 1: It's just unfortunate today even like, you know, if you look at all the black agencies today, and even though a lot of them don't want to recognize the black press when they're dealing with their white accounts--if it wasn't for API [Amalgamated Publishers, Inc.], and even before Ebony magazine, Ebony just kind of opened up the market to national advertising in terms of color, and so far, which made--paved the way for other magazines.  But all of these agencies that exist today are a result of the black press.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Because once API was formed, and they started going to these national advertisers with this million plus circulation nationally, then the national corporations started looking for African American agencies to put their advertising and so forth together.  And, you know, I mean Ebony gets some credit for the slick magazine ads [advertisements] and they, they--but it was mainly the black newspapers who initially made the thrust.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And even when you talk about Johnson Publishing [Inc., Chicago, Illinois]--when I was a kid, [Alfred E.] Al Monroe, who was the entertainment editor of the [Chicago] Defender, and some of the other people used--I remember Audrey Weaver used to say, "Come here, Sengstacke, young Sengstacke," or whatever--they said, "you see this magazine here?"  And they'd be pointing to Jet.  And they said, "If it wasn't for your father [John H. Sengstacke], this wouldn't be in business."  And that's true.  My father unselfishly helped [HistoryMaker John H.] Johnny Johnson in many ways--most of the Defender reporters moonlighted for Johnson.  My father let it go on--I think it was Ward Kale [ph.] who became the first editor as a white man for Jet and Ebony was originally, at that time, the editor for the Defender.  My father fired him 'cause he just kind of went over backwards--I think to the extent of even laying out Johnson's publication as the Defender.  I mean, that was going a little too far.  But, and I'm not criticizing Johnny Johnson.  But in his biography, he only credited my father for getting Jet magazine membership in the NNPA, National Newspaper Publishers Association.  I mean, which was really a small thing, but the publishers were against it.  My father did fight for Jet to be a member.  They--it--most of the publishers say, "It's a magazine," by--what my father said, "but it's a news magazine."  But see, my father gave Johnny Johnson the Defender's national distribution list when he was first getting started.  And that's how Johnson got to all these mom and pop stores and got the saturation for Jet, and I guess, Hue, Tan, Negro Digest [later, Black World]--
Story_ID: 196480
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that raises a point too.  In Chicago [Illinois], I know distribution of magazines is highly political.  You got to know somebody to get your stuff out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Charles Levy & Son [sic. Chas. Levy Co. LLC, Chicago, Illinois] used to control the--I don't know how--if how far back they controlled it, but I know in the '70s [1970s], they were controlling distribution of magazines and newspapers.  And if they didn't know who you were, you couldn't get your thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's the national, yeah.  But, see, even today, you got Levy and the major--you can go through them, but there's always this mom and pop saturation level.  The smaller stores are all throughout the South.  They're going to little towns and so forth--see, where the [Chicago] Defender was, see.  And that, that was the key, see, because even if you go back with Levy and the national distributors, when Ebony was founded, I mean, that really was a small number of places that, you know, maybe the Walgreens in the black community, you know what I'm saying?  But the mass distribution that saturated was when my father gave me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're saying that was more of a black controlled--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --business?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And see, and that in that days, you still had the Chicago Defender, and then you had the national edition of the Chicago Defender.  And I'll never forget it.  I almost remembered this.  On my father's [John H. Sengstacke] fortieth birthday, they had a birthday party somewhere.  It might have been at the Wabash Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois]--I don't remember.  I was still pretty young, but I remember [HistoryMaker John H.] Johnny Johnson standing up, and actually crediting my father for his success.  And that may have been the last time, but I, I remember that.  I was old enough.
Speaker 1: So by, by, so by 1956, you had the Chicago Defender (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Tri-State Defender, the Michigan Chronicle, the New Pittsburgh Courier [formerly, Pittsburgh Courier], and the Defender went daily, right, by, by '56 [1956], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, yeah, 1956, February--I think, February 6th.  I'm not--my, my oldest brother's birthday.
Speaker 1: So this is like a sort of a golden age of the Defender--I guess in some ways.
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: That's, that's like the golden age of the Defender in a way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, and my father's dreams, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in a sense that--
Speaker 2: One of the reasons, because when he used to go to Marshall Field's [Marshall Field & Company] and different advertisers, they say, "We don't have advertise in weeklies."  That's one of the main reasons we started the daily Defender--was to be competitive and get, get the major advertisers in the Defender.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Now, I want to try to--is, is there anything else you want to say about your, your father's contribution to the Defender?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, I need to go on.  I think--I mean, I think I've said enough to, you know, establish who he was as a man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 196481
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] and father [John H. Sengstacke] meet?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: God, I don't know exactly.  She was still--I think she was still living in Los Angeles [California].  I, I don't really--I don't, I never did really get to where they first met.  I don't know if she was here working in Chicago [Illinois].  I know, at one--I can't, because I know he used to visit her in Los Angeles.  She grew up with the Mills Brothers and I, I know there's a photo--I didn't know it was The Mills Brothers.  The photo I have of Mr. Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott] with these young kids standing around and, and one of my cousins told me that was the Mills Brothers.  Now my mother grew up with them so I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, they're from Ohio.  I know, yeah.
Speaker 2: --because she came from a family with resources out of Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She was up in with a certain generation that probably crossed over.  And it may have been somewhere through that connection through those kinds of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I never--my mother or my father never mentioned, you know, the first time they met or any of the circumstances.
Story_ID: 196482
Speaker 1: So, did she [Sengstacke's mother, Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] grow up in Los Angeles [California] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay.  So she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] and grew up in Los Angeles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was born in New Orleans, but her mother died shortly after birth, and my uncle and aunt did--raised her and migrated to Los Angeles when she was two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she's really, you know, she always referred herself as being from New Orleans.  She was born in New Orleans, but I mean all she ever knew was Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, she was part of the black middle class during that day.  I mean, Mr. Abbott [Robert Sengstacke Abbott] had a LaSalle, which was something in those days.  That was the Cadillac, but Uncle Lewis [ph.] had a LaSalle, too, in Los Angeles so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your mother's personality like?  What, what kind of a person was, was she, and what did she like to do, or what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a very beautiful person, very dedicated.  She, she had a certain amount of social responsibility in terms--she--I wouldn't exactly call her a socialite.  She was very--both my parents were very down to earth people.  And some people always--sometimes they comment that, that they assumed that I would be some kind of snob, and have some kind of a superior attitude.  But both my parents were very, very down to earth people, you know.  They always taught me not to underestimate anybody, and to take every, each person, one-on-one as an individual and not to, you know, see myself as above or superior to any, any human being.  I mean, that's basically my mother and father [John H. Sengstacke].  My mother did take on a degree of social responsibility as far as supporting my father and the [Chicago] Defender for a number of years.  And so, she was out there and she was involved in, in any number of things, but it was all being supported with him.  She knew that my father, even of being a newspaper man, did not always--I mean, really, 'cause like Katharine Graham once said, publishers are business people--not, not really editors.  And that he did not always have the time to thoroughly read the newspapers every day.  And I remember every evening when he'd come home--she would, she would sit down and forward the [Chicago] Sun Times, [Chicago] Tribune, and even the Defender, and clip everything that was relevant, and put it in front of him.  So, I mean that was not something that my father asked her to do, but she definitely was the kind of woman that, you know, was supportive and she was extremely intelligent.  I mean, she in a way, my father--I mean, even though underneath, he was really kind of--I mean, he had a softness about him in a way.  He covered it up and I mean, he, he, he, he was one of those people who, in his generation, believed that men weren't supposed to cry.  And you, you know, he did have a very tough exterior, you know.  But my mother, on the other hand, was a very sophisticated lady.  Everyone loved her, and she was maybe like kind of when it came to the public as his better half, you know.  I, I have several--when I say, several, three or four personal letters that [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy wrote to my mother thanking her.  One was--he never said what it was, but he was thanking her for the advice that she gave him, you know.  And so, she was definitely a woman who realized her position as John Sengstacke's wife.  And it did many things to complement that, you know.
Story_ID: 196483
Speaker 1: As a mother, you know, in a way--I mean, she's [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] the one that saved me in recognizing early on the fact that I was an artist.  And even though everybody in life, you know, a difficulty in growing up in a prominent family, and anybody can tell you this.  I've talked to [HistoryMaker] Jesse [Jackson], Jr. about it.  I mean, they immediately know what I'm talking about.  When you're put in a cubbyhole--I mean, when you're very young, you know--I mean, all my life, people said, "[HistoryMaker Robert] Sengstacke, you got it made.  All you got to do is wait for your daddy [John H. Sengstacke] to die, you're going to be rich!"  Now, if I had listened to that crap, when my father died--I mean, he left an opportunity of a good name, but he didn't leave a dime, okay.  And if I had listened to that kind of thing, but, you know, even though my father, he recognized, you know, my achievements as a graphic artist because I used to draw and paint before I--I've always been a picture person.  It kind of used to irritate him because he always wanted to see me be the kind of businessperson that he thought I should be because I do understand business.  I studied business in college [Bethune-Cookman College, later, Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], but I refuse to let the cold-blooded aspects of business because I realized that.  And I said, I can become that but I, I decided a long time ago I would have destroyed my artistic nature in that.  And I think in terms of my--what I've done in my career, I have been successful as a businessperson and managed any business.  I mean, the fact that I'm recognized all over the world.  I'm considered by many places the most prolific photographer on the planet.  But I credit my mother for recognizing that and encouraging that, and not necessarily--well, neither one of my parents ever--my father, it was decided, always said, "This is what you're supposed to be."  I mean, even today, people think that--I mean, it's like without the [Chicago] Defender I ain't shit, you know what I'm saying?  And my legacy is in having a profound impact on humanity through the form of a media and I've done that.  I've been living in my legacy most of my life, even before I realized it.   It's not necessarily in the pages of the Chicago Defender.  But even today, people have a lot of--are we (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keep talking--
Speaker 1: --running out of time--
Speaker 2: Yeah we are but go ahead and finish this--
Speaker 1: People cannot see the difference, you know.  And I mean sometime I even had somebody tell me that without the Defender, you ain't shit.  You know, I mean, and that's--come on, 'cause it's very difficult to find yourself and your own identity.  I mean, that's a hell of a struggle and I'm proud of myself, you know.  And like I said, I had a conversation with Jesse, Jr. about that recently.  And actually, it was in an interview and I popped the question on him.  And he immediately, you know--but anybody who comes from this kind of background because all, you know, you're  Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] son, and all you got to do is blah, blah, we.  Well, what about him, who he is?  How does he get to be congressman and get to be his own man--'cause his father didn't want, and when he first wanted to run for congressman, his father, Jesse, Sr. was against it.  That's a very difficult struggle when you're coming up in a prominent family.  So, you know, like I said, my legacy is not necessarily in the Defender.
Story_ID: 196484
Speaker 1: Yeah, many people throughout the years thought that Sengstacke, the [Chicago] Defender, was owned by whites.  And it might very well be--my work and my name carrying it, you know, that maybe has, you know, let people know that Sengstacke is, is, is an African American family.
Speaker 2: I guess the funny thing about this is there are various levels of confusion up around who is a Sengstacke, number one, if they're white or black--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and, and then who are you, and then people, people assuming that Abbotts are running the Chicago Defender, and not Sengstackes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who is a Sengstacke and what is a Seng--you know?  And so, I mean, people who are familiar with your work in--on a national scene, often don't know you're related to the Defender at all.  Though--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so, it's a, so, if there's any comfort in that--I, you know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, it is, you know, 'cause, you know, at some point because--see, I didn't realize that it's like I heard [Herbert] Nipson, a long-time editor to Ebony--said it wasn't in front of me, but he's talking to some photographer somewhere.  And someone told him--he said, "Yeah, well, Bobby [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke] got out of here and went around the country, and made a name for himself"--and not like I went out to make a name for myself.  But at some point, I didn't realize how many people knew me as a photographer.  And maybe in the last fifteen or twenty years, they say, "Yeah, I know you."  And I'm assuming, because I was always related as Bobby Sengstacke, John [H.] Sengstacke's son, you know, which it goes back to what I was saying before of coming up under a prominent father.  But they said, "No, I know you, the photographer," you know, and this began to kind of surprise me but I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, believe me, around the country, people don't know who, who the Sengstackes are.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, really, they really don't.  I mean, so it takes--
Speaker 1: There are a lot of people who know me.  And, actually, what's keeping the Sengstacke name alive today is my work, and the greater exposure that it's getting because just like in the New York Times, some back in the '80s [1980s], I was recognized as one of the most significant photographers of the civil rights era.  And this has just recently brought home by an exhibit--exhibition that was put together by the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] that is traveling for seven years, and 2004 will be the last year.  And it's a select group of civil rights photographers, like Charles Moore did the work in Birmingham [Alabama], and Matt Herron.  Of seven photographers, there are two African Americans and that's myself and [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks.  And even more than Gordon when civil rights work is shown, if it wasn't for me, all the other photographers whose work has really, goes beyond that--I mean, there were thousands of photographers who shot the Civil Rights Movement.  But it's come down to six or seven--if it wasn't for me, they'd all be white.
Story_ID: 196485
Speaker 1: Let's kind of backtrack now to--I mean and talk about growing up--how you grew up and we'll get to your career, you know, as we, as we progress.  But I was asking you how your parents [John H. Sengstacke and Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] met.  And I want to ask you now, like where did you grow up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in the Rosenwald [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and we lived there until I was seven which is 1950.
Speaker 1: Now that's a big building, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But a lot of prominent--
Speaker 2: --it takes up an entire block.
Speaker 1: --a lot of prominent black folks lived in that building?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah, and that, and during that period who were in--kind of up and coming and in transition.  The, it was the [Chicago] Tribune used to refer to as--Chicago Tribune as the oasis in the middle of the slums.  And--
Speaker 1: Robert Taylor's family lived there, I believe.
Speaker 2: Robert Taylor, yeah, he had a real estate office.  He managed the Rosenwald. And later, you know, CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], when, when Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], and all that was put together.  And Congressman [Ralph] Metcalfe, when he was still, you know, you know, not too long after coming from Germany [1936 Summer Olympics, Berlin, Germany] with Jesse Owens and all that, and a lot of prominent families, either came out of the Rosenwald, or--and that time, the black community was all in one area.  I mean, but you lived in Rosenwald, or you lived along Michigan Avenue in that area.  But as soon as you went over to Wabash [Avenue] and State [Street], you were still kind of in the, or Indiana [Avenue], not so much Indiana, but Prairie [Avenue], Calumet [Avenue].  You had the poor blacks, I mean we were all there in one, you know, general vicinity.  And, of course, the other area where blacks who were well-to-do was [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive which, at that time, was South Park [Way].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: South Park Way, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's where Ida B. Wells' family lived--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott--
Speaker 1: --the Barnetts and the--
Speaker 2: --had, you know, his home.  But as far as the up and coming in the apartments, it was Michigan Avenue and the Rosenwald because mostly homes, you know, there's mostly, you know, homes along King Drive--
Story_ID: 196486
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s], blacks started moving into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois].  And, actually, we lived in Kenwood.  My father [John H. Sengstacke] bought a house on 48th [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue].  And, you know, a lot of people used to wonder, you know, how do you, you know, how I could be so down to earth coming from a family, 'cause I mean when we got a house, we had servants.  We had a houseman or he wasn't exactly a butler.  We had a maid.  We had a yard and land, and all that, but, see, a lot of people don't realize that--first of all, when you live in Rosenwald [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and you walked out on 47th Street, there was a mix of everything.  But even beyond that, see, the [Chicago] Defender was on 34th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], and that was called the dirty thirties.  And as a kid, I grew up around 31st [Street], 35th Street.  I mean, I saw a man get his throat cut when I was about five or six years old walking down 35th Street, you know.  I saw an old lady pissing in the alley, you know--I mean, looked like a sweet little old lady.  I mean, these are kind of shocking things to me.  I mean, you know, respect your elders and all that, and this woman, she--I guess she's a linehead coming down the alley.  And she pulled up her dress and leaned up on a lamp post, you know.  And I'm--so I, you know, even though I grew up in a house, I grew up in the Rosenwald which was an isolated area.  It was a building built around an entire block with a garden and a park inside, and you had guards.  People were not allowed in that didn't live there.  There was a playground.  There were trees.  As soon as you walked outside--I mean, I first got robbed when I was five years old, you know, on 47th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  So, and I used to sell newspaper Defenders before I could even count money.  And that's the first time I got robbed in this city.  So, and the fact that I said my parents were very down to earth people, and taught me to always respect all human beings and to take everybody on an one-and-one basis, and let them create their own, you know, personality and character and who they were, and not to assume anything about anyone, which I'm glad because some of the most influential people in my life have not been rich, you know, you know, necessarily had financial resources, you know.  But that, that isn't what really generates a quality of life, you know, money just gives you access to do things.  I mean, I'd rather have it than not have it.  But money doesn't generate, you know--it's like another favorite saying of mine is money isn't everything.  We've all heard that, right?  But whatever everything is, money is second (laughter), you know.  So coming up as a kid, I'm glad that I had the opportunity to be around the Defender on 35th Street, as well as the growing up, in the way the black community was in those days where everything was close knit.  So, you know, I've had my struggles in coming up in the streets of Chicago [Illinois] just like everybody else.
Story_ID: 196487
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, during that period, we went to the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and was even with--in an integrated situation, you know, with African Americans, Jews, you know, Protestants, even maybe one or two Orientals.  I don't remember any Hispanics, but I also remember we were the only kids out of all those children, and mostly white, that were chauffeured--driven to school was my brother and I.  So, you know, I had both sides of the coin.  So we went to the University of Chicago for about--I would--for about four years.  And then my father [John H. Sengstacke], for some reason, didn't like it.  And then we went to a really very innovative boarding school in [Bristol] Pennsylvania for about three years.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that?
Speaker 2: It was called Manumit [School, Bristol, Pennsylvania].  And actually, it was a derivative from emancipation because the actual grounds of the boarding school we lived was part of the underground railroad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so can--
Speaker 2: --and was built that way because the, the buildings on this estate were connected by tunnels where, when they would come looking for slaves, they would go into these hidden tunnels and could move throughout, and come out in the stables
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Pennsylvania, you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where, whereabouts?
Speaker 2: Not too far--I guess the closest place about thirty [sic. fifteen] miles from Trenton [New Jersey], closer to a place called Bristol, Pennsylvania, right in a town called Langhorne [Pennsylvania] [sic.].  Interestingly enough, I have a cousin who works for New Jersey Network 9 who lives in Langhorne, Pennsylvania today.  And they had a thing of 10 percent black in those days.  Most of the other boarding schools, if they were integrated at all, maybe had one black student in that area.
Speaker 1: So it had a, it had a what--an abolitionist origin--the, the school did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, not only had--
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that spelling?
Speaker 2: Manument, M-A-N-U-M-E-N-T [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Manument--not only that, but they, they took kids from all kind of economic background.  One of the families--you can still find this cleanser.  It was at that--back in those days, it was called Bab-o.  And it was just like--there was the Ajax of the day.  I just happened to see it in a--they still sell it as an industrial cleanser.  But the grandson of that family went there--extremely rich all the way down to very poor.  The guy I slept next to in my dormitory and his name was Brown, Tiger Brown [ph.].  He came up in a converted chicken coop in Virginia--referred to himself as a tar heel, tar heel, I'm sorry.  So, you had--from the, some of the richest Jewish and Protestant white families, African American, to some of the poorest.  And so, it was not only an ethnic mixture, but it was an economic mixture.  And that was also an extremely significant period in my life because through the children of people, you get to learn the habits of families.  And I treasure that experience because, like I said, I, I lived with some of the richest children, some of the richest Jewish and white families in this country, and some of the poorest.  And also African American, and that, that's a very, very, very significant period in my life when I went to that boarding school.  I probably learned more about human nature and people and the diversity that exists, you know, in people and society.
Story_ID: 196488
Speaker 1: How did you feel at the time about going away to school [Manumit School, Bristol, Pennsylvania]?  Did your brother go, too, or, or did you just go by yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both my older brother and I--well, it was a combination thing, you know.  Of course, you miss your mom [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] and your dad [John H. Sengstacke], you know.  We didn't want to go away but we visited the school.  It was a beautiful school.  It was out in the countryside with rolling hills.  And it was a stream that flowed through the property, and the--had a little dam and a place where we went swimming.  It had horses, so it was like--on the other hand, and it was very liberal.  I mean, even the academic part of it--I mean, it wasn't like, you know.  I mean, and if we cut class and went up in the woods for a day--I mean we were never severely punished or, you know.  They had horses, so it was like going to summer camp all year round in a way.  And we had just recently moved away from the Rosenwald [Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], so I had been separated from my basic groups in terms of friends and the relation, you know, associations.  So, and within about a year or so, it wasn't like I was ripped out of the neighborhood from the home boys as drastically--and, and yet, I hadn't totally made new friendships and relationships in Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois].  I had, you know, few Jewish friends from the University of Chicago [Laboratory Schools,Chicago, Illinois] and some of the kids around there.  So, it was like breaking new ground.  And other than missing my mom and my dad a little bit--I mean, I enjoyed every bit of it.  It, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how old were you when you went to Manumit?
Speaker 2: I was about--I think, let's see, it would have been--I think I was nine--eight or nine.  I can't remember exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Around 1952 or '53 [1953] 'cause I was still going to the lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] when we moved into Kenwood.  But, and that was the other side of it.  Not only was it interesting and I learned a lot--of course, that came home to me later.  I mean, it was one of the most pleasurable, fun periods of my childhood, you know, 'cause we were, you know, out there in the--it's beautiful, you know.  Pennsylvania is a very beautiful state, you know.  And me being a visually orientated person--I mean, so, you know, I enjoyed all of that.
Speaker 1: It seems like the trees are bigger for some reason.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It seems like the trees are bigger for some reason than they are.  I, I don't know why.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and definitely more plentiful as far as--and it, it wasn't until years later, I learned to appreciate this area 'cause, you know, this is part of the Mississippi Delta--comes all the way up here.  It's just flat, you know, but you got the rolling hills and the streams and the, you know.  The mountain in this area is in, you know, so the terrain is, is much--at that time, more picturesque.  You know, you have to appreciate the Midwest for what it is.  I, I mean today, everything is nature, is beautiful to me, but in those days, you know, it, it--just like the architecture in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean it wasn't until I was in the--well into my adulthood that I began to really appreciate the architecture.  And the older I get, the more I see things that I just took for granted around me.  And it's the same way, you know, I used to look at everything like here is cornfields and wheat fields and flat and boring, you know what I'm saying?  But it has its beauty, and it's real, too.
Story_ID: 196489
Speaker 1: Well, what were your favorite subjects in school and what did you like the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, being a creative person, I, you know, school was very difficult for me because there was very little that was stimulating.  I mean, I hated 'Dick and Jane' [by William S. Gray and Zerna Sharp] if you--some people liked them.  I thought it was the most--it, did you have to read 'Dick and Jane?'  Yeah.  I mean, I thought it was--even as a little kid going in the first grade, I thought it was the most ridiculous, you know, thing.  And, and I hated it, you know.  English and reading, I didn't, I didn't really enjoy reading until the '60s [1960s] when I started reading black writers and black poets because it was like I was reading [President] George Washington year after year.  I mean, the same crap because in my day--I mean, the only African American subjects was Carver, George Washington Carver.  And they give him a page, and you might hear something about Booker T. Washington maybe.  And the rest of it was just, to me, like a rehash, "Oh, God, here we go with the American Revolution and George Washington," and that shit over and over and over and over and over, you know.  And for that reason, the English language was not one of my favorite subjects.  The math, I found challenging.  I used to do pretty good with math, although sometimes if I was taking match fractions and algebra--once I saw the pattern in it, I would--it's hard, it was hard for me to stay stimulated in stuff that was routine.  And if I saw a pattern or something or figured out how it worked, then my mind would go somewhere else, you know.  French was one of my favorite subjects.  That kind of was a growing progressive thing and, you know.  And I don't know because it's in my genes, but all my brothers--my brother and I, we all studied French, and maybe it was out of--I tried German, but it was, it was a little too guttural and (noise), you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But the French came natural.  But science, I found that was, you know, intriguing.  I used to enjoy that, plus you, you went from one thing to the other in high school, you know.  We studied geology.  We studied, you know, animals.  We studied the human body so it was constantly, you know, chapter to chapter.  It was changing, you know, from, from one thing to another.  So, plus in, in high school, you know, it was always that area of drawing the birds and, you know.  And if nothing else, I'd get A's from my drawings, you know.  And a lot of times, I'd be singled out to do illustrations on the blackboard because, as I said, I have always been a picture person.  And as long as I can remember, I came out of creative (unclear), so it was a mixed bag.  I had a very difficult, a lot of difficulty with English and--but it was mainly--they always used to have me in front of these counselors.  And, and my teachers and everybody, "You could be getting A's and Bs, and he's not a problem in school.  He's not disruptive, but he just doesn't do"--you know.  But it was just difficult concentrating, you know, and I'd wind up drawing during class.  I used to draw pictures of the students in the classroom and, and look out the window and daydream, and things like that.  And one day, I finally realized, 'cause I was thinking it was something wrong with me for years, 'cause they were always studying me and sending me to these counselors.  And, you know, they'd be asking all these questions all the time that didn't benefit me in my mind.  And one day, I realized I was in college.  And I was sitting up there and, and this teacher, I was at Bethune-Cookman [College, later, Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], and it just dawned on me.  I said, "There's nothing wrong with me, you know, I just have no interest whatsoever, and there's no stimulation in what's going on."  And I packed my things and I left Bethune-Cookman that day.
Story_ID: 196490
Speaker 1: So, now were there any teachers in grade school that stuck out as people that tried to encourage you and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, mainly the ones that--the first one was this white teacher I had at the lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] in kindergarten, named Ms. Thurston [ph.], who encouraged me as an artist, and saw my ability.  I would--I mean, I, just was just something I like to do.  I'll never forget her, and I'll never forget the fact that--I mean, I've had a lot of white teachers trying to discourage me, you know.  And that was very significant to me in terms of not, you know--I mean, even in terms of Caucasians, you know, taking them as individuals, you see.  And because I have, throughout my career, had people, white and black, helping, encourage me.  So she was the first one, and she even called my mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke].  And she said, "I'm going to have your mother come in tomorrow and see this."  And I'll never forget that.  I was--well, how old are you in kindergarten--about six--five, six years old?  I don't know.  And talking about it to my mother and look at the detail, and look at this, and look at that, you know.  And that was my first--my mother saved that picture.  I got it somewhere put away.  And I had no idea, you know, that this was great, you know, so, and 'cause over the years, I've had other art teachers that really tried to discourage me, you know.  And I used to have to make them teach me, you know.  And one of the most discouraging things is my art teacher in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] stole my work, act like it wasn't shit, and, and then kept it all, you know.  And I'd still kind of like to go back and find--Stern [ph.], Stein [ph.], that was her name.  But, yeah, now oddly enough, probably my best year--I went to Catholic school for one year under them nuns, and I probably did better.  My mother said that was my best year in grammar school.
Speaker 1: Well, what year was that?  I mean, what, what--
Speaker 2: Here, well, one of the three years--see, my brother went to Manumit [School, Bristol, Pennsylvania] for three years.  I went--was it one year, or I think it was four.  I think I went for two years, came back here, went to St. Ambrose [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]--I think that was in the fifth grade for a year, and missed the boarding school [Manumit School].  And then I went back for another year which I think was sixth or seventh grade.  And then I came back here, and I finished--we had a black private school called Howalton Day School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell that, Howalton?
Speaker 2: That's H-O-W-A-L-T-O-N Day School.  At that time, it was located at 51st [Street] and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive.  It's some kind of Baptist organization that owns the building now.  It's right there on the southwest corner.  There's a big garden brick building there and behind, there's a high rise behind it.  And there was part, few grounds then, and there was another building behind it, and that's where our school was at the time.  But that's because the nuns--I mean, they had a way of disciplining you and shaming you, and making you learn.  You, you did not want to come in Catholic school under those nuns and not have your work done, you know.  And it wasn't even about whether you liked it or not, you know.  And they, they--the school I was in anyway--they ruled through a kind of fear that the students had.
Speaker 1: I think that, that sounds like a universal Catholic school experience (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  And so, but I'm saying that it might have been, and I'm not saying that's the way to do things, but it worked, you know, it worked.
Story_ID: 196491
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: That was my first experience in public school.  And I wanted to go to a public school.  And even though a lot of the kids, you know, my contemporaries went to Francis [W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois] which is the North Side, and was still going to the lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].  And high school, I wanted to go to Hyde Park [High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Some, some of my contemporaries were in Hyde Park and I wanted to, you know, I wanted to go to a public school so
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went to Hyde Park for two and a half years.  And then I left, and I went to a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] School for kind of like a--oh, I don't know what the word is--called Central Y [Central YMCA High School, Chicago, Illinois] down in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was mainly made up of kids who came from other schools and didn't do too well.  And, see, at that time in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], it's hard to imagine today, but 63rd [Street] was a striving street with businesses and buildings all the way down.  The "L" [elevated train] was there but at Hyde--so there were a lot of restaurants right, a half a block away, so a lot--most of the kids--half the kids in the school took lunch and went outside, went out for lunch.  I mean, I, I think I ate in the lunchroom one time and didn't like the food.  And after that, I ate in the--we had--different groups had different restaurants.  And there was one called Darnell's [ph.] that, you know, people I knew--[HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson who was out of [Washington] D.C. on television.  She was one of that crowd, but you also had the [Jackson] Park right there.  And a few blocks away, you had the lakefront and 64th Street beach.  You had the Museum [of Science and Industry, Chicago, Illinois], and there were so many reasons not to go to class, especially in the spring and summer.  And I did pretty good in school.  But then one year, I flunked everything except one--no, I got Ds.  I got one or two Fs and I got--even got an F in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that the last half a year?  I mean so--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --was that, that last half a year that--
Speaker 2: No, it was maybe my first part of my sophomore year, I guess.  I don't know--or second year 'cause I don't know what I was when I left there.  But, anyway, I know my mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke], she said, "I can understand you flunking Spanish"--no, I had a--more, a lot of Fs and that was in Spanish and--was I taking Spanish then or something?  I don't know.  "But how do you flunk gym, you know?"  I said, "Easy, you just don't go," you know.  But, anyway, I pulled myself up, but then, I, I just told myself, then I said--I'll never get of high school if I stayed at Hyde Park because it's just too many distractions.  And I, on my own, went down to Central Y, which had a trimester thing, where if you weren't really around, you could get three semesters in for two--somewhere or another, even during the summer.  That was--the summer was considered a whole school semester.  So it still took me five years, you know, but I finally, you know, disciplined myself.  And even though I didn't like--the courses I didn't like, I got enough discipline, you know, to get the grades and finish high school.
Speaker 1: So when did you graduate?
Speaker 2: That was nineteen, I think, '62 [1962].  I should have come out, and I think this is--I should have come out in '61 [1961].  I came out in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, one of the reasons is I, I did it, you know, I wanted to make my mother proud.  I wanted--didn't, didn't, you know, I, I cared enough that my friends, even my girlfriend, had gone on to college.  And I'm still sitting, you know, but then, mainly for myself, too, you know.  But there were a number of reasons, but school was very difficult for me, only because it--as an artist--artistic person--the way the education system was set up, there was very little stimulation.
Story_ID: 196492
Speaker 1: You know, but a person does not, as far as I'm concerned, have to be school educated that teaches you about society and how things work.  You know, look at [Albert] Einstein, you know, and he couldn't even--they say, couldn't balance a checkbook, you know, and yet, he, you know, this theory of relativity--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and it just unlocked some of the secrets of the universe, but he couldn't balance a checkbook--
Speaker 2: There's a--it's a (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: There's a story, the guy that discovered the, the formulas by which computer technology is possible now, Norbert Wiener couldn't remember how to get home and stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He had to keep his address in his pocket (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And then one day, he did a formula on a paper and threw it away, and then couldn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And he got off the train and he said, oh, which way is it (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, you know, and, and so, you know, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Are we rolling?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I tell people sometimes that I'm glad I didn't study photography in school because at a certain point, school can teach you what you can't do, you know.  And, you know, whenever I taught photography, I've always told my students--I said, "Look, you know, I have my way of seeing what I like and what I don't like and, and just because you're pursuing something that doesn't turn me on, doesn't mean it's good.  And as far as I'm concerned, there's nothing that you can't do," you know.  So I said, "Even though I may, I may not be enthused or excited about--if you see something in yourself and where you're going, then you pursue it."  And that's the way I've always taught, you know, because I don't think anything is impossible.  I don't care what it is, you know.  And but sometimes, and maybe education has, has opened, opened up a little bit now.  But I mean there were certain things if, if it hadn't been done, you know, a lot of times, it wasn't considered possible, you know.  And so, at a certain point, sometimes education can be a drawback, you know.  And, you know, even in society, I mean one of the greatest tricks they play on society is, you know, you have a talent, a talent for this or a talent for that.  We have a talent for everything that we want to develop, you know.  Some come hard, some come natural.  But I can do, as far as I'm concerned today, I can do anything or achieve anything I want.  It's just a matter of it, you know, the fact that--it's not even a matter of putting my mind to it today.  It's matter of what I got time to do, you know.  And I'm so glad to, you know, be young enough to participate in this age of this computer technology.  I mean, I think it's fascinating that, to me, that when you buy something that's obsolete (laughter).  I mean it, I don't know.  I, I mean I had kind of find an enjoyment in that and the excitement, you know, that things are changing so fast, and not that I try to keep up, and then just saw all the things I can do.  I mean, what I've been able to do in marketing myself, and the fact that with, with my clients now--I mean, I don't have to go in the dark room and send them a print.  I can scan and download everything to the publishers and even TV--I mean, the people do it, you know.  I'm dealing with document.  I'll deal with, you know, people all over the world that use my work in books, documentaries, you know, Discovery Channel.  You name it--educational television, constantly almost.  I'm working with two different documentaries now--one on channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and--I mean, one on Shirley Chisholm, channel 7; and another one on the last, I think five years of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s life, you know.  So, I'm constantly supplying work, and the fact that I can just download it now through email--I mean, that's accelerated my ability, not only, you know, to make money and get myself out here.
Story_ID: 196493
Speaker 1: Were you working for the [Chicago] Defender during high school [at Hyde Park Academy High School and Central YMCA High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Did you do any work for the Defender?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened--actually, I, I got introduced to photography when--I was kind of interested in it, and I'd go in the dark room of the Defender.  And I'd watch the staff photographers, and it would amaze how they take a white piece of paper and shine a negative light on a piece of paper, and throw it in some--as far as I knew it was water or something, and come up with a positive image, you know.  And so, I just kind of--so any way--
Speaker 1: Who were the staff photographers there at that time?
Speaker 2: [Herman Santonio] Tony Rhoden, Cleo Lyles; the only one then (unclear); another guy named Howard Pulley who was the only one that really tried to teach me anything (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Howard Pulley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, P-U-L-L-E-Y?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: P-U-L-L-E-Y?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he took me out and, you know, he, he had a sense of creativity.  Most of the other photographers then just got them--one got a shot, and blam, blam.  But, anyway, my father [John H. Sengstacke]--I asked my father to get me a camera.  And my father, in those days, always had a camera and a movie camera.  And he was always taking home movies, and I think he really wanted to be a filmmaker.  But, anyway, he bought me this camera and it wasn't a Kodak Brownie.  It was an Ansco camera and it had a close-up lens.  And it had a yellow filter which brought the clouds out and stuff, so it was something to play with.  And I was standing--my class took a trip to Washington [D.C.].  I was standing on the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] and it was spring--springtime.  I took a picture and I turned.  I took another and I turned.  And at the end of it, I realized I had gone full cycle and captured, oh, about half a dozen or so shots.  And it, you know, I was stunned.  I said, "I just took all these pictures standing in one place.  And I could never do that in one painting."  I, you know, I could, I realized I could take this tree over here and put it on that hill over there, you know.  And so, I started--I decided to get into photography as a hobby.  And for a while, I drew and took photos.  So anyway, as I got interested in photography, I started bringing my camera to school, and not knowing, but I'd take candid shots of, you know, kids in the lunchroom and different things.  And then I'd also started taking my camera to parties 'cause at that time, the Defender had a very strong youth section.  And I would take pictures of kids dancing and maybe pose somebody--Johnny pouring some punch.  And in those days, you had punch and cookies at parties, you know (laughter).  And a ladle of punch in Little Susie's glass, and Billy giving Mary a bite off a cookie, you know.  And we'd run these in the youth section of the Defender.  And it didn't take long before, within a month or so, these kids' mothers were calling me to come out and take pictures, like they would have a planning meeting for some event coming up, and offered to pay me, you know.  And I didn't really get in photography for money but, you know, even today--I mean, there's things you always, if you're in photography, it's always something you need, you know.  I mean, another lens and another this, you know, you know, and some of this stuff costs three [thousand], five thousand [dollars] today, you know.  So, it, it's not something you can just go out and, you know.  So, anyway, so I started taking these assignments.  And, of course, even then, I had a sense because I came from being a visual person.  I had a natural sense of composition.  In fact, even today, if people look at my work, they say, this looks like a painting because I, I, I compose like a painter.  As a photographer, in fact, I don't consider myself an accomplished photographer.  I consider myself an accomplished painter with a camera.  But, anyway, so I was immediately thrust into photography as an art form, and as, as a form of income.  And so, and in, and immediately, as soon as I, you know, started running my stuff in the Defender--mainly, like I said, take my camera to parties, and supplying the youth section, and then blam, blam.  And then, by the time I was sixteen, I had my own studio, portrait studio--I set up in my basement making some nice bucks, too.  And so, but I--it wasn't, it wasn't until I was twenty-four years old that I realized that I had just transcended from one form of expressing myself in a picture into another.
Story_ID: 196494
Speaker 1: I always thought of photography as just something I did, and somewhere in there, I had stopped drawing.  It was really what, when that, that, woman stole my work.  It kind of discouraged me around art.
Speaker 2: Now, this was when you were at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In high school--
Speaker 2: In high school, okay.
Speaker 1: --in Hyde Park [at Hyde Park High School, later, Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I hope she's, you know, somewhere, and hears this one day.  And that kind of just put a whole--I didn't understand it then.  You know, but I'm saying it--why, you know, if I wasn't that great, why, you know--and I don't know why, you know.  I, I, I should have told my mother [Myrtle Picou Sengstacke], you know.  I don't, I don't know what happened, you know.  It was this weird thing 'cause I wanted, you know, make that woman bring--what happened is when, the next year when I came back, she had transferred to another school, you know.  And so, but I don't know--it kind of put a negative thing around it.  And I, I just gradually and, and transcended into photography.  But for a while, I did both--
Story_ID: 196495
Speaker 1: --The [Chicago] Defender early on was, I started--and then, one of the things that, firstly, you have Life magazine and Look, there was a magazine called Look, and Saturday Evening Post.  And they had a very innovative approach to photojournalism at the time, and natural, you know, you know, natural light photography, and W. Eugene Smith and [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks.  And, of course, Life, you know, and everybody heard of Gordon Parks, you know.  Although early on, what impressed me about Parks was, not so much his photojournalism, as his fashion work because even though I photographed and documented black lifestyles with a sense of history and all that.  I do fashion.  I do--I photograph flowers, trees, landscapes, you know, oil spots in the rain on the street, you know, all that kind of stuff.  People don't usually see that aspect of me.  But, so in fact, another photographer named Billy Abernathy--his family owned the Abernathy Cab, which is now Jiffy Cab, was a great photographer.  He gave it up some time ago.  We pioneered in this country magazine-type photojournalism in, in the pages of the Defender.  And you can go back and look.  And the Defender was the first ones to recognize, even when [Herman Santonio] Tony Rhoden and Cleo Lyles, the 35 millimeter camera.  This is back when they were still carrying the old graphics, the big great big camera with the slides and all that, but they, they would use them at sporting events like fights.  And I remember Lyles and Rhoden talk about how the white photographers laugh at them.  Well, you know, they were little bitty cameras but, you know, they discovered how you can pop, pop, pop out, you know.  You didn't have to get one shot and then take, you know.  And then, I was the second African American photographer to start using Nikons and 35 millimeter at the Defender back in the '60s [1960s].  It wasn't until 1970--I think it was 1971 that the [Chicago] Sun-Times switched to Nikons as the official camera.  Well, we had been using them in the early '60s [1960s], and because of the influence and the ground that we broke, around the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], the Sun-Times went out and hired a whole bunch of young creative photojournalists who were really, you know, studying to magazine photojournalism.  And we, we introduced that into newspaper journalism back in that day.  And if, if anybody that wants to refute it, you can go back and look at the photos in the Sun-Times, Trib [Chicago Tribune] and look at the photos in the Defender.  And it--that, you know, the document speaks for itself.  So, not only that, you know--I mean, being in the Defender but, you know, innovating a number of things in terms of photojournalism and opening up the door for, you know, a lot of young white photographers and, and blacks who, basically, were not studying that form of photojournalism, but to be shooting for the Sun-Times, the Tribune and the other newspapers during that day.  I was offered a position at the New York Times in 1969.  I could have been the second African American photographer ever to work at the New York Times.  And I turned it down for certain reasons.  But, so, I really feel like that I was--my destiny in this family was to take advantages of this opportunity because where else can an African American photographer gel in photojournalism and a daily African American daily newspaper that was also open to the innovation?  My cousin, Thom Picou [Thomas Maurice Sengstacke Picou], was the editor under a lot of the time, I was gelling and, of course, we--he was a few years older than I am.  But, you know, we both had the foresight and vision to, you know, cover the community and, and to, you know, exploit and, you know, promote the types of, you know.  We were on the same plane, you know, just like you'll see in about a week or so, unless something happens to change it, the Defender logo is gonna be projected over a strip of tent cloth during Kwanzaa which is something that's probably never been done before.  But that's, 'cause my cousin and I--and I tried to get my dad [John H. Sengstacke] to do it several years ago, and even the interim administration, you know.  But I guess it was a little too far-fetched, you know.  So, we still have that relationship.
Story_ID: 196496
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about you.  Now during the--let's see, you graduated [from Central YMCA High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '63 [1963, sic. 1962], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the year of the March on Washington.  Did you get a chance to cover that at all?
Speaker 2: It was '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's, yeah, August of '63 [1963] was the March on Washington, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I had covered, you know--are you sure it was '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, real sure.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--the first time I covered King was around '62 [1962] out in California.
Speaker 1: So you're still in high school then, right?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, but I had covered quite a bit and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get a chance to--
Speaker 2: And, suddenly, they decided to send John Dunn [ph.] 'cause they said I, you know, had been covering everything.  So I could have gone on my own, but I, you know, for some reason, I didn't.  I'm sorry I didn't, you know, but it didn't stop me from being recognized for my work with King and the Civil Rights Movement because of the way I documented him and, you know, and so, it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: --or when.
Speaker 1: --so you first started--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --covering King in '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: Sixty--it was around '62 [1962], I guess, the first time--was that '62 [1962]?  Yeah, somewhere around there in '60 [1960s].  When I was in school, I had some photos of him out in Los Angeles [California] with Dorothy Dandridge.  And I think it was the first time he came to Los Angeles.  And, but I had, had other occasions, you know, to photograph him.  So anyway, it was decided I wouldn't cover him in the March on Washington.  I, I started to go on my own 'cause it, it didn't take nothing to travel in those days.  I mean, you could, you know, flown round trip to, to Washington, D.C. and back for maybe seventy-five dollars or something, you know.  And so in a way, I'm kind of sorry I didn't go because I could have got access on the platform and everything else 'cause of my family, you know.  But it didn't seem to hurt anything, but like I said, it's what I did, and how I photographed King than when and where it was that I photographed him.
Story_ID: 196497
Speaker 1: The other thing that makes my work for the civil rights era strong is the fact that when I did cover, like Selma to Montgomery [March], and some of the other marches here in Chicago [Illinois], our family also had weekly newspapers.  And a lot of the mass marches usually were held on a Saturday so people could get off, come in.  And I knew that, even then, like the television would have the front line of march and the speakers, and all that on television that night.  And the white newspapers would have it on the front page the next morning and Sunday papers, 'cause even back then, there was technology where photographers with the New York Times or some of the major papers would go and take a hotel room, turn it into a dark room, process right there, and could go on a telephone line, and transfer photos.  So, what would--what was going to be interesting to the Sengstacke [Enterprises, Inc. later, Real Times Media LLC] newspaper readers that--of the weeklies, it came out Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday.  So, my work focuses a lot more on who was there, who was behind the front line, you know, [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], [Ralph] Abernathy, A. Philip Randolph, and Ralph Bunche.  And so, that's why, even though the way I photographed King, I'm known as the only photographer that captured the essence of his character and personality.  And these are what photo researchers say--it's not what I say.  And I've heard that many, many times.  But the--a lot of the popular photos I have aren't of people who were in the march.  And it brings that home because most people were trying to satisfy the Sunday front page of the New York Times, the [Chicago] Tribune, the, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it there, they were just trying to document that there was a march--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so they want a big picture of them, of all the people?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  And they wanted--the white papers wanted to go, go into the kind of stuff that I shot.
Speaker 2: To who the personalities are and what the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and see, that's what I show.  And also, people on the sidelines who aren't in the march, you know.  So I caught, I caught more of the true essence because, I mean, yeah, King was there, and it would--but what about the 200,000 people, 250,000 people behind him, with 175,000 that walked behind him, see.  And my work encompasses that, and that's another reason that as time goes on, it becomes more significant and valuable, you know.  So, I guess that it wasn't where so much as where I shot him, but what I did when I had the opportunities--
Story_ID: 196498
Speaker 1: So you had a--now, what--one thing that the [Chicago] Defender did--I mean, being associated with the Defender and the family or at least with the Defender it gave you access to people--
Speaker 2: It would--
Speaker 1: --that other people--that association gave you access to folks that--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --another photographer might not have?
Speaker 2: --right, right.
Speaker 1: And you took full advantage of everybody shooting good photographs.  You, you're famous for your photos of the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You have some beautiful photos of, of Saviours' Day and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the women in the, the--what do they call it in, in the Nation?  I know you shot the Fruit of Islam [FOI] but the women are called [sic. Muslim Girls Training & General Civilization Class] the--
Speaker 2: See, I don't know, sisters, I don't know, that's all I ever knew but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, okay, right, okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah they called them sisters.  But, you know, that was because I was the first non-Muslim photographer to work for Muhammad Speaks [later, Muslim Journal].  And a lot of people don't under--don't know it, but see, most of writers from Muhammad Speaks were not Muslim.  They were just journalists and that was because, see, if you go back and, and look at Muhammad Speaks, when you read an article by a Muslim, it, you know, it has to say, "In the name of Allah and the Elijah Muhammad and [Wallace] Fard [Muhammad]," you know, and blah, blah, blah, blah.  And then they, you know, they had to say this homage when they opened the story, see, and then go into whatever it was they were talking about.  Well, the thing that gave Muhammad Speaks to mass appeal was the level of coverage it gave to say, like the liberation struggles in Angola, Mozambique and South Africa.  And the things like that, that it focused on and supported their philosophy, but also, you know, brought out a whole aspect of African and African American history--I mean, not history, but news.  It wasn't covered in the white press.  So, that's why Elijah Muhammad was smart enough to realize that most of the staff writers--he didn't want to be Muslim because they could cut straight, straight to the chase, see.  And, of course, that's when Dick Durham was editor.  And he had told a friend of mine that he was looking for a certain type photographer who was writing for them at the time.  And even though he, he was a good photographer himself, he recommended me.  And so, I had access like the shot of--it's like a pattern shot, a panoramic shot of all the black faces and the white--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --well, that, that wasn't an accident.  The second year that I covered Saviours' Day, I had in mind if they--unfortunately, they had the same structure where--see, years later, they put the women in the balconies and different things.  But I have several variations of that photo, but, you know, I went in there, actually and, and got access to go up in the balcony, and get that specific shot.  And so, but I was able to move throughout and do pretty much what I wanted and especially after the first year when they saw what I was doing, you know, and which is another significant thing that people who know history point out my point of view of the Nation of Islam during that period because, actually, the white press was acting like the Nation didn't exist.  They weren't giving them any coverage whatsoever.  And outside of Muhammad Speaks, the only really national coverage that they were getting was in Sengstacke [Enterprises, Inc., later, Real Times Media LLC] newspapers.  And that's because we've had a long history of working with the Nation, see.  A lot of people don't know it, but the first newspaper to--I mean, the first printing company that published Muhammad Speaks was the Chicago Defender.  So, we go only, and I remember I didn't know who he was or anything, but I mean, Malcolm X coming out of the Defender building.  At that point, I wasn't up enough on knowing.  At that--when they first started--when we first started, pre-Muhammad Speaks, the Muslims, Malcolm X and the rest--they used to be like some weird dudes with shaved heads and bow ties, you know, coming in out of the--I didn't know much it at all or otherwise, I would have been clamoring to, you know, get at Malcolm, Malcolm X's feet, but he used to come in and out of the Defender.
Speaker 1: Did you ever shoot?  I think you shot some, some photos of--you got some photos of Malcolm?  No, no, you didn't?
Speaker 2: No, when I started with the Nation, I had [HistoryMaker Minister Louis] Farrakhan.  When I started with the Nation, he was--had already split with the messenger.  And I had--
Speaker 1: That's right, 'cause you didn't get out of school [Central YMCA High School, Chicago, Illinois] till '63 [1963, sic. 1962], yeah '63 [1963], yeah, he was killed in '65 [1965] so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I had, in, in '65 [1965], I had scheduled a trip to New York [New York], specifically to photograph Malcolm.  And about, within about a month before I planned to go to New York, that's when he got murdered.  And, well, you know, at least I tried.  I mean, you know, two of the things that I missed in my career was shooting Malcolm X and John Coltrane.  And that's 'cause with a trip--in fact, I went to New York to shoot Coltrane at the Village Vanguard [New York, New York] with a couple of my buddies.  And the night--the day we got in there, they went, and I was tired, and I said, "I'm going to catch him tomorrow."  They went down and saw Coltrane.  And I went down the next day and he cancelled because he was ill.  And within a few months, he died so, but at least I tried in both cases--
Story_ID: 196499
Speaker 1: You've got a lot of the significant figures from the Black Arts Movement though.  I know you've got pictures of Amiri Baraka [formerly, LeRoi Jones] and [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some of the, a lot of the poets and artists from that period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: And you're a part of that movement basically.  You're seen as a part of the Black Arts Movement.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a part of it.  And by the, by, nineteen, about '64 [1964], '65 [1965], I had become aware of who I was and what I was doing--and not only shooting for the [Chicago] Defender, but documenting, you know, black history, black lifestyle because I--one of the things, I didn't like the, the graphic interpretations or depictions that I saw of us in the white press.  And it wasn't just me.  There was a group of African American photographers here and we had a sense of purpose.  And because I mean the things that I'm doing now are like gravy, you know, and all these exhibits and museums and the DuSable [Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and the African American, you know, museums around the country, as well as the observances, Kwanzaa, and everything else that goes down--none of that was happening then.  But we knew that one day history wanted to know what the African American photographer had to say through his eyes and interpretation.  So, we were just doing this for a pure kind of, you know, service to the race of people of documenting this, this so, you know.  And people look at my work today--they said, "You're not only documenting with a sense of history but a sense of art."  So, way back then, I knew that I was documenting, you know.  That's why my work has that quality to it.  And then, the fact that in those days, see, by Sengstacke [Enterprises, Inc., later, Real Times Media LLC] newspapers having the number of newspapers we had, I could go and cover events like the Congress of Afrikan People, the African Liberation Day march in Washington [D.C.], and service all the papers and split the costs out, so it was very economical for me to travel and document these events.
Story_ID: 196500
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Black Arts Movement and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Yeah, so, yeah, like I said that there was two things.  It was not just covering, you know--I mean, actually, I look at the--being in this family as, as kind of a God-sent opportunity, and then I followed through.  But beyond that, you know, my other sense of purpose, as I said, was documenting the black experience.  It's not, you know--some people ask me, "Can you shoot white people?"  Of course, I can shoot white people.  I can shoot anything.  It's just that I had this cause, along with some other photographers to, you know, document and tell our story, you know.  And because of it, a whole lot of crap has fallen by the wayside that maybe, you know, white photographers may have, you know, because now--I mean, the only work that can stand up to the, you know, kind of things--it would be somebody like W. [Eugene] Gene Smith, Robert Frank, or some of these photographers.  They may be, who are true artists in the sense--I mean, I don't have problems with their documents.  And they can be formally of African Americans, you know, because to be a--I mean, you, you have, you have to divorce yourself and your personal likes and dislikes from what you're doing, and become a part of what's going on, you know, to really catch the essence of it.  I mean, the only thing you can't get away from is your style of doing--you know what I'm saying?  In, in a lot of photography, you can see the personal attitude, the lack of experience, the stereotype in what they see, you know.  And that's why, even in the Civil Rights Movement, there's only about five white photographers--five or six, whose, whose work really stands out because it, it was unbiased.  And it was kind of a social, you know, statement kind of thing that they used photography for--'cause how many photographers in Birmingham [Alabama] when that was going on?   How come it's only Charles Moore's work that everybody--you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You don't see anybody else, but Charles Moore, because he was, he was making a social statement, you know.  And he was going beyond just the stereotypes and, and probably most of that other stuff made blacks look like, you know, wrongdoers, you know.  I mean, you know, Matt Herron and people like that--Danny Lyon and he's not in the exhibition, but you know, I look at some of his work.  I'm being published in a book for the first time with Danny Lyon.  And most of the books are about African American, you know.  I'm finally being included with some of the great whites who are in history, you know, which is cool.
Speaker 1: When you started really shooting professionally, you were coming along, and you kind of joined something that had started I guess, in, in the mid-50's [1950s] of the civil rights--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --photography that actually some say it actually changed the way--I mean, it really made the, made the difference in the Civil Rights Movement, having the photographer on the scene to shoot the incidents, the marches, and the police brutality, and other things that showed the rest of the world what was really going on--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the southern United States and elsewhere.
Story_ID: 196501
Speaker 1: And not just Civil Rights Movement because, see, when we say joining--see, the Civil Rights Movement captured the attention, but there was a renaissance among black people.  The Wall of Respect, the different, you know, the growth of the Nation of Islam, the [Black] Panthers, you know, the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians], the, the art, the music--I mean, the, the Association of Advancement for Creative Musicians [sic.] which is now world renowned as one of the finest--and then Chicago [Illinois], the finest examples of world class music, you know, even though, you know, people--African American was shamefully--don't even know who Muhal Richard Abrams is.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You mentioned his name around the world.  You even mentioned--I got a friend, an associate, down in Memphis [Tennessee], lives way out in Pickwick [Tennessee], got a farm--I mean a home out there, and talked to some redneck country Western singers mentioned [HistoryMaker Famoudou] Don Moye.  And these, these white boys up there in the woods in the hills of Tennessee knew who Don Moye is.  And if I mentioned his name here in Chicago, you know, Roscoe Mitchell--I mean, most--
Speaker 2: Some of his neighbors don't know who he is (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) becoming a part of this, you know what I'm saying?  I was realizing myself as an artist also, and joining around 1964 when I came--finally finished college [Bethune-Cookman College, later, Bethuen-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida].  I didn't graduate, but there was a certain point I finished college.  I've been back, you know, in school off and on.
Speaker 2: Now is that Bethune-Cookman, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when I left Bethune, but I had been in school for college for four years.  I was barely a second semester sophomore after four years.  Now, I've been, you know, I've gone back--taken accounting, business courses, different things.
Speaker 2: So, it's about '67 [1967] that you, that you stopped going?
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I mean, mean, when you stopped going to school 'cause you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '67 [1967] or so all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I kinda say I went through college, not to college--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know (laughter).  But it was 1964, and a good friend from Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], Christopher Gaddy, who passed away some years ago--we hooked up.  And he was emerging and, of course, he had come through the church playing the piano, and so forth.  And so, I had my friends from the Jack and Jill [of America] and the black bourgeois but, in fact--see, I was the first person in the black bourgeois to wear an Afro.  And I was shunned and frowned on by people who later, when they, they got unruly.  And there was a period there were, you know, the afro was uncombed and uncut.  And I remember some of these doctors and some of my parents' [John H. Sengstacke and Myrtle Picou Sengstacke] friends who, "Get rid of that helmet, boy, you know," and all kind of shit.  I mean, later they ran uncombed afros and--but I was a very first one in the black middle class to--the only other people who were wearing afros were the artists, the musicians primarily.  And it was kind of popular in the New York [New York] set, but I mean, here in Chicago.  So I began to emerge and seriously see myself as an artist, and the camera as an art form, and the fact that I had been a picture person all my life.  I just transcended from one to the other.  All that happened around 1964, the summer of '64 [1964].  And I became aware of myself.  So, and I'd already had some sense of documenting, you know, the black experience, but that--even that, that group of photographers, 'cause there was a group of young photographers, Bob Crawford, Billy Abernathy, Mickey Farrow [ph.], who's still out--she's out in San Francisco [California].  It was about seven or eight of us.  And that's when I'm saying that we--and then in 1967, OBAC was formed, the Organization of Black American Culture--
Story_ID: 196502
Speaker 1: And they [Organization of Black American Culture, OBAC] had a visual arts workshop that did the Wall of Respect, and photography was a part of that.  That's become one of my most significant and sought-after documents more and more.  I must have done, I must have contracted more work out of last year, in '02 [2002], out of my work with the Wall of Respect, and even out of my work on the Nation of Islam, which has probably been known over all my most--it, my name got out there with my Civil Rights [Movement] work during the inauguration of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] holiday and through the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], a relationship with the Schomburg Center.  But then, fortunately, people are beginning to discover--for a while there, I was kind of typecast.  That photo you mentioned, it was two photos that won the singular Muslim woman praying, and the other one--fortunately, those have been out there enough that it drew people into my work of the Nation.  And that one of the--what I call the panoramic shot, the sea of black faces, and then white--that's my most published image.  Well, for a while, it was just my work with King and the Nation, you know.  Finally, people are beginning to discover that I have--I mean, it's still that the, the broad depth of my work has not been tapped, but it's beginning to, beginning to be.  By the way, I'm proud to say I'm, I'm being inaugurated into the LaSalle Bank [sic. Bank of America LaSalle Photography] Collection in February, and that's one of the premiere photographic collections in the world.  And so, and some of the photos that they've selected, you know, 'cause I'm happy that anything is being selected.  But after a while, you know--don't get me wrong 'cause I'm getting paid, you know.  So I'm not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what did you do--
Speaker 1: --but it's a pleasure now to, you know, finally people are just beginning to go into the depth of some of my work, and just not the icons and the circus kind of thing.
Story_ID: 196503
Speaker 1: Now, some questions on the work.  Now, what were your tools, and how've they changed over the years, you know.  You said you were the first one to use a, a Nikon in the--at the [Chicago] Defender when you were there.
Speaker 2: Well, even in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: In Chicago, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was the second African American photographer to--well, 35 millimeter was in.  I was just the second one to be able to use Nikon.  The first person that had it was a guy who was in, in the service, 'cause they were, they were, it's still considered relatively expensive.  And, you know, a lot of photographers that were using Pentax.  And it was actually--now I mentioned [Herman Santonio] Tony Rhoden that really started using them back in the late, oh, mid-50's [1950s], I guess.  They were carrying Pentax cameras back then, even when, you know, I mentioned all that from--but, you know, my first camera was a twin-lens reflex [TLR] which most people--was kind of the choice, the smaller lighter choice between the Graflex.  I never had a Graflex thank god.
Speaker 1: That a Speed Graphic or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Speed Graphic.  Mine, mine was the Mamiya which is a twin lens.  But within the year or so, I had gotten a 35 millimeter.  It was a Rangefinder camera--it wasn't a Leica.  It was a still kind of--I had to reach, I had built a system once and it got stolen, but I'll probably--I may build another Leica system.  But anyway--I guess around 1964, I got a Pentax system.
Speaker 1: Was it a Spotmatic?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it the Spotmatic?
Speaker 2: That was even before the Spotmatic.
Speaker 1: Oh, before the Spotmatic, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It came a little bit after that, but what happened, I didn't have it long.  The owner of Helix Camera [Chicago, Illinois], Paul Schutt, which is, you know, definitely the largest camera store in the Midwest, and, and equals any camera store, probably have in New York [New York].  I was--when I finished--came by--left Bethune-Cookman [College, later, Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], I, I was brainwashed like anybody else, and thought I need to get out and get a job.  So I got a job working in the color line at Helix.  And Paul Schutt had a little small camera store in the Gamma--not Helix--that's his store--Gamma Photolab [Chicago, Illinois], at the time, which was still handling Playboy and Jim Brady [ph.], Kraft Foods photographer, and had a few accounts.  And he just had a little bit of camera store, not much bigger than this room, and I found out that he--I could buy a camera from him, paying a third, a third, and a third--see, which meant that was about seventy bucks [dollars] a pop.  And that was reachable, so I got my first Nikon and so people--"Where'd you get the Nikon?"  See, Paul Schutt made it possible for African Americans to get Nikons.  I told--I just called him this year and told him that.  He's, "Oh, really?"  I said, "Yeah, man, you don't even remember."  Now he's got--I don't know if you've ever been over to Helix--four floors of photography, you know, in a huge ware[house]--you know, over there on Racine [Avenue].  So, but, yeah, I was the first one, but then, I had the Pentax before.  So I, I but I pretty much--I had a 35 millimeter back when I was still in high school [at Hyde Park High School, later Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '58 [1958], '59 [1959], even though my main camera was still the twin lens, so it--I used both almost from the beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I never--like when I used to shoot in high school--take my camera, I never carried the twin lens.  It was always a 35 millimeter.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I'd do my candid work with even, you know, I wasn't making it--discerning the difference, but when I go to parties--I mean, you know, do the flashing and set-up stuff, I always use the twin lens.  But I'd already selected as a tool for, you know, candid and natural photojournalism, 35 millimeter--just for the same reason everybody else is today, the ease, the compactness and, you know, thirty-six exposures, the whole nine yards.
Story_ID: 196504
Speaker 1: So was that--were you shooting with a [Nikon] F2 or something for--and during the--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I didn't have a Nikon then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, during the [Civil Rights] Movement when you were shooting the movement stuff--
Speaker 2: That's Nikon-F.
Speaker 1: --from, from '63 [1963].  F--okay, Nikon-F.
Speaker 2: I still have one.  Every time I trans--every time I upgrade, I keep one of my cameras, so I have a--but, no, actually, I never got the high point of the meter, you know--I mean, I shot around a meter so long that it was years.  But I had a guy that used to go around with--had a meter.  And I'd say the reading has a, a 30 per second, and F point and a half--bam, be right on the money, you know.  And I never really used a motor drive--don't use one much today.  I mean, 'cause, you know, as far as, you know, back in those days, I was out of focus.  I could shoot so fast--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know.  I mean, and but so I went from a Nikon-F--I didn't, I didn't come out of the F until they started making the smaller ones, FM, F[M]2--no, it was F, FM--was it F2?  Was that one of the smaller ones?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I'm not sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) FE, FM, these are the more compact ones, 'cause--
Speaker 1: Like and '80s [1980s], the ones that came out in the '80s [1980s] or those are, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I, I didn't upgrade to F2.  I got a F3.  I had that, that for a while, but it was damn heavy with that loader on it.  And, see, I burnt my shoulder out in about 1969.  I was having a problem, and I hadn't, you know, I burnt my shoulder out in about four years.  I used to carry three Nikons, full complemental [ph.] lenses, backup, you know, I was ready, you know.  When they--but it, it paid off a few times, 'cause when [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] got killed, and I usually kept me a brick of film, especially during--when they were transitioning--transcending, and it was some, you know, the riots and stuff like that, 'cause King was killed on a Friday--was, no, Thursday.  That Friday, I was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] covering the [1968 Chicago] riots.  And Saturday, I was on an airplane, but I had already two bricks of film, you know, one in the cut, one in the bag and at least three or four Nikons.  I had a duplicate of every lens.  I, you know, 85, 35, all the ones I use the most, you know, and every--all, all of the stuff, the backup stuff you need.  I just keep two cameras of any system today.  And I don't try to duplicate the lenses, but I have enough of a variety, you know.  So, if something does go in the shop, I'm not limited, you know, but I guess I answered that question.  I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 196505
Speaker 1: So what, what do you shoot with now?  You're into digital now?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you know, I want to go ahead and get a digital.
Speaker 1: Oh, you don't have one yet?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The reason I don't is because--see, like I'm reped [represented] by the number one photo gallery in the world, world--Howard Greenberg [Gallery] in Soho [New York, New York].  And because of the fine art market, I'm not certain yet if real collectors who want a dark room print are ready to start paying, you know.  I mean, right now, one of my agents and I--I mean, Greenberg kind of set the price which basically--I mean is low for who I am.  But I mean, you know, my stuff is getting around a thousand, 1,200 [dollars] a print.  And I'm, I'm about in--reportedly in the next year, I, I, I get, I'm going to have it up to around 5,000 [dollars], so I don't know if real collectors are ready to go digital, so I still shoot film.  Most of what I shoot today is color because of the industry demand although you, you can always go black and white with a color.  So, for that reason, I haven't gone digital.  Now, I'm going to get a digital camera very soon.  But at the same time, I'm still going to be very discerning as to when I do film and, and, you know, I mean I might use it for sports.  Even though I have good sports stuff, it's, it's never been--I don't think it's, you know, some of my early stuff for Bill Russell, I got a few things that are sought after that are kind of artistic.  So, I want to use it sparingly and, like I said, only for the ease of--because I have been--I just came out of an intense period of freelancing which, you know, was fortunate over the last four or five years.  I just kind of fell back into it after my father [John H. Sengstacke] died, and the, the paper [Chicago Defender] went into, you know, a kind of period of limbo.  And I had--well, that's another story but, anyway, fortunately, I--so, anyway, that's why I haven't jumped at a digital camera, you know, 'cause I was going to get one.  And somebody asked me, said, "[HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke] Bobby do you really want a digital camera?"  And I start asking, you know, and I don't know who it was that asked me that, but I said, yeah, wait a minute.  And so, but it's mainly because of my developing, and got an ongoing growth in the fine art market through somebody.  I've got one of the best African American reps right now, which is good, because most African American art dealers--well, most African American agents, they, they want to go to entertainers and athletes.  They don't understand that there's a market in black art, you know, and painters, photographers.  So this young man--well, not a young man about my age, he's kind of a one-man show, but I mean he's buying stuff for Bill Cosby, everybody.  I mean, he doesn't have a gallery, you know, he's kind of like the seat of the pants hip pocket.  But he's turned--he's the one who got me hooked with LaSalle Bank [sic. Bank of America LaSalle Photography Collection], and is--so that's the reason I haven't.  But most of the stuff I shoot--as soon as I get the film processed--boom, it goes right into a scanner and gets digitized.  But if somebody wants a lab print, I have the negative.
Story_ID: 196506
Speaker 1: Throughout your career as a photographer, you've worked in and out of the [Chicago] Defender in the business end of the Defender, as well in various capacities.  And from what I've heard from, and what I read from people, your, your father [John H. Sengstacke] is a tough guy to work for and with, in terms of his personality, he's kind of a--it's been written that he was, he has a kind, he had kind of an overbearing personality and was very single-minded about how he wanted everything done, and thought that only he can do it basically so was that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, yeah, you could say that about him in a lot of ways, but he was a mixed bag, you know.  But, yeah, he--there was a certain realm of control which he kept, and you couldn't really penetrate.  And that's why a lot of the talent that really--I mean, some of the best talent--the Defender's had some of the best talent in the world.  But they could, in terms of executives and the administrators, but they could only grow so far.  And then they start stepping on John Sengstacke's toes, and either left, or at some point, came in conflict and were let go.  So, yeah, he, he, you know, "I'm the boss-boss," you know.  And so, he had a certain amount of that would--but I also noticed that if you had a, if you knew you were right, and, or you had a good concept, if you kept saying it to my father, it would sink in.  Even though he might say he did it, you know, you know, but to me, it didn't matter.  And so, I keep coming back at him sometimes, you know.  And, you know, I remember one time we had this business manager in Detroit [Michigan] who was retiring.  And the clock was ticking down to her retirement and, you know, I kept saying--well, oh, boy, I can't remember her name right offhand.  This wasn't too long ago--Sylvia [ph.] something or other.  Anyway, well, I'm sure Sylvia will find somebody, you know.  And I'm hearing this from people in Detroit.  And, and, you know, people in Chicago [Illinois]--so I'm saying to myself, I mean, "If Sylvia is getting ready to retire.  Why in the hell should she be bothered with trying to find somebody to take"--you know what I'm saying?  And this got to be about a month or so before Sylvia retired.  So my father--I was over my father's farm, you know.  And I said, you know, "Dad, I came here and everybody said Sylvia--I'm sure Sylvia is going to find somebody, and I mean, that's what--I see no reason why she"--you know.  Even he was saying it, you know.  And everybody was relying on Sylvia, you know, to find somebody to take over.  And I said, I said, "I think we should, you know, take the [Michigan] Chronicle payroll over to Chicago and, you know, handle it out of Chicago."  I said, "I mean, basically they got the software and stuff."  And, "I, I don't want to do that, you know."  So, I left that morning, and it was probably about an hour and a half away.  And I came back to Chicago.  And I immediately called in our computer programmer, got on the phone with Sylvia and one other person, and started--had a conversation about what it would take to put the--handle the payroll, the Michigan Chronicle payroll, out of Chicago.  And there was just a few little things, like they pay straight commission over there.  We had a draw against commission.  I think, I don't know which one--I think it, I don't remember if it was State of Illinois or Michigan--one, one, you pay tax on the gross; the other you pay tax on the net.  So we had to, you know, it's a couple of adjustment--excuse me.  So, by the time my father gets in, he calls me and the computer programmer and says, "I, I decided to handle the Chronicle over here."  I said, "Well, that's fine, Dad, we ought to work out the details."  So, he wasn't totally close-minded, but when he wanted to, he could block things out.  I seen him sit in meetings and say things, and his most trusted people tell him we'd come back for a follow-up meeting next week.  His secretary and people never lied to him.  I never lied to him, you know, telling him, and, and he would deny that he said it, you know.  So he could block things out when it was to his advantage, you know.  And I, I don't think his memory was really that bad, you know.  And I was telling him one time, you know, he's the kind of dude like, I said, "Dad, you say things, and then you come back and deny it," you know, blah, blah, blah, you know.  So, you know, I pointed these things out to him, he said, "Well, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke], I might be senile, but if I am, that's everybody else's problem" (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 196507
Speaker 1: See, he [Sengstacke's father, John H. Sengstacke] was controlling.  And every time, I would leave the [Chicago] Defender, eventually he kicked on overtures of--you come back and I always loved the organization.  I love the business, you know, but as soon as I would come back to try to work with him--very soon, not long after that, I would wind up doing nothing.  And I'm not that kind of person.  I had the right to live with my generation, so I would leave.  And then I, fortunately, I always kept my photography career, and which was kind of budding all the time of, you know, on the back burner.  So it never took me long to turn up the heat, and the last time I left here, it was the greatest thing I ever did.  And, and was--I went, I spent about four years in New York [New York].  And, but before that, I'd been, you know, you know, in different parts of the country.  And mainly freelance--got out there and, you know--fortunately, I knew enough about my craft--the, the, I mean, like right now, I can go and make, make something happen.  I don't have to look.  I know where it is, you know.  It's just that I'm developing myself in, in other areas where I'm--like the fine art market.  And, like I said, by the end of next year, I plan to be getting at least five thousand dollars a print, and maybe more out here, you know, for dark room prints.  So, that's not exactly new ground, but that's what I'm pursuing now--really doing out there hustling, you know.  I mean, when my father died, Northern Trust [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] just took me off--out of the picture.  And all of a sudden, I found myself with no income.  And I'm the father of the beneficiary.  That's how cold-blooded people are.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--the grandchildren were the beneficiaries of his estate when he died, right?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So your children were the beneficiaries?
Speaker 1: Were the beneficiaries, and Northern Trust threw me out in the cold.  But, see, they didn't want, they--well, I'm getting a ride, but so, all of a sudden, you know, so I went from ground zero, from nothing to the last full year I was freelancing which I guess was '02 [2002].  That would be about seventy-five [thousand dollars] grand.  If I had gone through this year, I would be looking at making well over $100,000 out here running around with a camera, okay.  But, fortunately, you know, these things finally resolved.  And my cousin [Thomas Maurice Sengstacke Picou] and I and some other investors got control of the paper, so it took the hustle out of my existence, and they--like I'm not working my ass off but, you know.
Story_ID: 196508
Speaker 1: What is the condition of the Chicago Defender now?  Where is it?  I mean, there's been controversy in the news about how--what the future is going to be, and some people are anticipating a big disaster (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me, let me, let me go back a little bit.  During the interim period, when the Defender was in limbo, there were investors in the beginning.  There were people offering as much as fifteen million dollars for the paper, but and some people know my daughter [Myiti Sengstacke Rice] who's one, was the representative for the beneficiaries, which were all my children, was able to stop, step in and prevent the sale, which Northern Trust [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] wanted to do, because of the financial condition of the paper, okay.  Over the three or four year period between my cousin [Thomas Maurice Sengstacke Picou] and I and some--excuse me--other investors making the acquisition, the paper had deteriorated to a point where it was not financially--I mean, it was not attractive to any kind of buyer or investor.  I mean, really, nobody would have bought it, but my cousin and I.  And so, when we took over from the interim trustee--if we had not acquired the paper, they were going to put it into bankruptcy.  All of the papers, even the cash cow, the Michigan Chronicle, was hemorrhaging.  The Tri-State [Defender], [New] Pittsburgh Courier [formerly, Pittsburgh Courier], Michigan Chronicle, and the Defender--we had gotten in--all of them had liens from the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] for pay--non--you know, payroll taxes, in deep debt to the printer.  Now, we just had our last board meeting.  Now, the other thing is that there was a huge amount of debt that was acquired along with the acquisition of the paper, and mainly, on the back end.  We were only able to come up with $3 million.  It was actually a $9.7 million purchase, so there's still about $7 million that we owe on the back end.  When, when we first got in there, a friend of mine said, does this mean your--and he said, "Brother Bob [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke], this mean you're mean?"  I said "No, it means I'm about $8 million in debt," okay.  In eleven months, all of the papers are profitable, the IRS payments are up to date, the printer's payments are up--they're not all paid off, but everything is current, and all the papers are making a profit.  And we will not be in until about a month from now--I think the 12th of January, okay.  There's nobody in--under the sun that could do that, but Thom Picou and Bobby Sengstacke.  And I have to credit some of the other people on board, like David Milliner, who we named as publisher who's primarily, you know, been as far as getting out there and handling the marketing, and bringing in the money.  All the other publishers have been in place.  It's just a matter of direction.  I mean, we've turned this thing around in eleven months.  That's because we grew up in it.  Even David Milliner started with the Defender when he was about fourteen years old kind of as a copy boy.  We never big enough to really have a real copy boy, but 'cause grew up in editorial department.  My father [John H. Sengstacke] helped him--I think it was Drake [University, Des Moines, Iowa] or somewhere, we studied magazine photojournalism--came back and was his administrative assistant, also worked with Charles A. Davis & Associates [Inc., Chicago, Illinois] who was a tenant in our building throughout his career in public relations.  So, it takes this kind of--first of all, belief in yourself, and understanding of the business to do that, okay.  Now, the, the little bit of a downside is that we still are not quite generating the revenue we need to adequately service all of the debt.  But we're going to be able--we found ways to do that also.  So, it's--we're--all of the institutions are profiting--profitable, but we still got to make more money because of the fact that there was an enormous amount of debt on the back end.  But we've been able to find ways so far to handle that.  And I have no doubt that, given another six months or year, we'll be in a position to stay even board with everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And probably paid off the IRS and got back current with the printers.  And that's for now with the Defender because when my father died, the Defender wasn't in that great a shape although when we took over four years later, due to an interim trustee who didn't understand the business, and his failure to put somebody in that he did know the business.  You know, like I said, the--one of the people in there that they hadn't even run it, even told my daughter that if, if, if your uncle--when they--my kids call him Uncle Thom--I mean, your father and your uncle don't, don't get this deal through, we're going to file bankruptcy.  So, you know, I mean, I'm very pleased and happy and proud, but it wasn't like I didn't know we couldn't do it.  But I don't think anybody else could have, other than somebody who was born and then raised, you know, in the business so, the future looks good.
Story_ID: 196509
Speaker 1: You still got the hard job of--I don't care, you know, I mean everybody says the [Chicago] Defender looks bad, looks good, you know, we're competitive.  We got our own graphic thing going.  The Defender, it--even in my estimation is more interesting that it's ever been, you know, page for page, you know.  And I read more of the paper than skimming over certain things just to--you know what I'm saying?  So, but I don't care what you do.  You still got circulation, it's a hard building job, and that's one of the problems is that over the years, my uncle [Frederick Douglass Sengstacke] and my father [John H. Sengstacke], as they got older, did not continue.  That, that's probably one of the hardest things is, is keeping readership, keeping circulation.  And, unfortunately, we've got to go back and capture a whole generation that's fifty and under, that the Defender wasn't catering to over the years.  And that's one of our biggest challenges, you know, but, but we're beginning to move in that direction.  I'm interested--
Speaker 2: You know, the Defender has been kind of conservative over the last--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I mean, it's been for, for a long, long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A lot of the writers have been there for--I mean, they're past retirement age and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, yeah, and, and I mean basically, I mean I, I don't feel that--I mean, the Defender adequately catered to my generation.  My cousin [Thomas Maurice Sengstacke Picou] and I had it going.  And then my father made some changes, and put my uncle in there who's very--as publisher who is very conservative, and he cut out all of the stuff we were doing, you know, which was going at, and reflecting our generation.  So, and I'm not trying to knock my uncle or anything, you know, but that's just the person he was.  And--
Speaker 2: But a generation has been skipped is what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: But I mean the--
Speaker 1: --yeah and we've got to go back and get that because we got too many readers over fifty that are, are going in the grave, you know.  And if you look at a lot of the things--I mean, that's one of the things I'm doing right now.  I mean, is a lot of the stories you see in the Defender now are the people in their thirties and, and, you know, and the fashion section and, and the entertainment.  I mean, that's stuff that I'm bringing into the paper and, and identifying, you know, because I think it's one advantage that I was freelancing the last three--two or three years before we took over because, see, a writer can get a story over the phone, you know.  Everything could be done, but the photographer has to be there, okay.  Now, I have touched base and identified stuff all over this community 'cause if you look at my work at the Defender, you rarely see me covering downtown and the social crap and stuff.  It's not crap, but I mean, the, standup--grip and grin type of shots.  I mean, usually my stuff is in Stateway Park [Chicago, Illinois], in some schools talking about some teacher who's doing some fantastic thing.  And, you know, one thing that I've always--whenever I've been shooting for the Defender, I can walk through a school and see my stuff on the bulletin boards.  That's why I know when we do this Kente cloth strip behind the mast here, that's going to be in schools and stuff.  I went in a pool hall one time years ago back in the '60s [1960s], and they had a little cork bulletin board up there.  And it was all kind of forms that clipped of mine--I didn't even tell them it was my work, you know.  I went in there and shot, and nice like doing these ghetto pool halls 'cause my, my father had a pool table in our house.  So, you know, I, I got a nice series of studies on pool players--in fact, the, the--that's one of the photos LaSalle Bank [sic. Bank of America LaSalle Photography Collection] purchased.  But, I mean, you know, people will tell me I'm good, tell me I'm great, and I can see all this crap, but when I go in a school, and see where teachers clip my stuff, and put it on the bulletin board.  And I can walk in a pool hall and see several of my photos clipped from the Defender--stuck up in a ghetto pool hall on 43rd Street [Chicago, Illinois], you know, that's a supreme compliment to me, you know.  And I think in most cases, I didn't even say that's my work, you know--it doesn't--they didn't, they didn't put it up there 'cause they knew me, so, you know, and so--
Speaker 2: So, it--
Speaker 1: I kind of know when I'm doing that, you know.
Story_ID: 196510
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: God, I mean, I hope that something happens one day where the mass of black people wake up and realize who they are.  You know, when I look at these kids out here today and with television and mass media--I mean, you know, it's just been a deteriorating sense of who we are, you know.  And when I drive around the street, and, you know, I mean, see the crazy shit that I see, you know, I'm, I mean, more than once, I met people who are shot in front of me, you know, over the last twenty years.  And just the kind of ignorance that, that these young people and the hostility and the violence and the hatred, self-hatred, you know.  You know, when I go around the world and travel, other peoples have a respect and a disrespect for the African American.  I mean, they respect us because of who we are.  They disrespect us 'cause we don't know who we are.  Now, I know who I am, you know.  Now, I'm a black man who created something from my community from a black institution [Chicago Defender].  I control it.  It's valuable.  It's worth something.  It's mine and I control it.  That's full cycle.  And I think basically, that's what the, the ruling class really fears.  And now, and, and the black man is affected.  He wakes up and, and begins to survive on his own creativity.  And that's why they suppress jazz and that other high forms of music and stress the booty shaking because you get out here, and that's the creative interchange.  And they got most black people booty shaking their creativity--a way the music, the music they made popular every day because if you didn't shake it on your booty, you, you know, they'd be doing some other kind of way.  As far as I'm concerned, dance should be used in a, in a form of celebration of some kind of accomplishment.  I'm not knocking dance, you know, but I mean, there's a whole psyche and, and you just see these kids going for it every day.  You know, they took out the art.  They took out the music in the schools.  I mean, I never, you know, but I mean, when I went to school, you had to take a year of music.  I couldn't wait until the second year when we had to take a, you know, a year in the arts and drawing and painting and, you know, all that kind of stuff.  So, as far as I'm concerned, I, I, you know, I woke myself up enough.  I created--before I was thirty years old, I created a timeless document.  My work will be looked at a thousand years from now, you know.  My greatest hope is if--I don't know (laughter), the stroke--God made the wildest of them--works the mass of these people up.  'Cause it, it's just so heartbreaking to see--I mean, you know, every, every race, every people has a purpose on this planet, you know.  I hope white people wake up as a race and, and, you know, start using their God-given purpose here to, to a more positive--and I'm not somebody, I never talk about all anybody, you know, 'cause I said before, I've been encouraged and I've been helped, even though I've had most white people act like I don't, act like I don't exist.  But it doesn't matter, you know what I'm saying?  'Cause I've been having white people tell me that most of my people act like you ain't shit.  But take my word, I've had more than one tell me that, you know, take my word for it.  Your work is brilliant, and I'm talking about years ago.  So, you know, this whole, this whole world isn't just black people.  They, they just have to wake up, you know, one day.  So I mean, I don't know what I can do other than, you know, to change the world, you change yourself.  So I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you?  Yeah--
Speaker 2: --I keep, you know, I keep trying to be more what I practice more what I preach.
Story_ID: 196511
Speaker 1: How do you see the [Chicago] Defender as an agent for the kind of change you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, we're moving in that direction.  Just the fact that we're aware, like I said, that we've got to go back.  And we got backup homework to do in terms of captivating this other generation.  I mean, as far as I'm concerned, the Defender was a God-given institution to the people of this, you know, of this world really.  And, you know, because the change that my father [John H. Sengstacke] and the Defender made has been progressive change throughout for everybody, you know.  And so, we're moving back in that direction.  And the more--I mean that, you know, the first several months--I mean, we went through six or seven months of moving progressively, and at the same time, dealing with crisis management, okay.  We are kind of out of the crisis management mode, although and there's still some surprise things that are popping up.  But there was a whole lot in the beginning.  I mean, there was more than a half million dollars of hidden costs and obligation that, that wasn't seen, you know.  Almost immediately, when we walked through the door.  So, there are a lot of things that we have on the drawing board and plans that we have.  I mean, I've just been able to start focusing, like I said, in reaching out and exposing the kinds of people, the creative people in that generation, the people who are touching people, you know.  I mean, like I had a story on these two twins--called themselves Double Stitch [Twins, Erika and Monika Simmons], making this fantastic clothing and bags and scarves and, and dresses out of macrame that these young women are grabbing up, okay.  Another young lady makes what she calls spa products--all these innovative things for the body and soaps and bath salts, you know, that these young people are grabbing up, okay.  So, as I move around--identify these things, then they pay--I'm the Defender, you know what I'm saying?  We're the only paper that covers elementary and high school sports.  Now, because of us, the [Chicago] Tribune is looking for somebody.  They tried to hire our, our sports photographer, (unclear)--I don't know if you've seen--we just got him going.  And they, they tried to hire him away from us and, fortunately, for us, he's the kind of photographer I was.  He turned them down, even though, you know, the money and all that, and told him they want to start coming high school and elementary school sports.  Every time--I just stumbled on the fact that they had elementary level football a few years ago, you know, stopped, saw a game going on and, you know, the director of athletics for the elementary level said, "You're the first person that ever covered us," you know.  When the Marshall [Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] girls what--I mean, the Tribune is, is finally waking up, okay.  They, they always follow what we do.  But when the Marshall girls win the city championship, it's buried way in, in, inside--and they've been winning it for years, you know, even though it's on the weekend, we don't run it until two days later.  They're standing there, you know, with the trophy, and all that on the--all across the back page of the Defender.  Okay, every time we run a kid or a group of kids in that sports section, that parent is somewhere between late twenties, probably to mid-thirties.  Okay, they're going to buy anywhere from ten to twenty newspapers and, you know what I'm saying?  So, every day, hidden at this interchange of that generation that we missed because their son--child that's in there, okay.  So, you keep doing that and doing that, so it's not just the people who buy the Defender, but who are we putting in there because people will want the paper when they see people like themselves or people--when they, you know what I'm saying--because that twenty-six or that thirty-six-year-old dad who goes to work and gives out fifty Defenders to other, you know what I'm saying?  So, I mean, it, but it's--we've got to get back to promoting--promotion works.  Okay, now we finally got a website and it's on the radios and stuff.  You know, we got relationships.  We've developed with the TV station.  We're getting ready to kick off a whole lot of aggressive stuff.  We're getting ready to go into home delivery because that's really the best way.  We're going to start manning the south suburbs.  That's really the way to build circulation today.
Story_ID: 196512
Speaker 1: So, we know what to do.  We just had to clear out the time.  And you, you're going to see the [Chicago] Defender--
Speaker 2: Now, now is your daughter [Myiti Sengstacke Rice] still involved with it, 'cause she was the head of that group by the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think--I mean she moved to New York [New York].  She's trying to get--she wants to study at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], but she's writing for us out of New York.  She just did a thing on [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, you know, Angela Bassett.  She's got a thing we call 'Access New York' where she's, you know, covering art galleries.  She's, you know, getting ready to do a thing on B. Smith [Barbara Elaine Smith] and her restaurant, you know.  So, she just kind of got settled in, but you'll see more and more--I've been getting some feedback from people, so she's still on the, she's still a staff member.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I mean New York, I mean it, I mean there's enough stuff going in New York every day that it's interesting reading and no problem, you know.  So she was giving about two stories a week out of her right now from New York City.
Story_ID: 196513
Speaker 1: Tell me, at this juncture, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of, you know, like I said, my legacy is, is in having a profound impact on humanity through a form in the media, okay.  My daughter [Myiti Sengstacke Rice] is already a, a good writer coming out the gate.  I can't wait to see what she's going to be when she's gets some experience.  I think, you know, I, I kept telling her--I said, Myiti [Sengstacke], your legacy is not necessarily in the [Chicago] Defender.  It's in having an impact on humanity through a form in the media.  That's what Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott did--that, so it--whether you take over and run the [Chicago] Defender--now, it's more important if you're interested in staying in the media.  And I said, you already got some natural talent in, in this as a writer.  And I got a son, too.  You might see his name more and more in the Defender--Omhari Sengstacke, you know, he just started taking photos for us.  And he already, not only has an eye, but he has a sense of timing, you know, which is phenomenal.  I mean, I really look at these as, as talents that were God-given, just like mine was to carry on as the family legacy.  And yet, at the same time, we still have this daily vehicle, even though we got other investors and other owners.  And it's not totally the family-held corporation anymore, you know.  Like I told my son, I said, "Don't worry about that.  I said, there's nowhere else under the planet that you can develop as an African American photographer and have a forum, a media for outlet, on a daily basis.  And you're talking to your own people, so use it."  So, on the other hand, I have Sengstacke Media Productions [Chicago, Illinois].  I got a couple of television productions that we're getting ready to pop off and as I said, I've been in and out of video production off and on.  I'm not trying to get into Hollywood.  I'm more interested in, in forming and uplifting people through the form of the media, you know, through the, the visual media--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause that's where everybody is.  So, my spiritual purpose now, I'm developing and focusing more in that direction.
Story_ID: 196514
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there--when you look back on the things you've done, is there some--is there anything that you would do differently?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Sometimes I think--well, no, no, no.  I'll always think about how my life would have been if I'd gone with the New York Times, 'cause I knew I would only have stayed with them for a while, but having the notoriety of being the second African American photographer for the New York Times, I'm sure right now, I would have a condo somewhere on--what's that river in Paris [France] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Seine [River], the Seine (laughter)--
Speaker 2: --Eiffel Tower [Paris, France], and calling my shots all over the world, you know.  But because I decided to stay with my cause in terms of--see, I tell young photographers today--if, you know, maybe you don't have the excitement and all the Civil Rights Movement, I said, but as long as you're documenting your community and your experience, it's going to have a value.  And right now, you know, I, I could have shot through the top immediately going with the New York Times.  I would have stayed with them maybe a couple of years, and I would have left them and, you know, I'd still be writing my own ticket.  But the beautiful thing now is--see, first of all, they would have owned what I did and I'd never been able to put my whole heart into shooting for somebody that's going to own my negative, okay.  The beautiful thing is that the investment I made now is turning or coming back to me.  I control it.  I own it.  And so, the wonderful thing is all those things I did for just for a pure spiritual cause and, you know, serving the community, is now financially rewarding.  So I can't really--I can't, you know, I followed my inner voice, and I'm doing what I came here to do.  And that's the most satisfying--I mean, there's no doubt about it.  And anybody who looks at my work--I mean, Chinese people, Indians [Native Americans], black, white, all talk about a God-given talent.  And it is that.  And God put me here and gave me this opportunity in the Sengstacke family to, to grow and develop into what I am.  So, now, I couldn't, you know--I mean, if I had known when I was young, I might have been a better father or something.  But I didn't know, like anybody else, you know--I didn't, you know, and stuff like that, or but as far as my career and, and, you know, or been a better human being in some ways, 'cause all artists--their art is them at the, the highest.  That's why I said earlier--I'm learning more to practice what I preach, you know, because my work is me at my, you know, my highest level.  It's not--well, more and more it is, the, the level that I exist on, you know.  I mean, that's the ideal (unclear), so, no, but I wouldn't--I, I feel that I'm one of the few people--we all come here for a reason, you know--we, very few of us ever tap that, you know.  But if you do, you know, find your spiritual purpose of being, then everything is there and it's perfect.
Story_ID: 196515
Speaker 1: In that regard, this last question is similar to legacy, but not--a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, my--as I said, my--I, I created a timeless document before I'm thirty.  My work, some of my work will be looked at a thousand years from now.  So the fact that my work will be recognized--remembered and the--that, that, you know, me, who I am--I mean, you know, and I, I don't know how long that'll be significant, you know, it--a hundred or two hundred years from now.  The fact that I know my work will be out here and the statements I made, you know what I'm saying, it's like who cares who Leonardo Da Vinci is or Michelangelo as a person, you know, or [Vincent] Van Gogh, for example, you know.  I mean, you have the documentaries on--for those who want to watch them.  But the work lives on, so that's the memory, you know, that I've created something that will--enough of a thing of humanity because, see, it's--my work in the hand--it talks to everybody.  It has a certain--even though it's about African Americans, it has a certain degree of humanity that speaks to everybody.  There's a base so, like I said, I don't know if people really care who I am so much--I mean, unless they watch this tape, you know, but the work, you know, being remembered.  I know that.
