Story_ID: 617424
Speaker 1: LAX airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California], you think the streets are made of gold.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We thought that we landed in heaven. But once we left the airport, you know, got into the real world, it was just traumatic anyway; I mean that, that whole rupture. You know what I'm saying, the removing yourself, particularly as a child.
Speaker 1: But you're like two different kinds of aliens I guess in, in Los Angeles [California]. You're black, but you're not black American. So--
Speaker 2: Right. And--
Speaker 1: And we know how black Americans are with other groups of people. They, you know, they're--
Speaker 2: Do you want to see my scars from that (laughter)? The, the kids, they were--the first day my brother [Noel Samuels, Jr.] and I stepped foot on Abraham Lincoln Elementary School [Pasadena, California] we got beat up--
Speaker 1: That's typical (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) by, by the other blacks because we--
Speaker 1: That happens to black Americans when they go to another school, to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tell the truth.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean we were beat because (adopts accent), "We talked funny, man" (laughter), you know. And of, of course, to us they talked funny. They say, "Hi," you know. We don't--you say hi to a mule, you know. Where we come from you say, "Good morning." But you--people here, they say, "Hi." And of course, people wore beach walkers here. You know what I'm saying, those, you call them flips [flip flops], you know, the thing with--and we never wore stuff like that. And hula hoops were like the big craze. And for the white kids, it was surfing. So we were totally out of place.
Speaker 1: So this is 1958.
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay. This is in Pasadena [California]?
Speaker 2: Pasadena.
Speaker 1: Abraham Lincoln--
Speaker 2: Abraham Lincoln Elementary School. And of course, my brother, who was very athletic and very assertive, wasn't gonna take the, the teasing, you know. The kids, they were used to each other 'cause they had been, you know, second and third and fourth grade. And here we came, you know, my brother and me, and we were like the, not only the new kids on the block, but we were like aliens. We looked differently. As I said, we were dressed nicely. My brother was in one classroom. I was in the other. I'd come around the building, and my brother is fighting; they're fight- they're beating the mess out of my brother. And I grabbed a bat and just went after the crowd. I never forgot that. And of course, that made it even worse for us. The principal took us home to our parents [Lena Jones Samuels and Noel Samuels, Sr.] that day. And then we were in tears. And of course, we were screaming, "We want to go back home. We want to go back to Costa Rica." And my mother felt--I mean in retrospect I felt so bad for my mom for those days, because she had done an incredible thing. She had saved enough money, got enough sponsors to put us on a plane, her mother and three of us, because my older brother [Michael Samuels (ph.)] was already here. And I mean that's incredible for a black woman working as a maid those days to do, in a Pan American flight [Pan American World Airways], you know, from Costa Rica to, to California, to good living, buddy, good living. And, and I'm pretty certain that, as I said, in retrospect, she must have felt really, really, really bad. At any rate, the school, to the credit of the principal and to our teachers, came to our rescue and began educating, you know, the students about, you know, our culture, where we come from. And, and within a very short time, you know, we were embraced. We were aggregated into the community and did very well, went to a place called George Washington Junior High [George Washington Junior High School; Washington STEAM Magnet Academy, Pasadena, California]. We had, we had junior high school that was--
Speaker 1: Abraham Lincoln (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seventh, eighth--
Speaker 1: --and George Washington?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. I'm, I'm giving it to you because of that reason. And the lar- they were, they were integrated schools, but they had large black populations, and they had large Japanese populations, not as many as, believe it or not, not as many Hispanics or Latinos. But def- in fact, I would argue that the, the, the next largest minority population were Japanese, were Asians. And I think it had a lot to do with World War II [WWII] and you know, that other migration back, back and forth.
Speaker 1: So did, did they, to your knowledge, like, relocate the Nisei back, back to Pasadena 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think, I think--
Speaker 1: --a lot of their lands were taken.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were relocated to Arkansas--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Louisiana--
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: --Mississippi.
Speaker 2: --and many to Pasadena.
Speaker 1: They, they brought them back to Pasadena?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely. I'm, I'm pretty certain, you know, in retrospect, that was the case. But they did--they were model students then. I know that, that's considered a stereotype, but they, you know, bright. I mean they were the ones making the A's. And that's who my parents wanted me to pattern, you know, to be with, to pattern myself after.
Story_ID: 617425
Speaker 1: Then I went to John Muir High School [Pasadena, California], class of 1965.
Speaker 2: John, that's M-U-I-R (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I--M-U-I-R (laughter). I was actually a cheerleader at John Muir, so I could do the yell.
Speaker 2: So you must have been like a gymnast or something.
Speaker 1: I did. I went out for gymnastics and played soccer really, really well, learned how to play American football and loved it. Hate, hate, still hate baseball, just hate it 'cause, 'cause that was the sport my family loved. And so we ate, drank, slept baseball at home. And I was growing up American, you know, 'cause I was the youngest one, and I got into American culture real fast, you know. So, although America--although baseball is America's pastime, that was for the old folks. We were playing football, and I was helping my American friends learn about soccer and, and the whole nine yards.
Speaker 2: Now, that's, this gives us a whole time to talk about some of the history of athletics in Pasadena [California].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You have a family, the Robinson family--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --great athletic family.
Speaker 1: Ab- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jackie Robinson--
Speaker 1: Jackie Robinson, yes.
Speaker 2: --and his brother, Mack Robinson.
Speaker 1: Yes. And, and his, and his sister [Willa Robinson Walker], you know, we just know her--we just knew her as Mrs. Walker. She married Walker. But her daughter was in our class. So, Joyce Walker still--that's Jackie Robinson's niece. She and my brother [Noel Samuels, Jr.] are still best of friends. But we grew up together, and you know, I'd go to their home. I didn't know much about--I didn't know anything about Jackie Robinson. We didn't talk about it, but you know, later on, learned who he was, his historical significance and the whole nine yards. So, but I, I would think that Jackie was just now--yeah, mom [Lena Jones Samuels] loved Jackie Robinson. Mom was the, mom was a ba- baseball fan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Makes sound) (laughter) She loved baseball. Don Drysdale, Jackie Robinson, you know, I can name them all, thanks to mom (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], yeah, a Dodgers fan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, she was a, she was a Dodgers fan, a diehard Dodgers fan.
Story_ID: 617426
Speaker 1: Now did you have any--was there any special teachers or mentors in the--
Speaker 2: They were all--
Speaker 1: --schools or--
Speaker 2: --they were all, they were all, all of my teachers were special. Mrs. Broussard [ph.] was my first American teacher. I think Mrs. Broussard was, she was not--she was dark skinned, but she was not black. She was not African American. She might have been Creole, French, and something. Mrs. Bugs [ph.] and--at, at, at, at Washington [George Washington Junior High School; Washington STEAM Magnet Academy, Pasadena, California]; Mrs. Broussard at Lincoln [Abraham Lincoln Elementary School, Pasadena, California]; Mrs. Bugs at Washington; all of my teachers. Now I had, I had one teacher, Mr. Zwere [ph.] at, at John Muir High School [Pasadena, California] was like my favorite. I was, I was, guess you would call me smart 'cause I was in all the advanced classes and you know, did everything, choir, I was class president (laughter), all of it, you know. So I became pretty, pretty visible, pretty popular. I think I was voted friendliest in my graduating class, won, you know, leadership awards as I was graduating (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you got into the--
Speaker 2: Oh yes. I grew up African Amer- I claimed to be African American, by the way. Despite my, my wonderful background and, and cultural hybridity, I claimed to be African American. I mean, what else am I gonna do? I've been here fifty years. You know, it's true that my parents [Lena Jones Samuels and Noel Samuels, Sr.] didn't come from the South and were not slaves in Alabama, but I come from a, you know, their resonances. You know, and so I, I identify as African American. I married an African American [Barbara Fikes Samuels]. I'm the only one in my family that did. My children [Michael A. Samuels and Detavio Samuels] are African Americans (laughter), you know, so. So getting back to the favorite teachers, I was pretty much mentored all along. But I had one teacher that, in retrospect, was a, was a true racist. And she pretty much told me--she did the Malcolm X thing on me. And tell me that, you know, that I would never go to college. This literally happened to me. And--
Speaker 1: So what was the context? Was she supposed to be counseling you or something or--
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't counseling me. I, we had done 'Julius Caesar,' the play by Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], and apparently I didn't grasp it the way she wanted me to. And I perhaps didn't write properly enough about it to please her, so she, she chastised me and told me that I would, you know. And, and she could see that I was doing--in an environment where I was doing very, very well. But she took it upon herself--I mean I could see her standing here talking to me, telling me this. What--to be very honest, I think it's the best thing that ever happened to me, because I think that part of my impetus was to prove this woman wrong, for, for one thing. I was growing up in a family in which education was prioritized. I certainly had the love and support of my family. And in, in our home I think the mantra must have been, you didn't come to America to fail (laughter); you know, you were gonna succeed. So, not only did I go to college, finish high school, went to college, I majored in English to prove her wrong. I'm pretty certain that that's true.
Story_ID: 617427
Speaker 1: When you were a senior, you know, you're popular. You're, you're taking advance classes. I mean, what, what college were, were you considering or, or, or how, how, how did you choose a college when you were a senior in high--at John Muir [John Muir High School, Pasadena, California]?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. Everybody did (laughter), you know. But by, by the time I graduated high school, we did not have money in my family to send me to UCLA. I applied and got into UCLA, and I got into the Seventh-day Adventist school at Huntsville, Alabama, Oakwood College [Oakwood University]. You know, I mean I was granted admission, but I couldn't go because, you know, mom [Lena Jones Samuels] was working. She didn't have the money. She didn't, certainly didn't have the income to support those kinds of things. And by--in 1965 there were no scholarships available to foreigners, you now. And, and to be very honest, my mother did not know the ropes, you know. She knew to do enough to get us where she got us, you know, and, and that was a blessing, and that was a great thing. But, although I'd been granted admission to--and to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], to Howard, to Oakwood, and to UCLA, yeah, because of my grades, because of my leadership awards and all those kinds of things, and, but we couldn't afford it. So I went to Pasadena City College [Pasadena, California], the same school Jackie Robinson went to and played football and baseball, years later though. I was there in the '60s [1960s]; he was there in the '50s [1950s]. And--
Speaker 1: Or '40s [sic. 1930s], yeah. He was, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or '40s [1940s], yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the '40s [1940s], yeah.
Speaker 2: I think his ma--
Speaker 1: So, so you were at--
Speaker 2: --mom [Mallie McGriff Robinson] had moved out.
Speaker 1: --at, at Pasadena City College.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is like a, like junior college?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was a junior college. Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Sixty- '65 [1965], '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: So you, you earned an A.A., or did you get the A.A. degree?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. I transferred to UC Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California], because down the pike came something called EOP, Education Opportunities Program. And that's how, you know, I was able to, to go to a regular research institution. I had the grades. I could get the letters of recommendation, but we didn't have the--we couldn't afford college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But EOP, when I, when I went to Riverside, fact, I was working full time and going to the junior college part time. And one of my underclassmen from high school days came in the store--I was working at a grocery store--and said--you know, they called me Pepe. "Pepe, what are, what are you doing, man? As smart as you are and your credentials are better than mine, and you're working grocery store and I'm going to college." His name is Booker McClain. I'll never forget Booker, Booker T. McClain. And he says, "Well," he says, "on Thursday I'm going down to UC Riverside 'cause they're, they're giving out money there. And if you--if you can get your, you, you know, grades," I guess today you'd call it a transcript or whatever, "and we'll go down and you know, we'll see what we can do." And trust me, that, that was it. That--I mean I never looked back. From that day on I was, I went to school full time, and within ten years I had the B.A., M.A., and Ph.D. And, and I said that proudly, you know, given the obstacles. Today, I have a son [Detavio Samuels] who went to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], who went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], had no idea what it was like back in the days when the opportunities just were not there. And as smart as I was, I did not come from an upper middle class black family; came from a working class family, proudly so, by the way.
Story_ID: 617428
Speaker 1: So was UC Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California], is that close? Is that in Pasadena [California]? Is that--
Speaker 2: It was about seventy-five miles (laughter) away--
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. It's southeast; you're going east towards San Bernardino [California].
Speaker 1: Seventy-five miles away.
Speaker 2: Away from home.
Speaker 1: And now, now, there you earned your, your--
Speaker 2: B.A.
Speaker 1: B.A., okay.
Speaker 2: I own two, two degrees there, a degree in English and a degree in black studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And it's not a minor. I have, I actually have an earned degree in black studies--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause black studies became popular those days. You, you know that.
Speaker 1: Now who was teaching black studies in UC Riverside?
Speaker 2: Oh, you talk about major--well, first of all, the, the lady that admitted me, her name was Lyndsay Brown [ph.]. Lyndsay became my most significant mentor in terms of that. I went down to, to, to, to UC Riverside, and I had all my papers and whatnot. But I was working. I was making good money. I had a brand new Chevy Camaro [Chevrolet Camaro], yellow with a black vinyl top, and you know, I thought I was the cat's meow. But I wanted to go to school more than anything else; I really, really wanted to go to school. And so she said, "Well, what are you gonna do? If we admit you, you've got this new car. How are you gonna pay for it?" And I said to her, I said, "I'll give the car back." I said, "I will find a way to sell the car or give it back." And at--when I said that, she said, "You are admitted," just like that. And years later she said she had never met a student like me. She said I wanted it so badly that I would give up all of those nice things that young men my age, you know, were interested in having.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the thing to have then, that--
Speaker 2: Oh, man (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that Camaro with the--
Speaker 2: --a Camaro, are you kidding (laughter)? Oh, I mean--
Speaker 1: So what, what was her name again, this--
Speaker 2: Lyndsay Brown.
Speaker 1: Lyndsay Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) L-Y-N-D-S-A-Y, Lyndsay Brown, and, but the person that became my most significant teacher was a woman named Jackie Haywood [Jacquelyn Slaughter Haywood]. Jackie Haywood, she was, she taught African American history, an incredibly beautiful dark skinned woman from Alabama. And I talk about mentors. I'm, I'm sure this happened to you; you know, those teachers will take you into their homes, sit you down, and, and teach you. You know, Jackie taught at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] for years before, you know, Riverside literally went down there and stole her and brought her to teach in an all-white school. She was incredible as a teacher. But at the same time, I also had a guy named George Knox, K-N-O-X, who was white. And he was my first African American literature teacher. George was very much into black literature. He was into Richard Wright and Ralph Ellison. Of course, those were the big names those days. This was, you know, pre-Toni Morrison and Alice Walker. And there wasn't even a course in black literature on the books. What we did is we took what we called then independent studies, about six of us from George. And we'd meet at his house or meet in the library. And that was my first formal introduction to African American literature and culture.
Story_ID: 617429
Speaker 1: Here you are, you're in UC Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California]. And, and now this is what people have called the Black Arts Movement days.
Speaker 2: Yes. Oh yes, oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of powerful--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --literature is being written.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: People are saying things that they hadn't--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --said before.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And they call themselves black.
Speaker 2: Oh yes. My mother didn't like any of that (laughter). My mother said (speaking Spanish), "Ustendo es Americano," you know, "You're not American, you're not African American." These were also the days when Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] was governor, and they were not pretty days, as you can imagine, because of the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War], because of the Civil Rights Movement, and because of the student activism. I mean our little campus was very active. You know, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, Eldridge Cleaver, these people were on campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Panthers [Black Panther Party] started the--
Speaker 2: The Panthers--
Speaker 1: --in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: --were right there.
Speaker 1: They started in 1966.
Speaker 2: They were right there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We used to go on Sundays to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], because that's where his group met, and, and listen to Ron Karenga and US [The Organization Us].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the name of his group.
Speaker 1: The founding Kwanzaa in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Kwanzaa--
Speaker 1: --sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right. So I was like, I was, I was fascinated by that stuff. It just like, took my breath away. And, and the other thing is BSU, Black Student Union came into being during those days. And I mean, that's where I found my voice, found my identity. And much, as I suggested, much of the disgruntlement of, of my mom and of my family, I, I became black, you know, 'cause I, I remember the first time I told this guy named Halisi, who was, who was Ron Karenga's right hand man. Do you remember when Ron Karenga used to stand up, he had two warriors on his side?
Speaker 1: That's Clyde Halisi, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know the brother.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) He's in Illinois now, yeah.
Speaker 2: He is? I thought he was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Ah, he was at University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] for a while.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know now. Maybe he's back.
Speaker 2: Clyde Halisi.
Speaker 1: I don't, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The brother's name is Clyde Daniels. That's the way--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I knew him at John Muir High School [Pasadena, California].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Clyde Daniels. He changed his name. But I remember when Halisi attacked me at PCC [Pasadena City College, Pasadena, California], "You so called Negroes, you foreign Negroes who don't want to be black." He drove me into tears, you know. But it was--I can--you know, I, I turned it all into a positive. Because once I understood where he was coming from, you know, I, I was all for it. You know, I wanted to learn more. Yeah, Clyde and I are, are still good friends; no, Halisi. (Laughter) No, he doesn't like you to call him Clyde. Yeah, so, Black Arts Movement, Black Power movement, whether it was Malcolm [Malcolm X]--I saw Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at Friendship Baptist Church in Pasadena [California], the--I never saw Malcolm face to face, though where I worked, at the grocery store, the corner of Orange Grove [Boulevard] and Fair Oaks [Avenue] in Pasadena, the, the, the mosque [Masjid Al-Taqwa, Altadena, California] was like two blocks up the street [sic.], you know. Now that was a little too radical for me and for my parents [Lena Jones Samuels and Noel Samuels, Sr.], you know, the Nation of Islam. But, because they would come in my grocery store or walk, you know, to the mosque. And I'm pretty certain Malcolm visited that mal- mosque. I never saw him in person, you know, saw him on TV, of course, and, and the whole nine years, but definitely saw, saw Mar- Martin Luther King, Jr. at Friendship Baptist Church. I never forgot that.
Speaker 1: What did he, what did he speak about and--
Speaker 2: I can't even remember. I, I remember that I was in the overflow section of the church. He was di- he was talking about the, you know, the Civil Rights Movement, but the specifics, I cannot remember.
Speaker 1: I always remember the reference, "Let freedom ring from the curvaceous slopes of California--"
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: "--to the--," [I Have a Dream] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Maybe that's where he got it. Maybe that's where he got it. But no--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --I don't--I, I think he was just talking about the, the, the, the, the, the, the movement itself, rather than anything specific. And, and I don't even know that I could hear him that well because the place was--like I said, I was in the overflow. The place was just like packed, you know, but it was a--it's just like today, you know. It's like Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is running for president. I told folks if you ever get the opportunity to go see this brother, 'cause you're in the middle of history. I never thought I would live to see this thing, and here it is. At any rate, so, LeRoi Jones, Baraka [Amiri Baraka], [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, I mean Don L. Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], these were people that became my immediate idols. I could, I could recite any of those poems, you know, not only because I went in to literature, but I fell in love with it all, you know.
Speaker 1: I think when, when you were there, like, they were starting to compile these anthologies.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: John Henrik Clarke had already published 'American Negro Short Stories.'
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --poetry. But then, you know, 'Black Fire' ['Black Fire: An Anthology of Afro American Writing,' Amiri Baraka and Larry Neal]--
Speaker 2: 'Black Fire.'
Speaker 1: --was published.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Dude, you have to go downstairs and see my--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --library. I have all of those wonderful books. And of course, my advisor, by the time I got to graduate school at Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], Darwin Turner became my advisor. And Darwin was, was the leading scholar.
Story_ID: 617430
Speaker 1: From Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California] I go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Riverside to University of Iowa.
Speaker 1: --University of Iowa in Iowa City [Iowa].
Speaker 2: How did you choose the University of Iowa?
Speaker 1: I went--okay, two things: number one, (laughter) how do you choose a, a college? They're giving you the most amount of money. That's number one. But secondly, I had a degree in English, and I had a degree in black studies. And I did not want to do a straight graduate program in English. That was never attractive to me, because I never wanted to study, you know, British literature exclusively, which is what--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you would have done as an English major in those days. So what I did was look for schools that allowed me to combine my two degrees. So I could do that in what is called an American studies program. American studies allowed me to do American literature, American history, African American literature and history, and then we called it then American civilization. So that's, that's, that's why I went to Iowa. There were programs at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Iowa, but Iowa had the best program at that time.
Speaker 2: Well, Darwin Turner was highly respected. And--
Speaker 1: Oh, my god, yes.
Speaker 2: --a mentor in [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois] and others.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Val Gray Ward, all of them came through there. And he had, every summer, the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH] gave him a huge fellowship. And he ran summer institutes, so that anybody, everybody came through there. And as graduate students, we were his assistant. I mean Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] you men- mentioned. I mean I loved Hoyt Fuller. People don't even know who Hoyt Fuller is, but Hoyt was big in my days, you know. I mean I drove him around. I was his chauffer when he came--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just, just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to, to--
Speaker 2: --speak a little bit about the importance of Black World.
Speaker 1: Listen, if you think about it, my generation learned a lot about blackness through the Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], whether you were reading Jet magazine or Ebony. They even had some little rag sheet called Sepia and Bronze Thrill [sic. Bronze Thrills]. I don't know if you remember those--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --little rags. 'Cause I worked in a grocery store, I'd get that stuff and read it. But I don't think--I mean those, that's what you call popular literature, popular culture. But the, the, the one venue, the one medium that was just incredible in terms of promoting and celebrating African American culture was--was it called the Negro--it wasn't called Black World initially.
Speaker 2: Negro Digest.
Speaker 1: Negro Digest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was patterned I think after the Reader's Digest. So that, so that alone tells--you could, you could get synopses of novels. You could get political debate. I mean everybody starting out published, every black writer published their first or second poems in, you know, the Negro World [sic.]. And then, of course, you had all of the, the current political issues related to, to the Civil Rights Movement, you know, being discussed, being--you know, there was dialogue, you know, articulated and dialogued about on that. I just think that it was an incredible pioneering--now, Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], I understand didn't love it because, you know, it didn't bring in money. Ebony did because, you know, we could see black people, you know, in tuxedos or drinking whiskey or driving Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz]. But the real, the real vehicle to me was Negro Digest, slash Black World. And I remember fir- if you go out in my garage, I probably have about thirty or forty of those things. You know, I remember Ralph Ellison on the cover. I remember James Baldwin on the cover, you know. I mean, and I read those things. I couldn't wait for them to come out, you know. And I remember the first time it came out as Black--Black World with Hoyt Fuller on the back in this African garb, you know, taking it to a even more politically--
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) strident level. I was excited. Those were exciting times, man, you know.
Story_ID: 617431
Speaker 1: So we were talk- talking about Black World and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I just think that in terms of a vehicle for promoting, for celebrating African American literature and culture that, you know, outside of something like Journal of Negro History [The Journal of Negro History; The Journal of African American History], is--there was just nothing like Black World. It's too bad that Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], the papa, did not believe in, in it as much. And, and I think maybe Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] just suffered because of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they, the magazine met its demise in '76 [1976] and then--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --he start--Hoyt Fuller started First World--
Speaker 2: First World, yes, I got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: --some of those too.
Speaker 1: And it, and it was a collective effort to support it, but it, it didn't, it didn't--it only last a few issues.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he passed in '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --good that you know the history, yeah, good, good, good. Even Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] I think was important, you know.
Speaker 1: Even (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: I'd say he was, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, because--well, I mean because now Kwanzaa--Kwanzaa's been commercialized. But Ron got some really bad, bad rap, bad press back in the days.
Speaker 1: That's true--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, I mean, we, we--I mean before he became a nutcase, Eldridge Cleaver was okay to us. You know that. We used to belong to a group called CAAAE, California Association for the Study of African American something or another [ph.], and those were some radical brothers. You know that. That's, that, it was actually led by Baraka [Amiri Baraka] during his black nationalist days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this, this is part of Congress of Afrikan People.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, absolutely, but it was called--it was, I think the national branch was called Congress of Afrikan People, but the California branch was called CAAAE.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we went everywhere (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there, there was something called Cap West [ph.] out there I remember in, in the--
Speaker 2: I don't remember that one.
Speaker 1: --early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: I don't remember that one.
Speaker 1: And there were people in Cap West that were used to be a part of, or, or were associated with US [The Organization Us], you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: 'Cause Dr. Karenga was incarcerated--
Speaker 2: This is what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: --from '71 [1971] until '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: This is what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: On a battery charge that came out of COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program], you know. You know, he was accused of torturing--
Speaker 2: Women.
Speaker 1: --two women from the East Coast (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Oh, I remember that stuff--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --very well.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And that was part of what COINTEL--it's well known now for anybody who reads books, 'The FBI Files' ['Malcolm X: The FBI File'] by [HistoryMaker] Clayborne Carson and some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --other books that--
Story_ID: 617432
Speaker 1: Okay, University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]. So, no culture shock now, right?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: At the University of, in, at I, I, at I, Iowa.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. When I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was--
Speaker 2: When I went to, when I went to Iowa in six- '71 [1971]. And that plane landed in that cornfield, and I'm not making it up. Larry [Larry Crowe], I cried. I cried for two reasons. Number one, I'd never been that far away from my [maternal] grandmother. And it was just like heart wrenching. But that plane landed in the cornfield. And forgive me, I have never in my life seen so many pale white people. They had no color. And I'm coming from California where people like, hey, you know, they get a little sun; they go to the beach. These people looked like they had never even seen the sun. And I said oh, my god, I made a mistake. Yeah, it was, it was a cultural shock. But immediately, a- again, you know, I have a blessed life. Immediately, I had a family that met me and kept me for two weeks until I acclimated, and, and it was wonderful. I stayed there seven years, you know, so, and took my first--I, I taught around just about every small college in the Iowa and got my first break at the University of Northern Iowa in Cedar Falls, Iowa, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's, let's kind of get this chronologically. So, so, well, well, you went to--you, you studied under Darwin Turner.
Speaker 2: Right, at Iowa.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And--
Speaker 2: And got my M.A. and Ph.D. at Iowa from '71 [1971]--I think that by '78 [1978] I had a Ph.D. I don't know what--
Speaker 1: It says '77 [1977] here, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It might have been '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's correct. Those things kind of fade out (laughter) after a while.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was your, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--I, I, I mentioned earlier that I did it on the Afro-Caribbean voices of the Harlem Renaissance. It was American studies dissertation, so I looked at the '20s [1920s] as a sort of American modern period. And I looked at the Harlem Renaissance as one of the movements of, of early American modernism. But I didn't want to do just the, the regular voices, you know. I, I looked at that Caribbean influence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a period of time I know I, I attended the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History conference [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in '76 [1976]. And there's a panel discussion about that very subject that featured Ewart Guinier, I think Jan Carew at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tony Martin.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Martin Kilson--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --seemed to be very much--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --he seemed to kind of poo poo the idea that Caribbeans had so much influence. He was--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --sort of resistant to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: The literature is there to prove otherwise though. They were there as architects. They were there as subjects. They were there as publishers, I mean, as leading voices. Now what people tend to poo poo is the real role that McKay [Claude McKay] played because he spent a good bit of this time outside of United States. But he probably was one of the--he was in the vanguard of this movement. So--
Speaker 1: And then you got, you know, Tony Martin's 'Race First' comes out in '76 [1976] about the Garvey movement and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Bobby [ph.]--
Speaker 2: Even publishes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --poetry, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: He has a collection of Marcus Garvey's ['The Poetical Works of Marcus Garvey,' ed. Tony Martin]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I have all of those books--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --someplace.
Speaker 1: Garvey as a poet.
Speaker 2: Poet, yeah. And I'm excited that he did one on a, it was Amy. There are two Amys.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Amy Ashwood [Amy Ashwood Garvey] first--
Speaker 2: Amy Ashwood--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Amy Jacques [Amy Jacques Garvey].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful time. So, as I mentioned, you know, Wilfred Domingo [Wilfred A. Domingo], Hubert H. Harrison [Hubert Harrison], Richard B. Moore, these were all people that I wrote about.
Speaker 1: Cyril Briggs.
Speaker 2: Cyril Briggs.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: African Blood Brotherhood was the name of his organization. I mean so, again, even within that, you can see that it wasn't just Garvey, even though Garvey was a major voice. You had all these other factions and factors going on at all, at all, at all levels, at all, at all, you know, at all junctures of, of the movement, and so you cannot write them off. I mean that was my, that was my argument. They should not be written off. I don't care if you thought that they were monkey chasers or whatever they were called. They were major architects, so, and, and including--I, I hope that one of the arguments that Tony is making is that Garvey's wives were all--he had--you know, were, were significant pioneers in, in these movements.
Story_ID: 617433
Speaker 1: You know, I remember when I was at Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], I had a professor whose name is Wilson Moses, Wilson Jeremiah Moses (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilson Jeremiah Moses, right.
Speaker 1: Moses--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --as my professor. And he had written a book on black nationalism ['The Golden Age of Black Nationalism, 1850 - 1925'] in which he beat up on Garvey [Marcus Garvey], 'cause you know, Moses had issues with the nationalists. At any rate, Mrs. Garvey wrote to me--I still have that letter--and asked me to go after this man (laughter). She said, "There's a man at your school" (laughter). And I had written to her years ago because I was working on Garvey. So I said I didn't end, I didn't end up with the chapter on him because of John Henrik Clarke's incredible work ['Marcus Garvey and the Vision of Africa']. But I had corresponded with Amy Jacques [Amy Jacques Garvey]. She was living in Mona in, in Jamaica. And when, when, when, when Moses did that terrible book, you know, she wanted me to go after him. And I still have--she used to send me like--she was, she was incredible. I would get mailings from this woman. And I know what it cost to mail and how difficult it is to get a lot of that kind of bulk mailing out of Jamaica back in those days. She used to send me stuff. And I know the last note I got from her said, "I'm not doing well." You know, she just scribbled it, and she died within another week or two, at least that was the news, so. Yeah, I'm glad to know somebody's working on these people.
Speaker 2: Right, right. The--of course, you know, John Henrik Clarke, you know, he reviewed--
Speaker 1: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 2: --Amy Jacques.
Speaker 1: Amy Jacques, yeah, he did, he did. And so is, is Ash- is Ashwood alive? I mean I know that sounds like a silly question, but--
Speaker 2: She died in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Amy Ashwood Garvey died in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She had a--I mean there's a three, new three hundred page book about her life ['Amy Ashwood Garvey: Pan-Africanist, Feminist, and Wife No. 1'] by Tony Martin (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Good. Good.
Speaker 2: It's hardback. I mean it's a serious--
Speaker 1: I think, I think--
Speaker 2: --piece of work.
Speaker 1: --it's, I think it's long overdue.
Story_ID: 617434
Speaker 1: So you, you're in your Ph.D. [at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] in, in '77 [1977]. Now, now did you--was there a book published as a result of your, your dis- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it came out of the book.
Speaker 1: --dissertation? Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--my first book was my dissertation. I published it with Belmont Books.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and--
Speaker 2: And I can't even remember when that was, but it must have been the eight- 1982 or something like that [sic. 1977].
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the--
Speaker 2: Same thing, 'Five Af- '--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Five Afro-Caribbean Voices' ['Five Afro-Caribbean Voices in American Culture, 1917 - 1929,' Wilfred David Samuels], and, and, and was very successful. The book not only sold out, but I've, I've been asked in the last ten years to redo the book, to republish it. And who know, maybe one day. But, I mean there's so much wonderful stuff out now on, you know, on those men. I mean I'm, I'm impressed when people know Cyril Briggs and Richard B. Moore, because when I started working on them--
Speaker 1: Nobody.
Speaker 2: --it wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Outside of Harlem [New York, New York] and the, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Outside of Harlem and the people--
Speaker 1: --the black nationalists in Harlem knew, but--
Speaker 2: Nothing was there. I mean I did--you know, of, of course, of course, John Henrik Clarke, you know, and the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], which is where--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: As I said, I lived in New York [New York] for about six weeks, and it was in, it was totally incredible. I had such a wonderful time just going through that stuff, you know. But the bottom line is that book did very, very well, and then I published little excerpt from it, you know. I think I published the first article--and I'm not bragging; I'm just saying--the first article on the Hubert H. Harrison [Hubert Harrison], and, and now I see people, you know, republishing 'When Africa Awakes,' his book, and all that, you know. And I just thought, what if I had (laughter) the vision to, to have done all of those things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's another major book of his writings that's out now too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Harrison.
Speaker 2: --they combine it. There's this guy that re- that resurrected him. I mean because the, the, the, the discourse, you know, you know, these, these men were brilliant. Hubert H. Harrison was called like the Aristotle or the something.
Speaker 1: The black Socrates.
Speaker 2: The black, black Socrates.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly, brilliant, brilliant, brilliant people, yeah.
Speaker 1: So these--so we, we're--you know, Harrison's from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Saint Kitts, Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic], Jamaica, and Virgin Islands I think is where these guys all came from. Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and McKay [Claude McKay] were from Jamaica.
Story_ID: 617435
Speaker 1: We should do this for whoever watches this. Tell the story of McKay's [Claude McKay] poem 'We Must Die' ['If We Must Die'].
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Again, this is one reason I want to make the argument that the West Indian voice was so very, very strong. As you know, following World War I [WWI], lynchings increased in, in the United States of America. And part of the reason for the increase was the arrogance, at least the perceived arrogance, of the returning black military men who had fought, you know, as the line goes, "To make the world safe for democracy." So they were gonna come back home and make certain that they were not denied the same privileges that they had fought for so. This didn't stand well with, as you know, some of, some of the Europeans. Right there in Chicago [Illinois], you are from, in 1919, you had the largest race riot when, when a black kid [Eugene Williams]--the, the beaches, as you know, was, were sep- segregated. And the story goes that a black kid dove off of a raft, and when he came up, he came up on the white side. And the whites on the, on the beach stoned him, and he died. That's how the, the 1919 riot in Chicago started. You know, by the time that news got back to the ghetto--and by the way, this is post-World War I, which means that the soldiers were not only coming back, they were trying to get those jobs that, you know, they had left behind or perhaps that they never even had. And they were now finding racism raising its, its ugly head, after they had fought to defend democracy. And they were not having it. As, as well as they also found that the, the, the dream of the urban North was now, as Langston Hughes would say, you know, having to be deferred ['Harlem']. You know, they couldn't get jobs. The housing was a problem. Education was a problem. So there was a lot of anger festering, you know, beneath the surface of all of these things. And so, when the, the young boy was killed, you know, it just all erupted. But it had all, already erupted in St. Louis [Missouri] and East St. Louis [Illinois] and the whole nine yards. And one of the ways, as you know, historically the whites were as, as--and let's just call it supremacists--tried to subjugate blacks was, was through lynching. So the story goes that McKay, who at the time had an apartment in like 135th [Street] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard], where the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] now is, the Y, YMCA [Harlem YMCA, New York, New York], comes downstairs to get a coffee right there at the corner. And he sees the cover of The Crisis magazine, which is a picture of a lynching, a very, very famous picture of the, you know, the strange fruit, as Billie Holliday calls it in her song ['Strange Fruit']. And he is so angered. He is so moved that he goes right back to his apartment, and he writes this sonnet. "If we must die, let it not be like hogs," you know, hunted and, and, and killed. And then he ends the poem like that we shouldn't be like cowards; "You should not cowardly face the murderous crowd." I'm blocking on, on, on, on, on the words.
Speaker 1: Oh, "Like men we'll face the cowardly pack" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Like men we'll face the cowardly pack / Pressed to the wall dying but fighting back." You know, I'm talking about powerful words. I'm talking about militancy, you know. I mean, even today, you know, when I read this, when I studied this, this poem, you know, my students, you know, you know, shrug, shrug backward with, you know, just disgust. You know, "He's saying kill people," he said. No, he's saying die with dignity, you know. If somebody's, you know--you're, you're, you don't, you're not protected against them. They're just taking you, lynchings, and you know, don't be a coward, you know, fight back, you know. If you're a human being and they're treating you less than a human being, then you know, where's your human dignity? You know, oh, "Oh, kinsmen! We must meet the common foe." And yeah--
Speaker 1: Though we're outnumbered--
Speaker 2: Let us far--let's--though far outnumbers, let us something or another.
Speaker 1: Let show us brave and--
Speaker 2: Show us brave, yes. I know his poem well, I used to. But then he--it becomes a sort of manifesto, that 'If We Must Die' poem. It's taken up by--of course, you know these are all young radical writers and you know, the whole nine yards. And this poem, which by the way was not published initially in a black journal. It was published in The Liberator, you know. And so it beca- it became a sort of like mantra for not only Locke [Alain LeRoy Locke], you know, the, the, the, the distinguished dean of humanities at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who edited the, the, the, the volume of 'The New Negro' ['The New Negro: An Interpretation'], you know, but certain the younger people like Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Wallace Thurman, you know, Bruce Nugent [Richard Bruce Nugent], you know, all of these, all of these young radical voices, you know, saw in Claude McKay's poem a sort of statement about the direction of the New Negro.
Story_ID: 617436
Speaker 1: Now there's an ironic twist to this in some ways where--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in World War II [WWII], you know, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh, absolutely--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --know that story. In World War II--the prime minister, Churchill, I'm on this--I mean and I've never seen this disputed, takes this sonnet--and, and that's, that's a, that's other ironies. Here's a man, who's a West Indian, who's writing a very, very radical poem about a very tragic situation in America, and he's using a very form--well form, a very sophisticated, the British sonnet, you know, specific lines, specific meters, and he's doing so very expertly by the way. You know, he's doing so, he's doing so very expertly. But Winston Churchill uses this poem to encourage the British to war, noting that it had been written by a, by a British, by a British subject [Claude McKay], you know. I don't think people knew that he was a black man or you know any of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: He, I don't think he credited it to him.
Speaker 2: No, just that he was the former, former British subject. Now, I don't know. You should know because, that it was also used by the prisoners at Attica [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York]. I don't know if you've--
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: That when Attica erupted, and in, and in the, the rubble they found, you know, 'If We Must Die' [Claude McKay] scra- scribbled. And what the, the prisoners had done is like, passed it around. Yeah, Newsweek magazine published, you know, an image of those, the, the, the poem scribbled and handwritten, you know, and you know, and said this is part--this is what had inspired them and of course, without knowing, the, the source or the history of that poem.
Speaker 1: During the urban rebellion, some call riots of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] or the popular--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --poem at meetings and--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --they had a life far beyond--
Speaker 2: Oh, far beyond Harlem [New York, New York], the Renaissance [Harlem Renaissance], and I, I suspected it's gonna continue to do so. It's a very powerful poem. But I mean I--so all of his, his radical signs, you know, 'America' [Claude McKay], "Although she feeds me bread of bitterness," you know, "I will confess," you know. And then he says--and I love this poem because when I teach it, and I taught maybe two years ago, he almost prophesize or prophesied the, the, the 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. I don't know if you know that poem. He said, dark- darkly I gaze ahead and, and see, you know, the wonders granite. They're, you know, falling into the sand. And he, and he, and he goes back to that poem 'Ozymandias,' you know, where, you know, the great ruler thought that he would never be destroyed. And all that is found is a--armor, a plaque saying you know look upon me. You know, but there was nothing to look, to look up but, but the sand (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Percy Shelley's [Percy Bysshe Shelley] poem--
Speaker 2: Shelley's poem.
Speaker 1: 'Ozymandias.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the looking at the ruins of an empire.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 617437
Speaker 1: We ought to talk about--before we just pick up the chronology of your career, may- maybe we should talk about Wallace Thurman, or maybe we should wait 'til we get here to talk about it, I guess. What, what--well, pick, pick (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --pick us up.
Speaker 2: --ter- I mean I--
Speaker 1: After you got the Ph.D. you taught in, at, in Nor- Nor- Northern Iowa, you said, and other--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --other schools.
Speaker 2: I taught at every school in, in, in Iowa. I taught at Coe College; I taught at Iowa Wesleyan College. I taught at, you know, whatever, you know, because I was cutting my--I was honing my skills as a teacher. And African American lit [literature] was becoming popular, and of course, Darwin Turner had access. That's the bottom line. And people would call him and say, "Well, who do you have?" And he, he'd send us out, all of his graduate students. We not only as TAs [teaching assistant] taught at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], but you know, we went out into the, the, the various small--I drove what, thirty, forty miles to Iowa Wesleyan College [Iowa Wesleyan University] in Mount Pleasant, Iowa, you know. Coe College is in Cedar Rapids, Iowa--and a wonderful experience though Larry [Larry Crowe]; I had just really, really incredibly wonderful experiences. And then I took my first real job at the University of Northern Iowa [Cedar Falls, Iowa]. That's where I became an, a, a tenure track assistant professor. And I did that in part because I was writing the dissertation, and I did not want to get too far away from Darwin Turner.
Speaker 1: So this is in the mid-'70s [1970s] and--
Speaker 2: This is like, '70s [1970s], '78 [1978] to '82 [1982] I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, actually I'm wrong. It's '75 [1975] to '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you had finished your Ph.D. in--
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: --in '78 [1978], right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I finished the Ph--I was ABD [all but dissertation] when I went to UNI, but I definitely had my Ph.D. by the time I left. So it was '75 [1975]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to '78 [1978]. Seventy-eight [1978] I came out to the University of Colorado Boulder [Boulder, Colorado] as an assistant professor.
Speaker 1: What was it like there? Was it--
Speaker 2: You know, kind of interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was, was Dr. King there then?
Speaker 2: Of course, Bill--
Speaker 1: Richard King [Donald Richard King], yeah, [HistoryMaker] William King.
Speaker 2: William King.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you know who was there? A very incredibly wonderful gentleman named Charles Nilon, N-I-L-O-N. I don't know if you know Charles, a gentleman from--born in Alabama, prestigious, prestigious guy, who was--who went to Colorado as a professor in 1952, if you can believe, you know. And in fact, when I was working on my dissertation ['Five Afro-Caribbean Voices in American Culture, 1917 - 1929,' Wilfred David Samuels], Charles was the interim chair of the Department of English at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And he offered me a job at Howard, and I said no, I couldn't come, and 'cause as I was working on the--to finishing the dissertation because I didn't, but I didn't really like D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the time. And, but when he went back to his full time regular job at Colorado, and there was an opening--talk about that mentoring. I've never--I say this very honestly. In the early part of my career, I never applied for a job. I never, I was never, 'til today, I've never been interviewed at the MLA [Modern Language Association of America] (laughter), you know, at the meat market at the MLA. The older scholars, you know, looked out for the younger ones; they mentored us. And when they thought we were ready, they, they sent us out. Now I was, you know, interview--I did go through the interview process, but I didn't like send out eighty-five applications and wait around biting my nails for MLA, for the MLA interviews. And that's a, that's a credit to these gentlemen. Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] would fit in that category to me, you know. But it was Charles Nilon--now Bill King was, was slightly older than me but not by much I don't think when I, when I met him there at Colorado. But it was Charles Nilon and his wife, Mildred [Mildred Harper Nilon], who was a librarian. Charles is dead, which is--do you know, do you know Richard Barksdale?
Speaker 1: I've heard of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], I mean, one of the earliest anthologists, black, black writers of America, still a, still a classical masterpiece. But Turner, Nilon, Barksdale, you can add some other names, but these were, these were the guys that stood in the--and, and of course, Dorothy Porter [Dorothy Porter Wesley] was a, was the librarian at Howard University. These were the guys that stood in the vanguard back in the days, you know, came out of black colleges [HBCUs], you know.
Story_ID: 617438
Speaker 1: Fact is, there's this, there's a footnote I meant to give you earlier. Remember when I told you about Lyndsay [Lyndsay Brown (ph.)], the woman at UC Riverside [University of California, Riverside, Riverside, California]? Lyndsay had gone to Prairie View A&M [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University] in Prairie View, Texas. That was her undergraduate school. Well, I ended up teaching two years at Prairie View as a way of saying thanks to Lyndsay, you know, after she had done for me. And I'd never been to a black school or taught at one. But when the opportunity came, I went and, and taught at Prairie View 1985 to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighty-seven [1987]. I left Prairie View. I didn't go back to Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado]. I came here instead [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah]. But what I did there was to help them put in place the first honors college [Benjamin Banneker Honors College], not a departmental program, at a historically black college [HBCU].
Speaker 2: Now is, was Houston Bake- he's, he's down in Texas some--Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.].
Speaker 1: I don't know where Houston is these days. I just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I just saw that he's at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I thought he was at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But Houston, when I, I went to--I, I got a Ford Foundation postdoc fellowship [Ford Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship] in '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. And I ended up--I chose to go and study with Houston. I needed a host school that would accept me as a visiting professor. And Houston invited me, and I went to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That's my contact--connection with Houston.
Speaker 2: At Penn, okay.
Speaker 1: At Penn, not Prairie View.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And eventually Wilson Jeremiah Moses ends up at Penn and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], yeah, is where I think he ends, ends up. And, and Halisi [Clyde Halisi], it came back to me, is at Cal State, L.A. [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --right as we speak.
Story_ID: 617439
Speaker 1: University of Utah at Salt Lake City [Utah].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right. Now how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came here after leaving Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] because, though I loved being at Prairie View, and I loved the college, the Benjamin Banneker Honors College, named after the great inventor and almanac writer, Benjamin Banneker, it was a teaching school. I'd taught at--my first class was at eight [o'clock]. My last class was at four to five, and I loved it. I loved my students. These were the brightest and the best. They'd all graduated in the top 3 percent of the gra- their graduating class, and they got a full ride. And so I was very happy to work with those kids. But my own career, selfishly I thought, was being put on hold. And I, I, I wanted to be a good teacher, you know, and I'd worked really hard at being a, the best teacher. But I also wanted to be a scholar, which meant that I wanted to write and research. And you don't get a chance to do that teaching freshman comp [composition] all day, then going home and grading those papers and whatnot. So, in 1984, before, just as I was going to Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'd actually gotten a whiff of this, this job. And Ron Coleman [HistoryMaker Ronald Gerald Coleman], who you also interviewed, asked me to come out and be interviewed for it. And I got the job; I was offered the job. But I was married at the time, and my wife, Barbara [Barbara Fikes Samuels], who's from Chicago [Illinois], said, "There is no way we're taking our boys [Michael A. Samuels and Detavio Samuels] to Mormon Utah. I'm not." And she had all these horrific stories about her friends' kids who had had nightmare experiences here. And, and you know, we have sons, and we were not going to go. So, the, the, the, the postdoc [Ford Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship] gave me a way out. I said, okay, I'm gonna take the postdoc, go to Penn, and so I did not come to Utah. Well, again, I, I say I'm blessed because every year, from '84 [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987], Utah kept calling me and asking me to come. And I was still married, and I said you know, I, I couldn't come. And I didn't have any more excuses, other than, you know, Barbara didn't want the kids growing up in Utah. But when I was out in Texas, she, she didn't stay in Texas. She didn't like Texas, so she went back to Colorado. And long story short, by the end of that second year at Prairie View, out of my sense of frustration, I called Ron, who I'd already turned down in May. It was June and July, and I still had not gotten any writing done. I said, "Is that job still available?" That's how I ended up at, in, in, in Utah. They said, "Well, when you wanna come?" I said, "I can be there in September." He says, well, we know--you know, at any rate, he--they worked it. And I came in September, and that's been twenty-one years ago.
Speaker 1: Well, did your family eventually follow you?
Speaker 2: They, my family never moved to Salt Lake City. I commuted for many, many years. You--Colorado's just next door, you know. So, it was actually kind of nice being here. 'Cause if I turn left, I'd go down I-15 South [Interstate 15] to my mother and [maternal] grandmother, and if I went in the opposite direction, I'd end up in Colorado at my wife and kids.
Speaker 1: That was a pretty long drive though--
Speaker 2: Well, and, and I got broke. (Laughter) I, I, I exhausted every penny I had, you know, particularly as my family got--my parents [Lena Jones Samuels and Noel Samuels, Sr.] got golden, grandma got older and sick. You know, I was like, always--but you know, still, because family was important, you know. The kids grew up here during the summer. We never missed a Christmas. I'd go there; they'd come here. We worked it out very, very nicely, but it took a toll on the marriage eventually, no doubt. And by then, you know, my wife had a--my ex-wife had a great career, and I certainly was doing very well here. So, things happen.
Story_ID: 617440
Speaker 1: Well, here in Salt Lake City, Utah, I had a big surprise when I read the material. You've hosted a number of conferences and, and gatherings of black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --writers over the years.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: But, but one that really caught my eye was a conference on the works of Wallace Thurman [Looking Back with Pleasure II: A Celebration]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who is actually famous for his, his poetry, his plays, his--
Speaker 2: His plays, his novels--
Speaker 1: --novels and--
Speaker 2: --'The Blacker the Berry' ['The Blacker the Berry: A Novel of Negro Life,' Wallace Thurman].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, 'Blacker the Berry' is the most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --famous one. You're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Infants of the Spring' [Wallace Thurman], yeah. I mean this--he, this guy, had Broadway plays, as you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Harlem' [Wallace Thurman] was--
Speaker 2: Har- yeah, 'Harlem,' yeah.
Speaker 1: --reviewed by Hubert Harrison--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --in the Negro World.
Speaker 2: Good for you.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, good for you.
Speaker 1: --so we're, we're talking about a major black writer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who looked like our videographer [Matthew Hickey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he actually--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --worked for Garvey [Marcus Garvey] too.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: He did work for the Negro World. He worked for the Negro World.
Speaker 1: Well, most of the big writers ended up working for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Work--yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --for at least one part of their career as--in the beginning.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they moved on though. I mean they moved on. But, but the big secret that most people do not know is that Wallace Thurman was born right here in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Speaker 1: I know I'm flabbergasted, yeah. So, tell us about this and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, my understanding is that his parents--his grandparents came from the Midwest to settle here. They were--actually, this another migration pattern. They were moving from the Midwest to California and never got any further. His grandma, Ma Jackson [Thurman's maternal grandmother, Emma Jackson], never got any further than, than Utah. And then--
Speaker 1: This is like in the 1890s or something, right, we're talking about?
Speaker 2: It, it was in the 1890s. It was in the late--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --nineteenth century. I mean, Wallace Thurman graduated from West High [West High School, Salt Lake City, Utah], which is still the largest high school here, in about 1919, you know. But his mother [Beulah Thurman]--I think it's his--the, the woman that is most famous here is his maternal grandmother, Mother Jackson. But because--again, it's, it's a, it's a story almost like mine. Because, because of his mother's domestic situation, the grandmother, Ma Jackson, ended up raising Wallace Thurman as the boy. And my understanding is that they would move from Salt Lake City, Utah, to Boise, Idaho. But they settled, you know, permanently in Salt Lake City, which allowed him to go to high school, to work at the Hotel Utah [Joseph Smith Memorial Building, Salt Lake City, Utah], which is famous for not letting Marian Anderson come through the, the front door (laughter). Again, it's so funny. We can laugh about stuff now because we've got a black man running for president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. But people don't understand what black people went through back in the days, man. And I think--I, I could be wrong on this--that it is a result of her denial, her being denied entrance to the u- Hotel Utah through the front gates, that Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt] had that major conferen- I mean concert in Washington [D.C.] where Marian Anderson went and sang. So, something good came out of it. But at any rate, we went to West, worked at the Hotel Utah, went to the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah], you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he actually was a student at the University--
Speaker 2: He we- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of Utah--
Speaker 2: --he grew up here.
Speaker 1: --where you teach now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he's a--
Speaker 2: That's the irony, you know. And he was a, a, a biology major. He was not a literary man--literature major. He was a biology major. And he left--Wallace Thurman was a very, very dark skinned man. And I could imagine that, particularly given the way blacks were perceived as not being worthy of the priesthood, particularly black men by the Mormon church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], that his life must have been a living hell in, in many, many ways. And so he left the University of Utah and went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], you know, in the early 1920s where he met Arna Bontemps, another major architect of the Black Arts Movement. They were both working in L.A. They were working for a black newspaper that's still around. And right now the name just went straight out of my head.
Speaker 1: In, in--
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Los Angeles (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel].
Speaker 1: Oh, the Sentinel, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. And then the--
Speaker 1: So Bontemps and, and Thurman worked for the Sentinel?
Speaker 2: Ex- exactly. And, and they also worked--they first met at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. They worked at the post office in Los Angeles (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's where you find a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For, for that--
Speaker 1: --black college graduates--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and intellectuals--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the post office, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were work--they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly right. Then they found their common interest and love for literature. And you know what? I don't want to, you know, misspeak, but I think they founded their first journal or magazine together there in Los Angeles. Then, of course, Harlem [New York, New York] caught fire. Bontemps went to Harlem, and Wallace Thurman followed, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 617441
Speaker 1: Thurman [Wallace Thurman] was definitely against the whole concept of a Harlem Renaissance as a movement, particularly because it was led by the black bourgeoisie, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and Locke [Alain LeRoy Locke] and whatnot. And so he formed a different kind of club with Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, and again, Bruce Nugent [Richard Bruce Nugent]. They started the magazine called Fire!!. I'm, I, I'm sure you've seen it, you know--as a sort of counter voice to, to what Du Bois and Locke were doing.
Speaker 2: Once again, Zora Neale Hurston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hurston.
Speaker 2: --started--her first job was with Negro World with Garvey [Marcus Garvey].
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now and, and, and, and, and, and, and Hurston, Langston Hughes, and a couple of them won--well, they published their work in the Negro World, but they also won the Opportunity magazine [Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life], which was, which was published by the Urban League [National Urban League], won their, their literary contests on--again, I just think they're exciting times, you know, to have been alive and to have been involved. And anyway, Wallace poo poos the Harlem Renaissance in a second novel called 'Infants of the Spring,' in which he, you know, kind of like satirizes the movement and some of the writers. But--
Speaker 2: 'Infants of the Spring.' We have this image of kind of an, an image of innocence, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, exactly.
Speaker 2: --in the midst of, would it be white patronage or something or--
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes, that's it.
Speaker 2: 'Infants of the Spring.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: The, the--
Speaker 1: They all live in a building called the, the Niggeratti, you know. And they all gathered--it's quite a good book. It's been republished by, I think it's Northwestern University Press [Evanston, Illinois]. But the other, the other thing that, that I--you know, you know, these, these people lived on the edge, you know. They were bo- bohemians. The one person that we didn't mention--I don't even know why--was the, was the artist, Aaron Douglas. He was the other, he was the other player.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, in, in Fire!! magazine?
Speaker 1: Yes, you know, Aaron Douglas.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And these are, these are people that, that went on, if they lived long enough, to do very well. Now, Wallace Thurman died very young. He, he had asthma or something [tuberculosis], something that you would think today he would have been able to live, but he, he didn't. He was very young. He was like in his early, maybe being in his thirties when he died. He didn't--
Speaker 2: That's right, he did died young (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't live to be--but he certainly had been productive. He worked for a major white publishing house [Macaulay Company, New York, New York]. I don't remember one--I mean that--he was probably the first black to get a job as an editor with a, with a major white publishing house back in the '20s [1920s], you know, and play on Broadway and several magazines--always in the right place at the right time, but never seeming to go, you know, beyond a short distance, but making a difference, you know. We need to celebrate Wallace Thurman more. You know, we need to, people need to know. Not only was he black and radical, he was also gay. I don't know if you know that. Several of the writers from the Renaissance were gay. And as a result of that--
Speaker 2: Hughes I know for one.
Speaker 1: Langston Hughes--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even Claude McKay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so they spoke to and represented several communities, you know. And if for no other reason than, than their--we call it in literature, the many borders that they crossed, you know, as artists, and as men, and as black men and women--they, they, they, their voices should be, you know, resurrected and celebrated, given where we are now, particularly in the academy. The academy now you can study, you know, what is it called? Not gay and lesbian literature. You can study queer theory, you know. And, and I think these writers should be right up there in, in, in, on anybody's syllabus, in terms of talking about these issues in American literature and culture.
Story_ID: 617442
Speaker 1: We had a discussion before. I was telling you that Thurman's [Wallace Thurman] play, 'Harlem'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was produced prob- probably for the only time in the last fifty years or so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sure.
Speaker 1: --in Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio] in 1974. And they do have a videotape of it that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a person at the National African American Museum and Cultural Center at Wilberforce [sic. National Afro American Museum and Cultural Center, Wilberforce, Ohio] has right now.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's, it's--so anybody listen to this that wants to--
Speaker 2: They can get it.
Speaker 1: --follow up can actually see it. And, but it's a, it's like a, the play was, describes a pretty nice slice of life about what Harlem [New York, New York] was like--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in the turn of the century, with a West Indian writer and, or intellectual in the center of the play (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Wow, wow.
Speaker 1: --even though it's written by an African American.
Speaker 2: African American, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But again, you know, if you see or if you look simply at Locke [Alain LeRoy Locke], the, 'The New Negro' ['The New Negro: An Interpretation,' Alain LeRoy Locke], or even some of the things that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] wrote, you know, and, and, and managed as a result of his role as editor of The Crisis, the NAAC's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] Crisis magazine. You get one side of that, and it's all upper middle bourgeois life. Langston Hughes, you know, and, and his essay, 'The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain,' you know, says that, you know, he wants to talk about the other, the marginalized black. And so that's what Wallace does in, in that play. In 2000, when I had that big conference here, believe it or not, a drama group from BYU, the Mormon [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] university down the road dramatized the, the, the, his, his novel, 'The Blacker the Berry' ['The Blacker the Berry: A Novel of Negro Life,' Wallace Thurman]. For two weeks they had a play, a drama version of 'The Blacker the Berry' in, in, in, in Utah County [Utah] and here in, in Salt Lake City [Utah].
Speaker 1: Now did they do it as nontraditional casting with the white people playing the black parts, or did--were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No they--
Speaker 1: --black students?
Speaker 2: --they used black students, BY--
Speaker 1: Blacks, okay.
Speaker 2: --black BYU students. Yes, there are black Mormons who go to, to Brigham Young University [Provo, Utah]. And the teacher was not African American, but she certainly showed some intimate familiarity with, with the work. And, and I thought the, the people that saw it, the conference, were quite impressed.
Speaker 1: So this is in 2000?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], right. We had here a major international conference celebrating 100 years of contributions by African American in dance, music, literature, the whole nine yards. It was incredible.
Story_ID: 617443
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you've--there are lots of conferences and lots of--you've had since you've hosted here [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah], is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I probably wouldn't do any of it (laughter), because it, it's not just time consuming, man--like I told you, earlier about my--I'm pretty tunnel vision. I'm almost anal, anal retentive. And so, it was hard work. I raised over three thousand just, dollars, just for this conference [Looking Back with Pleasure II: A Celebration], 'cause I brought Alvin Ailey dancers [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] in here. I brought major shows. I, I remounted the--when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] went to the Paris exhibition in 1900 [Exposition Universelle of 1900, Paris, France], he took a photographic exhibit called the, 'The Negro' [sic. 'American Negro']. And we had--we went to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], got that duplicated, and brought it in here, just quite monumental, to say the least, but how do you do a hundred years of celebrating African American culture--brought all the major writers in here. [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, for example, was, was tops. I would do it again. I would do it again but differently. I mean and, and imagine having all of those writers here. You've seen the post (unclear)--and the personalities, some who are high maintenance, others who were just laid back. But, you know, I, I think, I think there's some kind of commitment here, or maybe it's just my father's [Noel Samuels, Sr.] personality that if once you say you're gonna do it, you're gonna do it, and you're gonna do it right, and you're gonna do it, you know, the best. But, and it's, and it's still, it, it, it, it was an award-winning conference. And so, and still I go to conferences now, and people come, who came out, says they want to come back because they didn't think that they could come to Utah and celebrate black culture, but we did. We had a great time.
Story_ID: 617444
Speaker 1: Now, again, if you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My sons (laughter). Other than my sons, I don't know. I just think that my sons are just the highlight of my life, you know, professionally, whatever. I mean, that's my greatest joy, is, is the way that my boys turned out, you know, very, very, very, very confident young men. My oldest son is a police officer, if you can believe that. Never bought him a gun, toy gun, but he chose--I'm very proud of Mike [Michael A. Samuels]. Detavio [Detavio Samuels] works for GlobalHue, which is a, a, a major advertising company in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Detroit, yeah, we've interviewed the, the CEO [HistoryMaker Donald A. Coleman]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of GlobalHue, right.
Speaker 2: That's where my son ended up. He started working for Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.]. Said he wanted to go and work an all-black, you know, pioneering company, and that's where Detavio works. And--
Speaker 1: What's his name now?
Speaker 2: My son?
Speaker 1: Yeah, both them, I guess.
Speaker 2: Michael--
Speaker 1: Michael.
Speaker 2: --and Detavio.
Speaker 1: Detavio, now that's the name we--okay.
Speaker 2: D-E-T-A-V-I-O.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: No. I just was in love with a girl years ago, and her aunt adopted a kid, and they named him Detavio. And she and I said when we had our first baby we're gonna name (laughter) him Detavio. Of course I never married that girl. And, but when I, you know, when, you know, it was time to name our second son, we, I had a chance to name him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I named him Detavio Ricardo after my mother's--my grandmother's--my mother's grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Detavio works for GlobalHue.
Speaker 2: Yes. And Michael is a police officer with the Denver Police Department. And I now have a grandson whose name is Tanner [Tanner Samuels (ph.)]. This is Michael's first son. I come from a family of boys, and we've all had boys, and our boys are having boys (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I want a granddaughter.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: No, but professionally, to be very, very honest, I, I, I didn't intentionally plan it, but as it turned out, I do, I've, I've divided my career into three very specific category--categories, as is the university divided teaching, service, and research. And as I mentioned earlier, I wanted to be not just a teacher; I want to be the best teacher, 'cause I'd had the best. Darwin Turner was incredible. Moses [Wilson Jeremiah Moses] was incredible. I've mentioned, you know, Jackie Haywood [Jacquelyn Slaughter Haywood]. I mean I had the best teachers. And I have won every major teaching award this university [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] offers. I mean I started at Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado]. And I've won all of them here except the one that comes with forty thousand [dollars], which I'm gonna win before I retire. So I think I achieved that goal. The service--the, the conference [Looking Back with Pleasure II: A Celebration] is part of the service. You know, you just, you have a mission. You share your culture. You share your research. That's ongoing. And now I'm, I'm in my research part. I published three books about--in fact, I just came out with an encyclopedia in African American literature. I'll show it to you.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what's the name of it?
Speaker 2: 'Encyclopedia of African American--'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '--Literature' ['Encyclopedia of African American Literature,' ed. Wilfred D. Samuels, Melvin Burke Donalson, Tracie Guzzio and Loretta Gilchrist]. And I'm working now on a book on Olaudah Equiano ['Making Crooked Paths Straight,' Wilfred D. Samuels]. I'm on sabbatical--and on Claude McKay. When I finish my, my Equiano book, I have about a six chapter book on Claude McKay that I'm going to hopefully get to a publisher next year as well. So, I'm proud of it all, you know. And I hope that you can understand why a kid whose mother [Lena Jones Samuels] was a domestic who end up with a Ph.D., (laughter) you know what I'm saying, who have, you know, wonderful sons with degrees from major institutions. Yeah, it's all, it's all a blessing for me.
Story_ID: 617445
Speaker 1: Now what--we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that's a tough question. I need to tell you quite honestly and quite frankly and quite candidly, that given my background, there are days that I'm very disappointed in the African American community. Certainly, I can say that because of the generation in which I grew up, you know. The impetus for who I became of course came from my family, of course came from my church. But it came from my commitment to black culture, you know, seeing people's head get bashed in, knowing that African Americans who were born American citizens couldn't vote, could not vote, man, couldn't exercise their rights, duties, or responsibilities as an American citizen. That pushed me to work hard, you know. And today, I just think that, particularly the younger gen- I think we've actually lost one or two generations, you know, because they either don't know, don't care. And I know that sounds critical, you know. I have no problem with hip hop culture in general. But I do have a serious problem with how we are represented sometimes on say BET [Black Entertainment Television], not a putdown, particularly the way women are represented, the lyrics that refer to beautiful black women. You know, my mother [Lena Jones Samuels] was black; my grandmother was black; my sister is black; my wife [Barbara Fikes Samuels] was black. They were not bitches and hoes. I mean I'm--do you know what I'm saying? And these guys, you know, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-five, no respect, none. I see it on TV. I, I see it on TV because I want to be informed, but I can only watch it for so long. Now having said that, right, I turn to somebody like my son, Detavio [Detavio Samuels], and my son, Mike [Michael A. Samuels], and that's my understanding of yet the other side. And, and then the people that they went to school with, the young men that they went to school with who are, for lack of a, for lack of a better word, they're just awesome. You know, there are some young black men and women out here, buddy, that'll make your head spin, you know, starting their own companies, being on top of the, the Internet world, maintaining a, a respect for black culture, black women. Yeah, so, though I can get very angry and be very critical of the negative of hip hop, not hip hop in general, I, I'm, I'm very hopeful, you know, because I see there's a, there's, there, there are young men and women that a lot of folk never talk about. You don't see them on the six o'clock news, but they're there working their butts off. And of course, now, I'm hoping that when Baraka Obama [sic. HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] gets elected (laughter), that'll be such an inspiration for, for, for young blacks to know that, that it is possible for them to make it all the way to the top.
Story_ID: 617446
Speaker 1: Now, I have one last question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this tape is rolling out, but, and, and you know our situation today. But the last question is similar to legacy. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, as, as, as a good father. I think that has to be first; as someone who grew up with a lot of love and spent my life trying to give some of that back. I don't care about the books. I care about the teach- the students that I've taught, but that's part of what I call love. But I, I mean I, you know, you know, it's all a--bell hooks has a book called 'It's All About Love' [sic. 'All About Love: New Visions']. I don't know if you know her, but she's fantastic. And that's what it is, you know. You can tease out what that might mean, but for me, love, love is it. And if I can be remembered as somebody who loved and cared, that's, that's, that's all that matters, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
