Story_ID: 394704
Speaker 1: Good morning, I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it including your middle name please?
Speaker 2: Donna Rochell Satchell [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell], that's Donna D-O-N-N-A, Rochell R-O-C-H-E-L-L, Satchell S-A-T-C-H-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Twel- 12/20/51 [December 20, 1951].
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Stone Mountain, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: January 18, 2007.
Speaker 1: And will you tell me your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professional speaker and trainer and co-author of several books, author, co-author.
Story_ID: 394705
Speaker 1: Now we're going to start with five, what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Actually every time of year is my favorite time of year.  Every day is my favorite day.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You ne- it's never too late to be all that you can be.
Story_ID: 394706
Speaker 1: Now that we've warmed up a bit, we're going to start by talking about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How far back in the generations before you can you go?
Speaker 2: I can go back as far as my grandmother, I can't go back any further.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother on--your paternal or maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Maternal.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me her name?
Speaker 2: Euphima Richardson [Euphima Davis Richardson].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name for me please?
Speaker 2: No I cannot (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay say it one more time, Euphima?
Speaker 2: Euphima Richardson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can get, I believe it's E-U-P-H-I-M-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about her?
Speaker 2: She, when she was a young woman and she had children, she did what was known as day's work.  She would go into someone's and she would cook, and clean and wash and iron and then at the end of the day she would come home and do that for her family.  And she had three sons and two daughters so there was five of them and one of her daughters was born in Jamaica. 'Cause my grandmother was from Jamaica, she was born in Spanish Town [Jamaica] the Wes- Jamaica, West Indies.  And I believe she came over when she was in her teen- teenage years.  And she got married to William Richardson because Richardson is her married name, I can't remember right now her maiden name.  And they had five children.  And in order they had Prentice Richardson [ph.]--no, William Richardson first, Prentice Richardson, Tom [ph.], my mother who is Jennie Richardson [Jennie Richardson Campbell] and then Myrtle Richardson [ph.], who was born in Jamaica.  And I remember I moved, when I when my mother I and my sister [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] were living with my grandmother I just remember her as someone who loved to cook.  And that's where I, that's where I got loving macaroni and cheese from, 'cause she was just a great cook.  She was just this warm woman my grand, my mother always tells she was very stubborn, very, very stubborn.  And she was a very giving person in a way, there were always relatives, or distant relatives or very, very distant relative coming up on Sunday for Sunday dinner.  So had all these different I guess I would almost say characters coming into our home.  Where we lived in Mount Vernon [New York] she actually owned that house and she owned another house that was in Mount Vernon probably about three miles away, it was a rooming house.  And there was always drama going on in the rooming house (laughter).  Because it was--people would rent like there were two, there were three floors and individuals would rent a room and they would share a kitchen area.  And I can just remember as a child hearing rumors of, we had to call the police for this person, we had to put this person out so there was always drama going on at 33 Union Lane, I can't, I can't believe that came back to me.  So it was interesting because I never spent a lot of time talking to her to find out her personal history.  But to think about it now, she came here with, I assume very little money, she didn't come from a, a wealthy or a well to do family.  And the same things true of my grandfather, and they were able to buy two houses.  The house the lived in we lived on the first floor, the second floor was actually they had roomers as well and there one, two, probably five, five roomers and a common kitchen.  And if I'm not mistaken they added the third floor, and the third floor was where my, one of my uncles lived.  So it was, it wasn't just like a, a attic I mean it had a kitchen and dining room and everything and that's where my uncle lived with his wife and one of my cousins, Douglas [ph.].  And I just remember it's, it's funny 'cause I'm thinking of it now and how ambition or how much she had to save to have been able to afford two homes, two houses and to be a very quote unquote average type of person.
Speaker 1: So do you remember, well did she talk about how much education she had?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't, I really don't know how much education she had.  It's funny 'cause now as I'm thinking about these things, it's like, did you ever have these conversations with her? I guess I never did.
Story_ID: 394707
Speaker 1: Did you know your [maternal] grandfather, her husband?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was William Richardson.
Speaker 1: Okay and what can you share about him?
Speaker 2: Out of the two he was the quieter one.  And I just remember growing up being with him, but he was, he was very quiet.  The interesting thing is and for now, now a days I find this very interesting, she was like ten years older than he was.  So I think that was very interesting for that, for whenever they got married, that she was so much older than him, by today's standards.  But he was very quiet, he was carpenter.  And there are quite a few churches in Mount Vernon [New York] where he did a lot of the carpentry I mean he did beautiful, beautiful work.  I mean just, just gorgeous work.  And he was quiet would give Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I some money from time to time.  But he kind of kept to myself, I guess my grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson] thinking back was probably the one who was, was more opinionated, who was a little more gutsy I guess one would say, at least that's the way it appeared, as a child looking at the two of 'em.  But they were married 'til he passed away, he passed away he was eighty-two and she was in her eighties, so they were married for over sixty years.
Story_ID: 394708
Speaker 1: All right now tell me about--you don't know much about your father's parents?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about my father's parents (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] and father separated when I was about four, we we're living in Mount Vernon [New York]--I mean we're living in Brooklyn, New York.  And my mother decided she was gonna move back to Mount Vernon.  So she basically packed up my- myself I was four, my sister was two and she moved back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have and I think he came to visit every once and a while but very, very rarely.  And then he just stopped visiting, he you know, I don't really have a true have a true memory of him.  I do remember one Christmas.
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: J.C. Horton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the interesting thing was for years I thought his name was J-A-Y, but his name J, the, the letter J, and the letter C.  And he was a twin and his twin was L.C., and I always thought for years it was L-E-S-L-I-E, it was letter L, letter C.  So he was a, a twin.  And one Christmas my mother always, bought Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I very separate things, we never dress the same, we never had the same toys, she I guess some how she wanted us, not even that we liked the same toys.  She wanted us to develop separately our separate identities and plus we always liked different things anyway.  But I remember one Christmas we got the same dolls and they were, they were kind of big dolls.  And I just thought that was interesting, I think my father gave them to us.  But my mother didn't say my father gave them to us, and she didn't she gave them to us.  She just said you know--most of the time we didn't have the type of Christmas where you got things from Santa Claus.  I guess my mother believed if I paid for it, I gonna take claim to it.  Not gonna be like, oh, Santa gave you that.  But these were I remember these dolls I remember what they looked like and they were the same.  So I knew that, thinking back I know she didn't give them to me, so I guess my father must have given them to me.
Story_ID: 394709
Speaker 1: I know my father's [J.C. Horton]--one of his sisters, I know f- more than other members of the family, I don't really know other members of the family.  And that's--her name is Georgia, Georgia Morgan [ph.], she lived in Brooklyn [New York].  And from time to time my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] would take my sister [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I to see Georgia.  And a relationship developed there for some time we would always--.  And it's interesting as children I think back on it now, you don't know what's going on in the background.  You know that you used to go see Auntie Georgia and then all of a sudden you weren't seeing her.  And you never really asked what made you, how come we're not taking visits to her anymore, you're just not seeing her.  One of my, as I got older I would call her from time to time and she would call me, at Christmas maybe sh- we would call.  But it wasn't on an ongoing basis, it's just sometime I spoke with her, sometime I didn't.  Well when I got married she came to the wedding.  And it lit me up, I was in tears 'cause she's just this warm, oh I getting emotional, this very warm sweet woman.  And I remember her being--taking the trip from I'm not sure if she was in Alabama or where she was living to be at my wedding.  And as I was walking, as people were coming through the receiving line I had sent her an invitation.  When she got in front of me I was in tears.  And I just went to see her, she lives in not far from Birmingham, Alabama--Huntsville [Alabama].  And I would call her every once and while, but I stay so busy I just kind of forget.  And I was in Birmingham right before Thanksgiving.
Speaker 2: Do we need to stop, are you okay?
Speaker 1: Yeah I'm okay.
Speaker 2: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I just get very, oh yeah I'm a very emotionally person, you'll be, you'll be stopping every few minutes, I'm just a very emotional person.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I had called her to say that I was going to be, 'cause I kept saying, "I'm gonna visit you, I'm gonna visit you."  So I went to visit her and I spent, I was intending to be there over night.  And she's ninety-eight years old, so when I got there, she was, you know she's very sweet, a very sweet woman, as best that I can describe her and very small.  So I got there late, 'cause I had done a speaking engagement, I get there and she's like.  "Oh I'm so glad you're here," and we're talking she's, "So how long are you staying?"  So I say I'm leaving tomorrow morning, tomorrow morning, "You're leaving tomorrow morning? No, you can't leave tomorrow morning.  You know, I've invited all your cousins over everybody coming to see you I thought you were staying for two weeks."  I'm like, "Auntie Georgia, I'm not staying for two weeks," I ended up staying there for like two days.  It was, this was right before Thanksgiving of last year, it was so rewarding just being with her.  And I would ask her a couple questions about my moth- my father, so I got a few questions or a few answers from her.  She's at the point where she's forget- very forgetful, so there's a lot she couldn't tell me.  But one of things that's starting to come to back to me a little bit now, is that my father was born a month after his father had passed away.  So he didn't know his father either, I thought that was very interesting.  And it was the following month on the same day.  So if his father had passed away on the 17th of whatever month it was, he was born the following month, the two twins.  And my grandmother on my father's side who I don't know raised like ten kids by herself, she never remarried.  And my--when I was talking to my Auntie Georgia, she was saying how strong she must have been to raise ten kids by herself.  And it, it was just it was an interesting time spending with her and talking to her.  And getting to, to reconnect in a certain way that I had never done before.
Story_ID: 394710
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about your mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We talked about your grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson], tell me about your mother, what type of mother was she to you?
Speaker 2: My mother's a very--warm, encouraging, she--the one of my biggest memories about my mother, was she loved to take my sister and I to New York City [New York, New York].  She wanted to instill in us I wouldn't say culture because that's she wanted us to, to have a lot different types of experiences.  So we lived in Mount Vernon [New York], so we would walk because my mother did not learn to drive 'til she was in her forties.  So growing up I didn't have a car, so we would walk everywhere, so we would walk to the train, and we would take the train into New York City.  And she loved to take us to museums, to Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] to art galleries, she loved to expose us to those types of things.  And I think that's where I have a, a love of art, oh my goodness, there were pieces I saw at the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York], when I was seven that I still remember.  And so that's what she wanted to do with us.  And she worked at the telephone company.  She was a telephone operator, for years.  And she would work, the hours she worked allowed her to be home in the evenings with us.  And she sewed--my mother and grandmother.  The one of the contributions they made to my sister and I was my grandmother could look at something and make it.  She could look at that blouse without a pattern and make it.  So she taught my mother how to sew.  Growing up my sister and I had no choice, we had to learn how to sew.  That was just you know, that's wasn't even a--you know an option.  So for years even as an adult, I would sell--sew all my clothes.  Coats, suits, bathing suits, I even tried jeans, jeans didn't work, but I did try jeans, blouses so for years I did that.  So she was very much about education, you were going to finish high school I mean that wasn't even an option.  I wouldn't say she was, at the time I thought she was demanding.  But I wouldn't think now, I wouldn't see her as demanding, you just had to get good grades.  I would think she was somewhat strict in a way.  She didn't allow Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I to do a lot things.  Like one of the big things was you could not, you didn't have a sleepover at somebody's house that was not allowed.  You could stay five, six o'clock you gonna come home and go to bed in your own house.  So that was just--she had rules and the rules, I wouldn't say, at the time I thought they were somewhat strict, now I wouldn't see them as that.  But you followed the rules, until I got to a teenage, and we'll talk about teenage years a little later, started breaking some of the rules.  But she instilled a sense that, that education was important.  But I never thought of it as being important enough to go college until later on and we'll talk about that later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I she just, she loved (unclear), my mother was a wonderful dresser, oh my goodness.  I remember as a little girl watching her get dressed and she made all of her clothes and when she was going out, she just looked elegant.  I remember looking up at her oh she looks so pretty and she would even buy pieces of fur to put on a, to make a fur collar onto her coat.  So she always looked very you know very well put together, very refined.  She worked at the telephone company and for years she would tell me how challenging it was there because she was working there at a time when, she I guess blacks, African Americans were not really accepted.  And I remember one of the stories, this stays in my mind all the time that she would, she would go to work and you would have a chair you would sit it, so you could answer the phone 'cause you were an operator.  And she said whenever the person came behind her, if it was a white woman they would wipe down the chair.  As if you know, you were sitting in this chair well now let me clean it off.  And she was an operator for, for many years and then she moved on and she got a position.  She got a promotion which took her into something was more of a secretarial analytical position.  And then she got promotions and she did different work that was not secretarial work.  Whenever they had training programs for the, for the operators or whatever position she had, she always went to all these training programs, so she was always doing that.  She was always trying to, to get better.
Story_ID: 394711
Speaker 1: She was also the kind of mother who--she didn't, she was very, very conscious as to what she did around Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I.  In other words she didn't have a lot of dates, she didn't date a lot.  She had one friend who I really wanted her to marry (laughter), Mr. Brown [ph.].  He was just, he was nice and he worked on a ship, and he brought her wonderful gifts.  And for years they were just like very, very close, very close.  And then one day he just didn't come by anymore (laughter).  And I think it had something to do with her--that he was in town and wanted, I think he wanted to do something with her and she was like well I have to go to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting or something.  I think she had to do something connected with Gale and I, if I'm not mistaken, or have the story correct.  And he was didn't understand, whatever and then he was out of our lives.  And then my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] did remarry when I was sixteen or seventeen.  And she stayed married for about three or four years, not for a long period of time.  My mother also instilled in me probably more indirectly this sense of, if somebody's not treating you right, you get out of there (laughter).  Even though, it took me a long time to do that with my own marriage.  But I can remember her, she got married and I wasn't really crazy about the person she married.  And then all of a sudden--I was a teenager at that time so I'm, you know dating and doing different things.  I have a social life and doing all different things I'm doing--and the next thing we knew she had kind of moved him out.  She packed up his stuff and he was out (laughter).  So I, I think that says something about her, it think it was very, when she decided to leave Brooklyn [New York] and move back home I think it was very hard decision for her to make because.  Because Gale and I were little.  And I believe my grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson] was the kind of person who well, you should have married somebody's who's Jamaican anyway.  And I think they wanted her to do that.  It's funny how you think you know things and you're not sure where you know them from.  So I think it was very hard for her to say, "Mom, I'm coming back home."  But I think she knew that, that was the best thing that she could do for Gale and I.  I think she also knew that staying with my father [J.C. Horton] was not gonna work and that's what she did.
Speaker 2: How much education did your mother have before working for the phone company and, and going on to the training that they offered there?
Speaker 1: She went through high school, she graduated from high school.
Story_ID: 394712
Speaker 1: You moved to Mount Vernon [New York] with your [maternal] grandparents [Euphima Davis Richardson and William Richardson]--or grandmother when you said you were four?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: So you started school in Mount Vernon?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me you told me about some of the memories that you had with your mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] and your grandmother.  But what is your first childhood memory what can you remember about your, your the first, what comes to your mind?
Speaker 2: What to my mind if I think as a child and I--once again I learned to sew at a very young age.  One of our, our great I guess adventures on a Sunday would be my mother, I and my sister all sewing at the same time.  Using one machine and each changing the thread to match whatever outfit we were making.  And I remember making sewing dresses for my Barbie dolls.  They had used to have patterns for them and my mother was the type, my grandmother and my mother both instilled in me the sense of, you know not to be wasteful with money.  My grandmother didn't believe in credit at all, at all, she said that, that was a sin.  So I remember making clothes for my Barbie dolls.  And Gale's [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] sewing, my sister and I'm sewing and my mother's sewing and we going back and forth and changing the, the thread on the sewing machine.  And we're running down into the living room watching TV while we're sewing, and that kind of stays in my mind.  Other memories are going to museums, I can't, it's hard for me to go back before I was like four.  So I'm not sure how far back you're looking for me to go, it's hard for me to go.
Speaker 1: No, just your earliest childhood memory (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, those my--I mean earliest memories.  I'm going to Fulton Elementary School, Robert Fulton Elementary School [Mount Vernon, New York].  And I went there through sixth grade, I don't have any memories that stand out either way, I don't have any memories that stand out either way positive or negative about school.
Speaker 1: No--were there any teachers that you remember in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any, yeah there's nothing in elementary school.  No, the only experience that really stands out is not a good one.  Was I absolutely dreaded Valentine's Day (laughter) because I never got any Valentines cards.  And, and in school they had this activity and I remember growing up later on thinking, if I'm, if I'm ever a teacher I'll never have kids go through that activity.  Where the other kids had to create Valentines for other kids in the class, I'm not sure how this whole thing works.  But I remember sitting there I would get like one Valentine or two, everyone else would have like five or six or eight Valentine's Day cards, I got none, or one.  I remember thinking if I'm ever a teacher I'll just ban that exercise (laughter).
Story_ID: 394713
Speaker 1: You said that you have one sister?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your sister?
Speaker 2: Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay], how can I--
Speaker 1: She's younger than you?
Speaker 2: Yeah Gale's two years, two and half years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very smart, she's an, she's the editor of Atlanta Goodlife magazine.  Growing up we just did tons of things together.  And I guess just because it was just the two of us, we would share a room together.  And she had her bed on one side of the room and I had my bed and then in the middle we had a little night stand.  One of our favorite activities, this sounds like really strange, was I loved lightening, absolutely love lighting (laughter).  One of my favorite activities, well there's two favorite activities that we had (laughter) not sure where we came up these games we created.  One of them was (laughter) this is so funny for me.  We had our beds had a, a what's it called, the head of the bed.  Which it was I guess a poster or the, you know you have the bed and then you have the pillow and then you have the head of bed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The headboard, um-hm.
Speaker 2: The headboard one of our favorite games, I don't understand why we did this, was we'd stand on the headboard (laughter) we'd act like were going like we're on a building we were gonna commit suicide (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh goodness.
Speaker 2: And we would jump on to the bed and we would laugh and the other person would be the person the person cheering you on, "Jump, jump," so that was one of our favorite games, childhood games.
Story_ID: 394714
Speaker 1: You're going to go to junior high school, it's about 1960--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me what you remember about junior high school, I'm sorry not high school, junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school.
Speaker 1: What school was it?
Speaker 2: It was Washington Junior High School [Mount Vernon, New York] and we, I was only there for two years, seventh and eighth grade.  Because at ninth grade you went to another high school before you went to high school, so I was there for two years.  Nothing stands out in my mind, there's one teacher, and I don't know why he stands out, his name, Mr. Krebs [ph.].  And he taught, he was my homeroom teacher, I think he taught history, I know he didn't teach any of the math class, he taught English, comes back to me.  I don't remember, I just remember him being a good teacher.  I don't remember anything more about him, I kind of remember what he looked, but he just stands out, he's probably the only teacher I remember from junior high school.  One of the things as a child, is just always wanting to be an adult.  I was like I just want to grow up, so I can make my own rules and I can do, live my life the way I want to live it.  Not that it was dramatically different than the way my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] brought me up.  But I just remember growing up with a, with a lot of rules and so therefore I think that's why I don't have a lot of, they weren't necessarily bad memories I just always wanted to be an adult.  My mother was always trying to move me in one direction or another.  And there's was a part, I guess there was a part of me that was resentful about that, but you didn't get resentful around my mother so.  She probably (unclear), "I don't know what Donna's [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell] talking about" (laughter) 'cause you knew better than to do that, so.  I remember I had a really good girl from my one of my best girlfriends I met in the eighth grade and she's one of my friends today.  She lives in Miami [Florida], Debbie, at the time her name was McRae it's now Debbie Bland [Deborah McRae Bland].  We were just really good friends and that I remember.  Oh I also remember one of the first boys I had a crush on was in junior high school.  And oh my goodness I was so in love with him, he never knew it until like years, years, years later.  When we talked about, a little--years later we talked about it and he said, "I didn't know you like--."  "I was in love with you," (laughter).  But not a lot of things kind of come to my mind.  I was very active, I was very, probably shy, more introverted.  Very I would describe myself as being introverted and a little more on the shy side.
Story_ID: 394715
Speaker 1: Well did you have activities that you did alone like read, did you draw, did you take music lessons?
Speaker 2: Didn't take music lessons, loved to sing, don't have a voice, I thought I was gonna be the next Diana Ross--that was my objective in life.  That was I guess if one was to say, well who was your idol, it's like Diana Ross.  I remember being in front of the mirror for, for hours (singing), "Stop in the--," you know doing all that, so.  But I, I never took and singing lessons that I, I debate with my sister [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay].  'Cause she says I can't sing and I tell her everyone can sing, it's whether they do it publicly or not.  So, that's our, our big debate.  But I, I enjoyed singing in front the mirror, I enjoyed I learned how to bowl a little a bit, so I did some bowling.  I think that was probably more in, in high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York].  Didn't take any music le- lessons, but I remember wanting to take piano.  I remember playing that I was, pretending that I was playing a piano.  But we didn't have a piano in my home and I never really asked my mom [Jennie Richardson Campbell] about lessons, but I don't think we probably could have afford actually lessons 'cause there was never the piano to practice on, so--
Speaker 1: Any organizations?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a joiner (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I took swimming lessons as the Y, my mother did expose us to the Y so I took some swimming lessons there.  I used to like to go to the library [Mount Vernon Public Library, Mount Vernon, New York], it wasn't far from our home actually it was two blocks away.  I used to go to the library and, and read I wouldn't say I read a lot, but I enjoyed reading I wouldn't say I read a lot, but I did enjoy reading.  I did average in junior high school [Washington Junior High School, Mount Vernon, New York] and we're in junior--in junior high school average.  One, you know, A, couple Bs, some Cs.
Speaker 1: What was the makeup of your school?
Speaker 2: It was predominately African American.
Speaker 1: And this was in Mount Vernon [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is in Mount Vernon.  I would think--
Speaker 1: What about the teachers?
Speaker 2: Teachers were a variety the- you know it doesn't kind of stand out in my mind one way or the other.  So I would say it was probably just a variety, more female teachers than male teachers.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they black or white?
Speaker 2: A variety, I think probably more black, but nothing kind of stands out in my mind a lot.
Story_ID: 394716
Speaker 1: You stay at Washington High School [Washington Junior High School, Mount Vernon, New York] for two years and then what high school do you go to?
Speaker 2: Then it was called the Annex and it was just, it was one, it was a school where you had all the ninth graders.  And I believe it was it was Mount Vernon High School Annex [Mount Vernon, New York].  And you were there for just one year and it was, it was nice, you know it was--nothing stands out from, from school any experiences either way, either way.  I think that's when I learned, actually one of the interesting things, kind of going back, one of the things I learned at a very age was how to type.  I learned to type when I was f- six or seven and I learned to type on my [maternal] grandfather's [William Richardson] typewriter, and I still have the typewriter.  And when I was in high s-, when I was in the Annex I learned to formally type.  That was one of the, the first times was exposed to actually a typing class.  But I remember being in class and people like you know how to type already.  And I had learned how to type years and years ago.  I think at that point I, everything interests me.  So if I took a class, this is true of when I was college also.  When I took something I had a strong interest in it.  So any class but nothing stands out as, as one thing that stands out more so than others.
Speaker 1: You talked about being in front of the, the mirror doing Diana Ross, what other music did you enjoy at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, all the music (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it more Motown?
Speaker 2: Oh Motown, Motown you, you name, you know I mean Diana Ross was like my absolute favorite, the Marvelettes, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, The Temptations, of course.  The Four Tops--loved music, loved music so, so any of those.  Aretha Franklin, I'm trying to see if anybody else comes to my mind.  Any of the, the--you know put out a song from that that era.  The Jackson 5, I think they a little bit later actually, they were later.
Speaker 1: Okay so do you know the reason why there was ninth graders in, in that one part of the school?
Speaker 2: I think they wanted to put the ninth graders at the high school but they didn't--.  What happen was they had built a new high school in Mount Vernon [New York], and I think the plan was for it to be the ninth through, through the senior to the twelve but in the construction they couldn't get them all there.  So that's why we were all together and it was the entire, you know all Mount Vernon was at the Annex.
Speaker 1: Okay. So the next year you go to Mount Vernon High School [Mount Vernon, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 394717
Speaker 1: Now in--1963 is the year that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is killed, do you remember that at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were?
Speaker 2: Actually when, I was in--it's funny 'cause I think I was in j- in junior high school [Washington Junior High School, Mount Vernon, New York] for some reason, I'm trying to think.  No that would wouldn't make any, wouldn't make any sense, well actually 'cause he was shot in, in ninety--in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: In '63 [1963]. And I graduate from high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York] in 1969, so if you go back six years, see I graduated high school in 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you go back six years, I was closer to junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in junior high school, yeah I remember, I remember something happened.  And they--school was dismissed, and you went home.  And you knew that the president--it's funny because some memories you can't separate the, it's hard to separate the memory when it happened from what you know now.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So that's the, and I think it's probably true of a lot of people.  But yeah I remember when that, that happened and it was, yeah.
Story_ID: 394718
Speaker 1: All right so now you're in high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have any memories of high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school was a interesting time I have, I have more memories--I had more friends.  It was during the time, at least the latter part of high school that were a lot of marches going on.  So we had, we were protesting and protesting that.  And the, the black kids weren't, I remember one time we weren't gonna go to school.  We, we had a march for something.  I don't know I think wanted more, more African American studies, or classes to be held.  So there were--we did a lot of marching, not sure exactly what it was for.  But it was like if there was a march oh yeah I want to be part of it I'm trying to be popular.  I was also--the interesting thing was I wore braces, I think this kind of a contributed to being more shy.  And I could not wait to get my braces off, I finally got my braces off when I was in the tenth grade.  I wore braces for years, seemed like forever (laughter).  So that was like a big thing, I got my braces off finally.  Had a lot of friends.  I was very good in accounting, extremely good in accounting, I surprised I didn't try to pursue it as a career.  I just, I loved work with, with num- I liked accounting working with numbers 'cause to me it was very logical.  Years later I absolutely dreaded algebra, even though it's a lot of numbers.  'Cause for me it wasn't logical didn't make any sense.  What else comes to my mind from high school?  My, this was, this was interesting I think one of the things about me was I was always looking to be my own person.  And I had my, my two good girlfriends was Pat [ph.], Debbie [Deborah McRae Bland] that was my best girlfriends.  And the three of us we always hung out together we did a lot together.  Well they decided they were gonna pledge for this--it wasn't, I guess it was a combinations boys and girls so it wasn't a sorority, sorority or fraternity.  It was called the Classics [ph.], was the name of the group.  And the person I was in love with he was member of the Classics and the two of them were gonna pledge.  And I was like, oh I'm not pledging, nobody's gonna tell me what to do.  (Unclear) you gotta come over to somebody's house and clean up their house to get into a club, oh, no, I don't do that.  Oh (unclear) and it was kind of of interesting when I think back on it, because the two of them they were my best friends they were Classics and the guy I loved or whatever he was a Classic.  I probably could have gotten in, but I was very one that no--no one's gonna tell me what to do.  Go over to somebody's house, I gotta wear what? Oh no, I wake up in the morning I decide what I'm gonna wear.  So it was just very interesting the two of them became part of this organization, I didn't--it wasn't a big thing.  Went to a lot of parties in high school, had I had a couple parties at my house.  Went to a lot of parties, my girlfriend Pat had a lot parties and you know we had the Motown music playing and it was a lot of it was a lot of fun to a degree, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at this time that were there to help you decide whether you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: No. Not really, I mean I remember having a counselor.  I really don't remember any of my teachers having like a--you know some people say, "Oh, I had this teacher," I was like, no, I didn't have that kind of experience.  Had a counselor, can't remember her name, I didn't really have an interest in going, I didn't have an interest in going to college.  Because my biggest interest was I want be able to make my decisions.  So going to college would have meant and I'm not sure if my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] even, if we even had the money to go to college.  I was an average student, one my big life objectives--I had two life objectives: one was either to be a Supreme, or be a secretary.  That was it; I didn't have a like major goals and people I tell it to a lot of people they have these you know lofty goals like I didn't not have lofty goals in high school.  I wanted be a secretary and that's what I did.  Now my other two girlfriends, almost all of my friends went to college, I just didn't have the desire to go.  I guess maybe inside I didn't think--I just thought I was average student.  There was a part of me I kind of remember, there was a part of me that thought going to college meant you made a lot more money.  Money was not a big driver for me, so I didn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think also there's a part of me that I've always wanted like once again, I'm gonna d- okay my friends can do that, I'm doing this.  My friends can do this I'm just--I wanted to always be my own person.
Story_ID: 394719
Speaker 1: At that time you were, you were talking about the fact that you were marching for different things in the school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that had to do with maybe African American studies.  Were your parents [Jennie Richardson Campbell and J.C. Horton] political at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, my mother was this very, very not political.
Speaker 1: Did she vote?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she tell you or talk to you about the importance of voting or one way or the other?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, okay, so that wasn't a discussion.
Speaker 2: We were a, I guess like some family are politically conscious, we were a politically conscious family.  My mother was always, she never wanted anything to happen to me and Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay].  And I think because what happened was we grew up with my [maternal] grandparents [Euphima Davis Richardson and William Richardson], who--they were in their sixties and seventies then.  And then my mother who she's trying to work and work to maintain a household for us.  I remember at times when they had rioting and different things or marches, she's like, "Oh no."  She, she let, I marched on the school marches because she didn't know I was marching.  She was not one who, she was always very concerned about someone's welfare, like, you shouldn't be out there walk you know marching you might get hurt or you might get you know something might happen to you.  So that was her concern.
Speaker 1: W- was your mother, she was born in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: No my mother was born here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was born here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born here--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 394720
Speaker 1: Now in your junior year [at Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York], Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was the climate of your community or your home?  What did your parents [Jennie Richardson Campbell and J.C. Horton] and your, well your mother and [maternal] grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson] think about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was just, it's funny I'm getting chills just thinking about it.  There was, there was some rioting going on in Mount Vernon [New York] at the time.  And people wanted to march and it was, it was a very--it was a lot of confusion.  But I remember, I remember being upset and every- you know as everyone was very upset watching it on TV.  But as a family we didn't get involved in the, the, the marches or any of those types of things.  My mother's major focus was raising Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I safely.  That was her major focus.
Speaker 1: What did you think about, about his assassination?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was just there were, there were times you just remember where you were when something happened.  And I remember just watching it on TV over and over again, just thinking, oh my goodness, how could that happen?  How--how could that happened?  And that's the, that's the only thing that kind of comes to my mind, how could that happen?
Speaker 1: We've talked a lot about your mother but I'm not sure but, and if we did that's fine but just in case, I don't remember you telling her name?
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't, Jennie, J-E-N-N-I-E, Campbell.  When I was growing up it was Jennie Horton 'cause that's my father's name.  So it was Jennie Horton and then when she remarried it became Jennie Campbell when I was sixteen.
Story_ID: 394721
Speaker 1: So now after high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York], you graduate in 1969--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what happens next?
Speaker 2: Next I decide I'm going to pursue my dream of being a secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wanted, I always wanted to work in New York City [New York, New York], which was about forty-five minutes from Mount Vernon [New York].  So I would take the train to New York City.  My first official, my first job before an official job was working at the library [Mount Vernon Public Library, Mount Vernon, New York], when I was sixteen.  I could not wait to get a working permit or whatever it's called.  And I used to work at the library I loved it.  I worked there on Sunday--not on Sunday, all day on Saturday and part the day on I guess in the evenings 'cause it wasn't far from my house.  And one of my, my joys as I remember the first, the first piece of clothing I ever bought was from the store and I was working.  Because my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell], one of the things my mother made all the clothes for Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] and I.  Our coats, the only thing she did not make was underwear.  She made all of our coats, blouses, pants.  And, and I would, I remember just thinking, I can't wait, I can finally get something from the store.  And now I was working at the library and I remember I bought a blue and white, I can see it now, light it was blue and white, kind of match--checkered skirt that I bought.  And then I wore it to library for about a year in a half when I was in high school.  And then my first job, official job, was as a, I guess a clerk, working for Mutual of New York.  Mutual of New York insurance company [Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York; The MONY Group, Inc.] in New York City and it was on 53rd Street [sic.] and Broadway.  And I worked there for quite a few years.  And I was a clerk and then I eventually very quickly became a secretary.  And then from there I was involved in different secretarial professions, or different secretarial jobs that the company had.
Story_ID: 394722
Speaker 1: One of the things that happened when I was in, at Mutual of New York [Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York; The MONY Group, Inc., New York, New York], after I had graduated from high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York] was I wanted t- I got involved with taking different kind of classes.  I remember taking, I, I was reading the paper and they had a school, it was Robert Powers or something school for [John Robert Powers School, New York, New York]--I'm not even sure how--it wasn't really a modeling school, but it was more on culture, or--the term escapes me right now.  But I remember taking classes there for about a year and they taught you how, taught you how to walk and talk and maybe it was kind of like a modeling school.  So I took classes there, then like a year later I took classes with Oph- at Ophelia DeVore modeling school [Ophelia DeVore School of Self-Development and Modeling, New York, New York] 'cause I thought--there was part of me that was thinking about being a model, or wanted to pursue modeling.  And I loved learning, I loved learning about how to put on makeup.  I loved learning--also a lot of modeling is how to think better.  And I guess I was looking to grow my, my self-esteem, in some ways, so I, oh I remember going to Ophelia DeVore modeling school, loved it, loved it.
Speaker 2: What did, what, what can you remember about that?
Speaker 1: There were different classes we were taking, one class is about makeup, classes about how to think better, classes about attitude.  The graduation was held at this hotel and you had to--I actually made the dress that I end up wearing in the graduation.  I'll never forget it was a very--I guess a political statement, it was a red, white and blue dress--no not red, white and blue, my goodness, red, black and green.  One side it was red, the middle black and side was green and it was this, this gown I had made.  And we had a graduation ceremony it was just, it was just a lot fun it was--I remembering learning so much and trying to, to, to stretch my mind to understand who I was as a person, or who I was as a woman.  And I would still, still my greatest dream I guess in a way that I thought was achievable was to be a secretary.  But I was taking all these other classes and doing all these other things.  So it was a kind of conflict I guess one would have, one would say.
Story_ID: 394723
Speaker 1: You stayed at Mutual New York [Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York; The MONY Group, Inc., New York, New York] for a couple of years--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and took some classes then what happened next?
Speaker 2: Well I got married when I was, trying to think, was I working a Mutual New York when I got married?  No, I was working at the American Stock Exchange [NYSE MKT] I left, I worked at Mutual of New York for and that was Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York].  Then I guess I just got bored I wanted to find another job, but it was still a secretarial job.  I took a job at the American Stock Exchange down on Wall Street [New York, New York].  And there I was a receptionist in their HR [human resources], personnel/HR department.  And when I was the- it was there I can't remember the year that I ended up getting married.  So I got married well actually my husband used to work at the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York] and I worked at the American Stock Exchange.  So we always thought that was kind of, or whatever we thought it was--kind of fun or romantic whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, any stories about the American Stock Exchange?
Speaker 2: No, nothing that kind of stands out, it was a job I, I enjoyed it.  I guess at that point I was starting to want to do other things beyond being a secretary.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I was doing like the personnel testing and I was getting involved in basic, I guess one would say, elements of personnel work.  And I remember thinking, wow wouldn't it be great to be the person doing the interviewing as opposed to the pre-interviewing.  Then I did some of the testing of different individuals who were being hired.
Story_ID: 394724
Speaker 1: And so what happened next?
Speaker 2: Then I moved on from there [American Stock Exchange; NYSE MKT] to Boehringer Mannheim, I only stayed there for a short time, it was a German firm and actually Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] was working there.  I got tired of traveling all the way down to Wall Street [New York, New York].  'Cause what happened was to get to New York [New York] you take a train from Mount Vernon [New York] into New York, into New York which was Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal].  So when I was working at Mutual of New York [Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York; The MONY Group, Inc., New York, New York] you could walk to Mutual of New York, or else you could take a subway.  But you could walk most of the time I walked 'cause I loved walking.  Then when I took the job in Wall Street you had to take a train so that was like, so I did that for a couple years.  And then you know I realized this job isn't going anywhere and Gale was work at Boehringer Mannheim and I think she was the one who arrange for me to get an interview.  I interview there and that brought me back to being in the Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York] area. And I work there for about two years, it wasn't very interesting I really probably didn't like it that much.  But I was in more of a human resources function, but it was still as a secretary.  And then decided I don't know if the company was closing, I just didn't like what I was doing, didn't like the people I was working with that much.  And I interviewed at Booz Allen Hamilton [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.], which was a management consulting firm, so that's how I kind of went from there to Booz Allen Hamilton.  And that was another secretarial position (laughter) that's all I could get was secretarial positions.
Speaker 1: Well you wanted to be a secretary (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did I wanted to be a secretary, but I also at the point was trying to move more into--and there was a term that was out then I can't think of it--personnel assistant.  That was this term that was out during that time, where you were kind of a, in between being a secretary and being in management.  It was but I, I couldn't get into those type of positions.  So I kept moving up the secretarial ladder because it was, it was hard for me to go anywhere else.
Story_ID: 394725
Speaker 1: From high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York] until you go to Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] you really are working your way up the secretarial ladder, gaining experience and then when do you go to Clairol?
Speaker 2: What happened, it's kind of interesting of how I win up getting to Clairol (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I--as you said I had worked in all these different areas and but it was always as administrative assistant.  When I was at Booz Allen Hamilton [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.], I had worked in, I was administrative assistant, administrative secretary, I worked in the international department, where I was actually running their M.B.A. recruiting, M.B.A. recruiting program.  When I say running it, I was the administrative support person.  So I loved doing that 'cause that was, even though you were still a administrative assistant, you had a lot of freedom to do a lot of different things I got involved in so that was great.  And then one day it, it's interesting now, kind of looking back, I kind of see what or even shortly thereafter, I kind of saw what was going on was, I was working as a secretary and I had just started to go to college, that's what happened.  I was thirty, thirty-three years old, I finally decided the only way I'm going to get out of being an administrative assistant is to go college.  Took me seven years to make that decision, at s- age, at age twenty-seven when I divorced twenty-seven, twenty-eight, I thought about going to college.  I kept thinking you've waited too late you should have gone earlier.  You--you know and you know all the things that kind of come up in one's mind about going to college.  So I kept working I never went, I kept thinking about it.  Then twenty-nine I said I should go to college, I kept thinking about it.  But the year I turned thirty-three I realized that I probably should have started years ago, but anyway I decided I was going to go college.  I was taking one class at a time at Westchester Community College [Valhalla, New York].  And I was one of these people, I never liked working overtime that was a big thing for me.  I liked to leave at five o'clock.  Well we had all the other secretaries there, they liked to work overtime because then you got overtime money.  Money was never a big driver for me.  So in the beginning I would work some overtime, but that wasn't really a big thing for me.  So anyway once I started going to college it's like, oh no you know I gotta be outta here at five o'clock.  Well there was this I'm, I'm trying the best way to describe it.  It was kind of like people were--other secretaries were starting to take note that I always left at five.  And then it was, it was getting kind of con- I guess it was getting very confusing for management, because how come everybody else has to work late and Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell] has to always leave at five.  And, but my work was always you know up to par well anyway, so all that was kind of going on.  I guess there are some discussions about that--
Story_ID: 394726
Speaker 1: Anyway on this one, I had a manager, I remember her now and my performance review was due in February.  That was when I was supposed to get my performance review and I always got--if I didn't get outstanding I got above average I mean that was just a standard.  So February comes and she says, "You know, well I'm busy doing something," and whatever she didn't get to it in February.  She didn't get to it in March and she was going to leave the company [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.].  So the week that she's supposed to leave I'm like, "Well when am I going to have my performance review?"  So it doesn't bother me 'cause I know I'm gonna get my money retroactive, so you know I just, we just need to sit down and talk about this.  So on Friday afternoon we sit down her last day, and we have my performance review.  And it was just average it wasn't anything, you know, I was like (unclear)--but at that point my shift had really gone away from, my shift was really college [Westchester Community College, Valhalla, New York].  When I started going to college I loved it, I absolutely loved learning, it was fascinating to me, I started to develop some sense of some goals in my life.  So she was kind of talking about well you know you did this good and you did that good and I'm like, oh okay whatever and you know whatever.  So that was the last that was her last day.  So I said, "Well you know how much of an increase do I get?"  She says, "Well you have to talk to human resources, they'll tell you that on Monday," okay cool, whatever.  Monday I sit down in human resources, a interview a, a review that was just okay, they're saying oh, this is very bad review.  Like what do you (unclear), well here she said this but they were kind of interpreting it very differently.  Now she's left the company already, so that you can't go back.  And, and so now I having this big debate with, with human resources.  'Cause they're like well you know sh- and then it sounded like they were saying that after they had the review with her, she added some comments or something I don't know what happens, this is years ago.  But all I remember these people were telling me they were not, bottom line after having series of meetings with them, the meetings with the director human resources by the end of the week they were basically saying we are not going to give you an increase for like six months.  You have to improve your performance.  I was like a crazy person, I went home I was so upset, was so angry.  And I just was I was, I was furious.  And in my, in my family we did have a couple of I guess one would say philosophies.  And my mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] and grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson] used to always preach this, their biggest philosophy is you never quit the job until you find another job.  'Cause whatever job you're at, it's not that bad.  You just don't you know, they were always thought if somebody and I'm not even sure how I came about knowing this but I guess they must have talked about it.  You don't just quit a job you know you find another job.  Monday morning I walked in there after we went through this series of I'm not getting an increase--my mother was in Dallas, Texas I remember calling and telling her I'm quitting.  She's like, you don't just quit a job.  That Monday morning I walked in there, and I quit, I'm out of here.  I don't know where I'm going, I don't know where I'm gonna work but I'm not working here anymore because you people are lying on me.  There's some kind of game being played, and I'm not playing the game anymore.  So I'm out of here.
Speaker 2: Do you think, do--can you say that you experienced any prejudice or any racism in the business world?
Speaker 1: I think it was the kind that was subtle.  That--it wasn't overt, where you could say, oh, that happened; it was overt.  But I believe growing just in those times decisions were made about certain things but you didn't know how the decision was arrive at, if that makes any sense.  But it was never anything that was overt and in your face, where you knew it per se.
Speaker 2: Do you think that this incident had anything to do with it?
Speaker 1: I, I'm not sure what it had to do with, what, what this incident re- what it taught me was to read the handwriting on the wall.  I never really read the handwriting on the wall, I was just busy going to college that was my big thing.  And I had been going to college for about a year, so it's kind of like when you focus is here, these people they're just paying all I had to, I need to do is get my paycheck.  And I'm doing as well I can do, but I remember just the focus was getting through, focus was college.
Story_ID: 394727
Speaker 1: Loved going to college.
Speaker 2: What was your course of study in college?
Speaker 1: Was marketing.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And you said you loved college--
Speaker 1: Loved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did you love about it?
Speaker 1: I just loved learning and when I started it was really interesting, when I started college I think the first class I took I remember sitting down with my advisor saying I don't know what I want to major in, what are the, what are the classes--I didn't even know the right language then, what I was asking for, what are the core classes, I was like what are the classes that you need no matter what you want to graduate as?  So she you know she kind of tell me you need English and you need that.  So I started taking those classes I just loved learning I can't even describe it.  It was like the world just opened up to me.  And surprisingly my first class I got an A then I got and A, and I got a B plus, then I realized I was pretty good in college.  So my objective was not to get anything, the objective was always to get a A and not to accept anything less than a B plus, and that is what I ended up with.  If I thought, if I was in a cla- and after a while you start to develop I wouldn't say a strategy, but I certainly felt, but I guess one would call it a strategy and I would sit in a class and I would know, okay this is going to be a A class, or this is going to be a B plus class.  And I remember sitting in classes where, like, the first day, the way the professor had outlined the class, or there was something he would say that would make me think, I'm not going to be able to get A or a B plus in here, I need to register out.  And I would register out of class, find another class.  And so my transcript, when I got out of Westchester Community [Westchester Community College, Valhalla, New York], was all--mostly A and a couple of B plus, and the same thing when I went on to get my bachelor's degree.
Speaker 2: So you did two years at Westchester Community, what year did you graduate?
Speaker 1: Actually I did four years.
Speaker 2: At Westchester Community?
Speaker 1: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I was going at night.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm taking one class, one class--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --and one class, and I think after the first year, I loved it so much I started taking two classes.
Speaker 2: What year did you graduate?
Speaker 1: I graduated after--I have to back into it.  'Cause I graduated Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York] in '89 [1989], so I graduated Westchester Community College in '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was there for four years.  And the four years I was there I was a secretary.
Speaker 2: What degree did you get from Westchester?
Speaker 1: I got a associate's degree in marketing, it was marketing or business administration.
Speaker 2: Okay so when you leave there you go to Mercy College you say?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 394728
Speaker 1: And at this time is, is this when you go to Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened was I was--no, when I went to Clairol I was still at Westchester Community College [Valhalla, New York] 'cause what happened was I quit Booz Allen Hamilton [Booz Allen Hamilton Inc.] and now I'm just working temporary at various companies in New York [New York] because at that point it was real easy to work temp.  So I'd be working in one week at one company I'd be working another week at another company.  And I, I thought it was kind of, of interesting 'cause you're always at this different corporations.  Then I had gotten this assignment for, it was another management counseling firm, one of the secretaries who worked for me at Booz Allen had moved on and she was working for this very small management consulting firm and they needed a long term secretary but it wasn't a permanent position.  So I was working there and that was, that I enjoyed because you had certain freedoms because you weren't permanent, and I'll never forget the person I was working for had been working for him for about f- a couple of months and he had to go on vacation.  So when he was gone on vacation it wasn't like you don't go to work because you're not a full-time secretary.  So I called a different employment agency and I got an assignment at Clairol for one week so I'll never forget when he was leav- 'cause he wanted to bring me on full time but somehow we couldn't with the it was a small company they didn't have the money.  So when he was going on the vacation he said, "You're gonna come back?" I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well what are you going to do next week?" Said, "I'm going to work at Clairol, just for a week, I'll be back," he said, "Okay."  And I never went back 'cause the first day I started working at Clairol they offered me a position.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how long did you stay at Clairol?
Speaker 2: Stayed at Clairol for seventeen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were some of the positions that you had there?
Speaker 2: What happened was, when I--as I said when I showed up for that one week assignment, the person who I was working for, guess he came out around lunch time, never forget, this guy named Jim Viesta [ph.], he said, "So what do you do, you know where do you work, you know why--," you know.  I was like, "Well, I work temp at different companies," and he said, "Well would you like to work here?"  One of the things that--let me just back up I had always wanted to work for a company like Clairol.  I had always wanted to work for a company that actually made products that I used, and I remember trying to get in to American Home Products, oh my goodness I wanted to get in there so badly I couldn't get in there.  So now you're at the company where they make shampoo and, and, and shampoo and hair color and all the products that I have in my house.  So I'm talking to him and he told me the salary, I said, oh no it's not enough money oh no, no I need a whole lot more money than that 'cause you have to realize I had worked my way up to where I was a executive secretary at Booz Allen and the position he had was just an secretarial position, I said, oh no, this is definitely too little money.  And that was administrative assistants' week, he took me out for Administrative Assistants' Day [Administrative Professionals' Day], and said, "You will be my secretary."  And I said, "Not at that salary; that's not enough money," so by the end of the week he had got them to increase the salary, just a little bit, not a lot.  It was still--I started at Clairol probably making I would say somewhere between 15 to 20 percent less than I made at Booz Allen Hamilton.  But I knew it was going to be, I always wanted to work in that kind of environment plus I was going to school for marketing, I was still at Westchester Community.  I was going to school and I was focusing on marketing, they were a marketing company, plus you get all these free products (laughter).  You know, free shampoo, they went to appliances I mean it as a fun, that was probably one of the--that was such a fun place to work, it was very exciting.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of minorities working there?
Speaker 2: There were a good amount, there were a good amount of minorities, as--in terms of anywhere else I worked there were a good amount you know there weren't a lot but there were enough minorities there.
Story_ID: 394729
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of the positions that you had in the seventeen years?
Speaker 2: Okay, one of the first things that happened when I was at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] was I was working for someone who was responsible for the U.S. Open [U.S. Open Tennis Championships] that's played in, in New York [New York], the tennis open.  So I got very much involved myself and another secretary in coordinating the--what happened was Clairol sponsored, was one of the sponsors for women's tennis.  This was before women's tennis was real big.  When men's tennis was the dominating sport and women's tennis was just something that was there; wasn't that important, wasn't as that impressive. So we got involved with bringing account managers in and we would have kind of hard to explain.  They would have these big events surrounding the U.S. Open and myself and another secretary we would basically responsible for a lot it.  We would send out letters to buyers at different companies to find out if they wanted to come the Op- come to the Open we coordinated all the tickets distribution.  The tickets we coordinated they had a reception we coordinated a big reception, Linda Evans was the spokesperson for one of our brands, Ultress.  So we would we would get involved with flying her in and it was it was just an ex- it was a great time to be at Clairol.  And so got very much involved in that.  And that, and I started working there as a secretary then I got promoted a senior secretary then I got promoted to I guess administrative secretary.  So now I'm kind of starting from the scratch working my way up the secretarial ladder again.  And I'm still going to school [Westchester Community College, Valhalla, New York] at night, when I graduated, my associate's degree, then I felt right that was like a major achievement for me.  It took me four years working as a secretary, and I got my associate's degree; I was so happy.
Story_ID: 394730
Speaker 1: And is then when you become a marketing assistant?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Not yet.
Speaker 2: No, what happened was the--one of the other administrative assistants gave me a big party.  'Cause she was, I mean pe- when I was at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] everyone knew I was in college [Westchester Community College, Valhalla, New York] 'cause I talked about it all of the time.  And I was doing, I had started to really become, I guess I want to say confident.  Because I was really volunteering a lot in college, I was getting involved in a lot different types of activities, and I was always having to ask for time off to do something.  And my manager would be like looking at me like, you want to do what? Like I remember one--hm?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was going to ask you what activities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, like one of the things, I decided I wanted to do an internship on market research and in order to do this and in order to do this internship you had to work for market research firm.  And you had to put it in I guess twenty-five hours of work, twenty-five hours a week, working in a market research firm, and then you could go through this program.  So I'm sitting there thinking and they and the company wasn't open on Sunday so I remember approaching my manager saying, "I want to do this market internship, and I want to be able to take like every Friday off."  And he was like--well but I knew, I had enough vacation time to do it.  One of the great things I got about Clairol when you started there you started with three weeks' vacation that's probably unheard of today.  So I had re- I had set up where I figured out if I took every Friday off for, during the summer and into the fall.  And I worked Friday and then worked on Saturday I would be able to get my twenty-five and then work like two hours, a couple of hours in the evenings I'd be able to get twenty-five hours every month or every week. So I go to my manager and I'm talking and he's like, "You want to do what?" I said, "Well, you know--," and I'm kind of a mapping out what I'm planning to do.  He said, "Okay, yeah, you can have every Friday" because it was my time.  So that was one thing they were real supportive of and this, and then one time I was working on I can't remember what it was but I remember it was some kind of term paper on having to do with marketing, and I remember going to all of the different employees in my department and asking them these different questions that would support this term paper.  And then at one point I was going to ask people in the cafeteria questions to build whatever this, was I was doing for my term paper.  So, so those are the type of things I, I got involved in.  And when I graduated I graduated with honors and one of the other secretaries decided she would plan this big party for me.
Story_ID: 394731
Speaker 1: I didn't know about this, this is was the only time in my life where someone completely surprised me, where you can honestly say, oh my goodness I didn't know that was being planned for me.  So anyway she decided she's planning this big party--well we were the two, myself and this other secretary we--I wouldn't say we had a lot of pull, but we could make things happen.  So she went to her manager who was the vice president of sales told him what she wanted to do, so this is being planning I don't know about it. And on this particular day I'm over by the Xerox machine and I'm, I'm making copies this other secretary Roseanne [ph.] comes over she said, "You need to go into the conference room, your manager Tim [ph.] he needs you in the conference room."  This is right around lunchtime I'm thinking okay I want to go in there and then she came over later she said, "You need to be in the conference room, Tim needs you."  Said, "I want to go in there," she said, "You need to go in there now," I said, "Okay," and now I'm getting annoyed because it's like it's lunchtime, I want to go to lunch.  What's going on here?  I'm getting frustrated so I go into this conference room and when I open the door at first I was real confused because there were people in the room.  And I got embarrassed 'cause I thought I had walked into somebody's meeting.  And then everyone says, "Surprise," and it took, it was still like what's going on here, and then I realized it was a party for me.  And they had the directors they had everybody in there, everyone who is part of sales and sales merchandising.  And I look over and who's at my party but the president of Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] U.S. operations.  Because one of the se- the secretary who worked for him, her name was Pat [ph.], she was a good friend of mine.  So when she got ready, she found out about the party, when she got ready to come down to go to the party, she tells her boss, the president, "I'm going downstairs I'll be back," you know.  He said, "Well, where are you going?" I'm assuming it was some kind of conversation like this, she says, "Well they're having a party in sales for, for Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell]."  "Who's Donna? Well I should come down to the party too" (laughter).  So I look over, it's like, oh my goodness, there's Jerry Beddall [Gerald Beddall], so he comes over and he's talking to me.  And he says, "Who--," and it was really interesting 'cause they had food you know flower and all the stuff had a lot of food we always at Clairol we believed in food (laughter).  So we had all this food lined up, and I was talking to him I was telling him--the question was raised and whenever I do programs I always talk about this he asked the question, "What are you going to do to celebrate that you graduated?"  And I never answered that question, I went into, this is going to do when I go--when I go to Westchester Community College [Valhalla, New York].  And I was--I remember when I was trying to decide to go to Westchester I was trying to figure--not Westchester, Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York].  I was trying to figure out what college I was going to go to after Westchester Community it took me four years to get sixty-four credits.  And I was looking at all these different colleges, and Westchester Community had this program where I thought I would be able to do what I did in four years, I'd be able to do it in two years.  If I went to school, if I, if I, doubled up on all these classes I was doing.  If I went to school on Saturday, if I went to s- I started going to school on Saturdays, I started going to school during the summer, and I realized if I worked hard I would be able, what I did in four years, I'd be able to do it in two years.  And I kept thinking, wow, that would be really impressive when I eventually graduated 'cause you realize I was still a secretary (laughter) still a secretary, still trying to figure out how am I going to make this transition from being a secretary into mar- into management and everyone at Clairol had told me that at Clairol they normally didn't promote secretaries.  But I had so I figured, okay, I'm gonna go to Westchester Com- I'm gonna go to Mercy College 'cause I'm be able to do this accelerated and they had at home classes all these different things.  So as I'm talking to the president he asked me the question, you know, "What are you going to do to graduate," it's like I want to talk to him about how I'm gonna do sixty-four credits in two years.  So as I'm talking to him I have to explain to him--'cause he was from London [England] he wasn't from the United States.  I was starting trying to explain to him how it took me four years to graduate.  And get this degree but now I'm gonna get it in two years.  And I'm just that's all I'm talking about he's like, "Oh, that sounds very, very impressive, that's very nice well you know, the best of luck to you."  So okay thank you and you know everyone's later on, "The president--."  Later on, I'll never forget, one of the managers came over to me, vice president of sales, he said, "I saw you talking to Jerry Beddall, you're trying to get into marketing."  And I was like, "No," it, it hadn't really dawned on me.  But I knew that I had to make an impact two years later that president promoted me into marketing.  Because during that time, like within I guess the following day or a couple days letter he sent me a letter and saying congratulations on you know what you were able to do, if you ever need any help let me know.  And he was always kind of sending me a later congratulating me.  'Cause I was always trying to do something that you weren't supposed to do.  So I always had to get permission to do different things and that's what happened.
Story_ID: 394732
Speaker 1: So you were there for seventeen years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And once you got into marketing what were some of the things that you did?
Speaker 2: What happened was they promoted me into marketing and this was, when you talk about--this was interesting I was going to move to Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause by then my sister [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] was living here in Atlanta.  And I had been trying to, to--I was sending all of these resumes to different companies in Atlanta, I couldn't get an interview.  And I had just graduated I was just getting ready to graduate from Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York].  And the president Jerry Beddall [Gerald Beddall] called me into his office, I sit down in his office, he's telling me, "I want to promote you to be an assistant product manager."  I was like in a state of shock because that was one thing Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] didn't do.  And he says, "Well I want you to--," he said, "I understand--" somehow somebody knew I was planning to move to Atlanta.  He said, "Well, I want you to think about it on Monday come back and tell me whether you want the job."  I wanted to accept the job then, I was scared to wait the weekend 'cause I'm afraid he might change his mind (laughter).  On Monday morning I go in and I accept the job as an assistant product manager.  He said, "Okay, I'll talk to HR [human resources], and they'll be in contact with you."
Story_ID: 394733
Speaker 1: Okay so in 1989 you graduate from Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with a B.A. in marketing?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, and you're still at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.], so tell me what happens now?
Speaker 2: The president [Gerald Beddall] offered me a position in marketing, so I ended up accept- I ended up in a position it was called marketing assistant, he had offered me a position, assistant product manager, and in--after he had offered me the position, in human resources got involved and in the, the arrangements, the position had been changed to a marketing assistant.  It was fine with me, because I literally went from a grade seven secretarial into a grade eleven on the market- or the management side.  So I was you talking about somebody who was scared.  When they told me the amount of the increase from the promotional increase then it was partnered up with a merit increase for being a secretary I remember sitting there just petrified like what do these people expect me to be doing?  'Cause it was just it was just a lot money.  And plus at that point you have to realize, realize then we were into double digit increases for a lot of people.  So marketing was exciting oh my goodness, I was working on the company's Miss Clairol, one of--the company's flagship brand.  And they had a product manager who was working on the general effort, or general market effort.  And I was working on the Hispanic effort, even though I didn't speak Spanish.  And we had like a, I had a smaller budget but we had a spokesperson I mean all the things they were doing for the regular market I was involved in doing for the Hispanic market.  We had Hispanic TV advertising, I was working with the advertising agency on developing Hispanic TV advertising, all different things, it was just it was just very, very exciting, but extremely--very long hours extremely, very stressful it was an it was an overwhelming experience.  There's a lot of times that I think back now there's some things I would have done differently if I had known different things.  I would have tried to get a mentor I would have just it was there would be nothing to be at work 'til two and three o'clock in the morning.  Working on projects and coming back in somehow it wasn't working as well as I would have liked it work.  So I was still thinking, I need to get to Atlanta [Georgia].  Now I'm thinking okay I've done something, I done a couple of years in marketing.  But this is wearing me out, it wasn't, it was challenging being accepted, not because you are African American because you were, used to be a secretary.  And there were different a- I never really I, I, I trying to think the best way to describe it.  You kind of knew that everyone didn't embrace this idea but there were a lot people who did, but there were manager's that who would kind of take me out.  I remember one manager particular he said, "You will never be fully accepted because you were an administrative assistant."  I was like, well I'm here now and you know I'm gonna do the best I can do.
Story_ID: 394734
Speaker 1: In the midst of all of that, I ac- to make a long story short, I accepted a position that Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] had, it was a sales analytical position in the Atlanta [Georgia] area, where I always wanted to live.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This was '92 [1992].  So basically I went from someone who was like suffering in marketing just you know at times I just wanted them to lay me off, just lay--in fact they had gone through a series of layoffs when I was in marketing and I praying just lay me off, this way can move to Clair- I can move to Atlanta.  I'll have some unemployment something to kind of get me stabilized 'cause I couldn't find a job in Atlanta, I kept trying to find a job I couldn't find one.  Well then one of managers I was working with told me that Clairol was, was open- was creating these new positions it's gonna be five of them.  And literally I had sat down with her she was telling me I wasn't doing well in marketing, marketing wasn't working for me, and all these different things that I kind of already knew.  And then a few days later she says, "Well I understand they're creating this sales analytical position and one of the positions is going to be in Atlanta, I think you'd be great for that position."  And I always think that it took a lot of, of--you had to be a certain type of manager to be able to look at someone and understand they are failing here, failing fast.  But they would probably be doing really well in another area of the company, so I interviewed for the position and one of the persons I interviewed with I worked with indirectly when I was administrative assistant, I thought that was kind of interesting.  Accepted the position and literally Clairol came, packed me up and moved me to Atlanta.  And the following year, I mean it was not the following year, it took a few months, two or three months I was in Atlanta, and I went from somebody who was failing under the weight--I always tell people I felt like I went from someplace where I was tolerated to someplace where I was celebrated.  When I moved to Atlanta, the Atlanta office they were excited about having me here.  The manager who brought me in, he--I remember the first day I was here, he kind of drove me around Atlanta, explained me the lay of the land.  And I had worked with people in the Atlanta office when I was in marketing indirectly on different projects.  So they were like ecstatic they were like, "Great, oh you accepted the position."  And the following year, I won sales analyst of the year so you went from someone who was just suffering to where you know people are excited about you.  And I, I worked on various accounts, did a lot of analytical work, and then I got another promotion to work on national accounts.   So I started working on Clairol's accounts, which was Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.], largest--Walmart, I was also--Walmart was the major account I was working for most of the time.  And then I got another promotion to category manager and the category I was working was hair color and hair care I was doing that for Walmart and various other accounts.  And I won another award then I won category and manager award and I--just a lot what happened was during that time because you're in an environment where people are excited about you being there, you just flourish you do so much better and maybe the work was probably more in line with what at work I wanted to do.  I was in Atlanta when I moved here I absolutely loved Atlanta--people are, "Are you ever going back?" "No, no," so it was just you, you just it was a good time very, very good time.  And just worked, did a lot of interesting assignments it was ju- it was just good, that's the only way to describe it.
Story_ID: 394735
Speaker 1: So after seventeen years what made you decide to leave?
Speaker 2: What happened was Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] was owned by Bristol-Myers [Bristol-Myers Squibb], Bristol-Myers decided to sell, sell Clairol to P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio].  In all, during all this time that I was working particularly when I moved into, when I moved to Atlanta [Georgia] I would always, I was always trying to find the thing that I would be passionate about--that was my big thing is, I'm doing good work here, but am I passionate about this? No.  But I'm doing good now I'm getting you know awards but I'm not passionate about it.  And I always thought it's kind of going back to when I was a, a child I thought singing like to be a singer to me I thought that was awesome because you can do that all time.  This is a thing you can get passionate about, so I was always working on different projects.  And the first one I started--I had been in Atlanta just a couple of years and I was trying to figure out well what could I if it wasn't singing what business I start 'cause I had started listening to a lot of motivation spee- speeches, [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, if you are familiar with him.  So following a lot of--doing a lot of self-work.  And they always said well go back to your childhood what do love doing as a child so I loved art, I'm going to start an art business.  So while I was working at Clairol I was doing what I called residential business art consulting; I would set up art shows.  And I would work with different artist and my objective was to expose general people to the fact that a lot of original work is affordable if you get it from artist when they're first developing.  When they haven't reached the, the stage of a Jacob Lawrence, if you get work when artist are, are just growing then you can get really affordable work, so I started working with a lot artist I would do art shows here in my home.  I'd go to people's homes and do art shows and I was trying to--the, the, the concept I had in my mind was similar to, for lack of a better word, I don't even like to make the comparison, but like Tupperware.  Where you go to somebody's home you have an art, you--then the person who brought you in, they get a discount so I, I kind of set up this concept the name of the company was Cultural Art Works, and it was I--and I was doing it part-time, loved it.  Loved it, but after a while you just got tired of trying carry all this art around because I would take, go to someone's home, I would take their art down I'd put my art up, you--doing all this, all these things you loved it but after a while you just got tired of doing it.  I did it for a couple of years.  That's how I got to know a lot of artists here in Atlanta, know quite a few artists.  (Unclear) started my own art collection and then one day said I'm tired of doing this. 'Cause you'd give these great shows and people would come and then would, "Well I'll come back, or you know, I'll get the fifty dollar print," and after a while so I stopped doing that.  And then I, I started doing just trying to find different businesses I could that I could do.
Story_ID: 394736
Speaker 1: I had always had a huge fear of public speaking, big time, so at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] I was always taking public speaking classes and at some point I decided to join Toastmasters [Toastmasters International].  Are you familiar with Toastmasters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I and I joined Toastmasters just to get better at doing my job.  And when I did that and this this kind of, this will bring up every--all of this comes together.  When I did that there was a gentleman who was my mentor in this Toastmasters and I was--Al Wiseman--and I had given, I was practicing a speech at his home, my first speech and he said to me, "Have you ever thought about being a professional speaker?"  And when he said that in my mind I was thinking, that's bizarre.  In my mind that is the craziest thing like I don't you know I'm thinking in my mind you don't know I feel like I'm gonna pass out when I give a speech. You know, people have those extreme fears of public speaking that's what I had.  And you're talking about would I want to do this for a living it this is bizarre, no, but I didn't say that to him, I was like (unclear), "No, I had never thought about it," he was a professional speaker at the time.  But somehow that kind of must have staying in my mind because I'm still trying to find my passion.  And at the time it was 2000 one of my girlfriends, Lynda Shorter had had approached me, we hadn't been friends for that long but she had said to me, we should start a, a group you know for African Americans were we would focus on personal development and the words were they weren't completely out of her mouth and I was getting so excited because I read more personal development books trying to get my life together.  So we start this group, and it was supposed to be for men and women and it ended up just being for women because we never could get that many men that were interested and every month we would meet, started in 2000.  And we started in June, every month we'd read a different personal development book.  And Linda and I, we would be like the facilitators I never thought of it as training this was just I, I, I know so know so much about personal problems 'cause I had so many issues I had to overcome.  So every month we would meet and the first I mean the first meeting we held right here in my home and we had maybe about twenty-five women.  And we had door prizes and every month Linda and I would plan this--you didn't have to bring any food we would provide all the food we would--we'd do everything but provide the books.  We would put the discussion points and we'd loved doing that so we did it for about six months and one day I was driving I was thinking, I love to do this.  Okay, how would I make this a business because the whole thing with--it's called WATTS, Women Aspiring Together To Succeed--the whole thing with WATTS was there are no dues there are there's no--you know you just show up you come to whatever meetings you want and women absolutely love it, we'll kind of move up to that later on.  But so I was thinking my mind we'll how would I make this a business because I know I could get passionate about this.  And this was six years after Al Wiseman told me about being a professional speaker so we're not talking about like the following week.  So I was thinking maybe I would run around Atlanta [Georgia] I set up these groups no that's not gonna work.  'Cause nobody pays any money for this, okay.  And then in my mind it was as if pursuing this would look like being a professional speaker, and I had just started to overcome some of my fears, I still had some big fears, but I started overcoming them.  And I call Al and tell him I think I want to become a professional speaker.  And this was six years after he had told me about being it, so at that point I had started just doing l- some small speeches here and there, not a lot and at that point Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] or Bristol-Myers [Bristol-Myers Squibb] announced that they were going to sell Clairol.
Story_ID: 394737
Speaker 1: So now you have these two things coming together I'm finding like I think I like to do this and I know I have a message because of so many things that have happened to me, in the work place.  And we've just touched on like a few of them, bele- I have more and more stories we'd be here for hours with all these different stories.  So I developed a program called, Making The Most Of Your 9-To-5, how do you make the workplace a growing, rewarding, filling experience, and I was doing that around Atlanta [Georgia] and not a lot but I would speak to a lot of administrative assistant organizations.  When Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] announced that they were actually sold to P and G [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio], now I gotta make a decision.  Do I want to stay with Clairol, where I've built this solid reputation, or do I wanta venture out and explore this, this area?  And I knew in my mind 'cause you got a severance package it wasn't a lot but it was pretty good.  I knew in my mind that if I stayed with Clairol--no I knew it this way, I knew if I started out on this business being a professional speaker and trainer that there would be days I would regret it.  There'd be days I go, you left that company car you left that credit card, company credit card.  You left all this good stuff and you don't know what you're doing.  I knew there would possibly be some days like that, but I knew if I stayed at Clairol there'd be a lot of days like that.  And kn- I just knew that because I knew over here this I loved to do these.  I don't know what I'm doing I'm not sure I never ever thought I'd have my own business.  I, I don't even know how to actually do this.  But over here this--it's kind of like when you find the thing you're in love with, you want to go with the thing you're in love with.  And the other thing was that because I did a lot of business travel with Clairol did a lot of business travel tons and tons of it.  I knew that I would never be able to tell an organization, yes I'm going to speak at your women's meeting in June, 'cause Clairol might decide or P and G, if I'd gone with P and G they might schedule you to be out of town that day, can't do that.  And so I decided to start my own business [Success Can Be Yours, LLC; Starr Consulting and Training, Stone Mountain, Georgia], that's how I started.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 394738
Speaker 1: And so how does your business work?
Speaker 2: Well it started and it's, it's funny because when I started I truly had no idea what I was doing.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the company?
Speaker 2: Right now it's Starr Consulting and Training [Stone Mountain, Georgia], S-T-A-R-R, Consulting and Training, but it didn't even start as Starr Consulting and Training, it started under the name of Success Can Be Yours [Success Can Be Yours, LLC, Stone Mountain, Georgia].  That was the first name, Success Can Be Yours, everyone can be a success.  And I was talking about workplace success, but I was just looking at being a motivational speaker, I didn't even know anything about training, I knew so little it's amazing.  But I joined the National Speakers Association, learned some things about speaking, joined--then I--a turn, a kind of like turning point was I became associated with [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, motivational trainer, a motivational speaker, a friend ran into him at the airport, the Atlanta airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], she didn't live in Atlanta [Georgia].  And she told him about me and she was telling him how I was passionate about what I did, her name is Stephanie Townsend [ph.].  She, she called me one day--no one day I come home, you have to realize I don't know what I'm doing with my business.  And I, I pick up the phone and there is this message on there, it's like, "Yes, Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell], success can be yours 'cause you have--."  And the voice is going on and on and on I'm trying to think who is this, I'm thinking I know who this sounds like but it wouldn't be that person because that person doesn't know me and it wouldn't make any sense for that person to call me, well it actually it ended up being Les Brown.  He had run into my girlfriend Stephanie at the airport, she told him about me 'cause she said, "I know, nobody else who's as passionate about what they're doing, and they don't know what they're doing, they're not making any money."  She said, "I don't know anybody else who every time I call you're excited, you don't know what you're doing, you're telling me you're not making any money, but you're excited," so she told about me.  He called me and then I had a conversation with him and he had, he was starting a speakers program.  So I took my hard earned money and after arguing with him for hours on the phone, I packed up everything I had on my business and sent it to him.  With what, with what I thought was a huge check that was like you be out of your mind to pay this amount of money, but I sent it to him.  And in the meantime I was starting to do some training and I had, I had joined Fred Pryor [Fred Pryor Seminars], their national training company, I'd done some training for them.  And that's contractual work, so you do it for a couple of months and then I found that the traveling was just wearing me down I wasn't sure if they were paying enough.  And that wasn't working, so you're, you're in this business but you don't--it's really kind of strange, you don't know what you're doing.  You're doing this, this is working, you're get paid you know, not getting paid a lot over here, getting paid a little bit over here.  You know, you, in your mind, you never thought you'd have a business but slowly some things are coming together but coming together real slow but you know you love to do this.  So through the Les Brown training program, this is like you're talking about a slight turning 'cause I'm still trying to figure out my business, he, he had somebody on the--we were having a conference call, he had someone on the phone who was fulfilling a training contact for the City of Atlanta.  And her name was Pam Evans [ph.] and she was trying to bring on trainers to work for I guess a couple of months for the City of Atlanta.  So I met with her and she accepted me as one of the trainers, and I was doing change management training for the City of Atlanta.  Then I found out, I really love training.
Story_ID: 394739
Speaker 1: I found out I love training as much as I loved speaking; I didn't care whether I was doing motivational speeches or whether I was doing training programs. And for someone who wasn't really trained in how to be a trainer, I, there's something's that I just naturally bring to training.  And I was getting really good reviews you know people like, "Oh, she's great she's--," you know I bring different stories in and I would--
Speaker 2: What were you training people on?
Speaker 1: I was--change management.
Speaker 2: Change management?
Speaker 1: Change management--
Speaker 2: Change management.
Speaker 1: --it was the City of Atlanta [Georgia], it was all of their employees had to go through change management and all of a sudden I'm--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I know change management, change from what to what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh I sorry, change management: how do you deal with change?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay I got you.
Speaker 1: And at this point the city was going through a lot of change--how, because a lot times people are resistant to change.  They you know they might get laid off, they might have a new job, they might have a new manager, there's a lot of emotions that come up, so we were trying to help people deal with change.  And it was a full day program.  And the city had actually put together the program so they just needed people to facilitate it.  And I loved doing it and it was interesting because many--I would say more than half my classes were people who did not want to be there.  Half of my classes were like I remember one--doing one--my first--I had a meeting I got accepted to do the training.  You have to realize I haven't really done a lot training up to the point then I get a call from the City of Atlanta saying, "Can you do the program on Friday?" So I said, "Yes."  "It's a group of police officers, they don't want the training, they don't want to be there, and the person who's been doing the training is so upset she won't go back, can you do it?"  (Laughter) And I'm thinking, (unclear) after I said yes I'm thinking, you don't know what to do, this is kind of crazy you know and plus you have to realize, I'm one of these people who never--my ideal audience is women, I loved talking to women's audiences so now I'm going do a bunch of men who don't even want me being there.  And after like the first, the first day you could tell they didn't want you there.  But I'm on this high, I'm excited, you know we're gonna do this change management, and by the end of the day I kind of got some people to some men to--they weren't as hostile as when then they were, when they first came into the class.  And then I started almost always doing the police officers and fire fighters and these hostile audiences and I would walk in in the morning thinking I know they don't want me there, and it doesn't make any difference 'cause one of us has got to move.
Story_ID: 394740
Speaker 1: So what happened with the [HistoryMaker] Les Brown--when you sent him the package?
Speaker 2: Oh when he's, when I got it, when he got the package you know he called me the following day and he was like, "Well you have some, you have some pretty good stuff here."  And you have to realize, this was like the huge investment for me.  So I'm talking to him and he's like, and I'm looking at your videotape 'cause I had some, some things and I'll never forget he said to me, "You have this program called, How to Make The Most Of Your 9-To-5 [sic. Making The Most Of Your 9-To-5], are you open?"  So I said, "Um-hm," he said, "You're open to changing it?"  So I said, "The title," so I said, "Yeah."  He said, "You should change it to, Satchell Principles for Workplace Success," and he said, "Each of the letters should be one of your principles."  So he kind of showed me how it would work and I was like, wow, and I'll never forget 'cause I'm having this conversation with him I'm like, "That's really good, Les."  And he's like, "Have I earned my money yet?"  And I said, "Not yet, but this is pretty good."  So I'm still in the program.  We actually--a group of speakers here in Atlanta [Georgia] we did a program with Les in 2002, it's called Motivational Monday, probably one of the highlights, one of the fascinating things I ever did.   Was five speakers we came together we sold tickets it was held at the Crowne Plaza Ravinia [Crowne Plaza Atlanta Perimeter at Ravinia] on--well, you know where it is, Perimeter Mall area [Atlanta, Georgia].  We rented the out--the five speakers, we rented out a ballroom for four hundred people we're trying to sell ticket, none of us know what we're doing but you know Les says he's gonna come in and he's gonna introduce us.  And he comes in a few days before he does an interview on the radio and we're giving away tickets we're selling tickets we're doing all kind of things when the event started, I'll never forget that day it was this ballroom that held four hundred people, had about six hundred people in there.  It was the first time I spoke to that size audience (laughter).
Speaker 1: And when was this?
Speaker 2: This was in, it was either 2002 or two t- I think it was 2002 and we called the, the program Motivational Monday and we actually audio taped and videotaped it, so it--that's one of my products, Motivational Monday was--I spoke for about twenty minutes, each of the speakers we spoke for between fifteen and twenty minutes, Les opened the program and he talked for about it was interesting, he was talking, he--we thought he was gonna talk for about five minutes and he's talking and he's getting the crowd all warmed up and riled up and the speakers we're in the background, when's he gonna shut up, when's he gonna shut up, we're ready to go on, well then you know he introduces each of us and we come up and we do our, my program was on, Three S's of Success, what does it take to be successful. You have to, I'm trying to what the first S was one of the S's was support, the last S was you have to be serious about what you want to do, and I can't remember the first.  S--the first S was self-knowledge.  So I'm still in the program, so I did that program with Les and we, and then two years ago, Les said he was, everyone who was in the program he would do a video, a audiotape with them.  I had a program called, The Success Formula, so I literally--I flew, I drove to Albany [Georgia], where he was in Albany, we rented a studio and we--it's similar to what we're doing now only was an hour on The Success Formula.  So it was my concept and I was talking to him and he was asking questions and that's another one of my products, is called, The Success Formula: Donna Satchell and Les Brown.
Story_ID: 394741
Speaker 1: All right so we were talking about this series of books.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Doug Smart had a, came up with this concept of this series of books that would focus on one specific area, so the first one is '303 Solutions to Developing the Leader in You' ['303 Solutions for Developing the Leader in You'] '303 Solutions to Dropping Stress and Finding the Balance' ['303 Solutions for Dropping Stress and Finding Balance'] and '303 Solutions to Accomplishing More in Less Time' ['303 Solutions for Accomplishing More in Less Time'].  So there's fifteen speakers in each book, and there's 303 solutions to each of these problems, or each of these areas.  And each of the solutions is either a quote or paragraph or a--several lines on how you can get better on this particular area, so those were the first three books I was involved in.  And then he came back with '303 Solutions to Boosting Creativity and Solving--' (unclear) excuse me, 'Solving Challenges' ['303 Solutions for Boosting Creativity and Solving Challenges'] and '303 Solutions to Living Your Goals--' 'Reaching Your Goals and Living Your Dreams' ['303 Solutions for Reaching Goals and Living Your Dreams'] and then '303 Solutions to Accum- to Communicating Effectively' ['303 Solutions for Communicating Effectively and Getting Results'].  Those are the six books that I'm involved in as a co-author.  Then I'm also involved in a book called 'The Power of Motivation,' and in that book we have nine speakers, and each speaker has a chapter on dealing with motivation.  So my s- my particular chapter is "Get Motivated, Keep Moving, Be a Success," and in that book we have two celebrity speakers, Wally Famous Amos [Wally Amos], from Famous Amos cookies and [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, so those are the books that I'm involved in.  And I'm looking to this year write a book under, on the subject of moti- professional, not professional speaking, public speaking 'cause I do a lot of public speaking programs 'cause I truly understand the fear that people have.  And, and I think it's, it's very interesting for me that public speaking was probably my biggest fear and I don't think that I ever had anything that was a bigger fear.  And most people are like, "Well what was the big fear about?" I don't know I guess even if I had to give a presentation in marketing in front of five people I was up for days in fear.  And during the time, when I was at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] probably at least on a quarterly basis I had to give some kind of presentation I was in fear of it.  So to take that from something that you hated doing to something that you love doing.  I have a lot of tips that I share with people, how they can get better about being a public speaker so I do that.  So I'm looking to create a book of all the information I know about getting better at being a public speaker, so that's one book.  And then I want to do a book on workplace success, how do you make the workplace a growing, rewarding experience?  So those are the--and then one on time management.
Story_ID: 394742
Speaker 1: Sounds like a future plan's in the works --
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I still do a lot of motivational speaking, I speak for a lot of corporations on workplace success and personal success, and the pro- training programs I do are usually a half day or a full day.  So that's the difference from the training programs and the speech, motivational speeches usually about forty-five minutes, an hour.  And work with different companies I'm doing something with Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] at the end of this month, I did something with Coca-Cola last year.  I still do work for the City of Atlanta [Georgia], after doing the change management training, they brought me back to do their customer service training, so I do that sporadically.  Then they brought me back to do their time management training, I do that.  On Monday I'm doing public speaking training for them, for one of their departments so their still one of my clients.  And then but it's not, it's not like a job so you know you work with them a couple of days this week a couple of days next week.  And the challenge is learning--for me, is learning how to market myself, learning how to actually have a business.  'Cause I never, it's not like something I'd ever wanted to do you know having a bus- no I'm gonna be a secretary and retire.  And then you're you know you're faced with putting together press releases, and doing all the things you need to do to run a business that I never thought I would ever do.  And there are days it is truly overwhelming, there are days you just sit there and go I can't, I can't even figure half of this out.  But I know that this is what I'm supposed to be doing.
Story_ID: 394743
Speaker 1: Do you know Dennis Kimbro [HistoryMaker Dennis Paul Kimbro]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I know Dennis Kimbro very well.  Yeah, in fact I have a story about Dennis Kimbro, when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] I had joined an organization called Black Newcomers Network, and I had been here about two years and they were doing their anniversary celebration.  So I'm on the planning committee for the anniversary celebration and they had always had a they had never had speaker for their anniversary celebration, so I'm sitting there I'm like we gotta have a motivational speaker and they're like huh, I said, yeah, yeah we gotta you know you get, you've gotta have a motivational speaker.  Now this is even before I knew anything about speaking and training, and there was a part of me and I remember thinking because I truly do believe people can change their lives I know that.  But I remember thinking at that point, oh I would never be a motivational speaker, but I can bring in one.  So I'm talking to them, and I'm saying we need to get either Dennis Kimbro or [HistoryMaker] Les Brown and they're like, Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell] you like you know you're from New York--well, if you want to do that, you can.  So that was the project, so I'm on this project so I call Le- this is before I met Les, so I call Les Brown's office, I find out about his schedule.  I call Dennis Kimbro, make a long story short, we ended up having Dennis Kimbro, as our keynote speaker that year.  And I still see him from time to time, he said, "You're still--?"  The last I, no not the last probably a couple years ago when I saw him, he was doing a program in Savannah [Georgia] and what happened was when I contracted him to be the speaker I actually ended up having dinner with him and his wife [Patricia McCauley Kimbro] and I got to--I wouldn't say that, I got to a point where like if I was at an event he'd look at me and go, "Do- do-, are you still at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]?" So he kind of recognized me so oh yeah, he's, he is a, incredible speaker, absolutely incredible.
Story_ID: 394744
Speaker 1: Donna [HistoryMaker Donna Satchell], when you look back over your life is there something that you would have changed?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Probably, but I think it, it's funny because being a speaker and trainer you get to a point when you start to realize that everything you've done has led to you a certain place.  So I could have said, wow I probably would have gone to college a lot earlier, but I motivate, I'm so motivating telling people I went to college [Westchester Community College, Valhalla, New York] when I was thirty-three.  It wouldn't have been as--my story wouldn't have as interesting as it I said well you know I went to, to college right after high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York].  The fact that--so I'm not sure if there's anything thing I would really change.  I think maybe I'd be a little bit more willing to step out earlier in my life but I think that has created part of who I am.  I probably would've--I don't know, that's a really good, it's a really good question.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's something to, to think about.
Story_ID: 394745
Speaker 1: Now since this information, your, your wonderful life story is gonna be shared for future generations, what message would you like to send to the future generation?
Speaker 2: What, what message, I think and it's funny 'cause sometimes a message can be so you know like everyone says that you know.  And I guess my message is that truly you can be whatever you want to be, that you truly can, that if you work hard it, it really from a motivational place.  Like one of my favorite, (unclear) we had talked quotes earlier, one of my other favorite quotes is by Albert Maslow [sic. Abraham Maslow], a psychologist who came up with Maslow's pyramid of needs I guess and I always keep this quote in my mind he says the history of men--the history of man and women are (unclear)--the history of the human race is men and women selling themselves short.  And I think that's true I think most of the time we don't think we're as good as we are.  We don't think we're as smart as we are, we don't think we're as pretty as we are.  And we sell ourselves short.  So think if there would be any message is find what's gonna give you joy.  And if you don't--or find your passion, if you can't find your passion, get passionate about finding your passion.
Story_ID: 394746
Speaker 1: Or how would you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, how would I like--want to be remembered, as someone who was encouraging, as someone who is motivating, as someone who is inspiring, as someone who saw the best in people, someone who found her passion and pursued it.
Story_ID: 394747
Speaker 1: And the legacy you'd like to leave behind?
Speaker 2: The legacy, when you say legacy, meaning--?
Speaker 1: What works do you want to accomplish that would be something that the future generations you know can look back and, and grab hold to?
Speaker 2: I think that's still evolving, I think, my, my life is one of evolution if you had spoken to me probably a year ago I wouldn't be talking about a lot of things I'm looking doing now.  I want to get into coaching, personal coaching.  Really help people get unstuck on a one on one basis.  One of the things I would like to leave behind is motivational material I've created under my own name as you know I think it's great having books that I've co-authored, but looking at some publications on my own.  And I think life for me is very much evolution.  I never thought I would be here.  If you'd come back and talked to me in two years or three years, there be something's I'll be talking about doing two years from now that I don't even know that I have an interest in.  Because I think part of life it's, it's, it's kind of like you, the best way to describe it is there's a door and you walk through that door because you think that door's gonna take you one place, so you walk through that door and you go, oh so I didn't know this was behind this door.  And you look that and you find that interesting, and you look at something else you go oh that sounds interesting.  But if you don't go through that door you doing know what other avenues or things are gonna open up for you.  So I think that's still, I think I'm still discovering that if someone to say truly like what is your truly legacy that you wanta leave.  I don't know if I've done that yet, I think in WATTS [Women Aspiring Together To Succeed], the women's group I have--we do we're still meeting, we've been meeting for seven years now.  We are still meeting, that's one of my great personal accomplishments.  So as part of my legacy could be taking this group into something that's more formalized, that becomes more of a non-profit group that empowers woman beyond just the thirty or forty women that come to our meetings.  We have probably about 150 women who are on our email list so maybe part of my legacy if you come back and ask me might be two years from now there might be a WATTS foundation and through that foundation I've finding ways to empower women.  I'm very much about empowering women.  I think if women, if, if there was any I guess not something I would have wanted to do differently in my life, but to understand my--I wouldn't say my power but to understand I could do more earlier in my life than later in my life.  But I think finding it later in my life is what makes part of my inspirational--the things I talk about.  So I think that's still evolving what my legacy would be I would say I don't know yet.
Story_ID: 394748
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, I think we've, one of the things I would talk about, and I would say that this, I wouldn't say this is a legacy as much as interesting to see where this is going to take me.  One of the things I've done through WATTS [Women Aspiring Together to Succeed] is we started doing treasure maps, if you familiar with the term treasure map, treasure mapping?
Speaker 1: Not really (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really, okay what it does it comes and this is, life is such as adventure, life is such a journey for me.  Years ago when I was in college I took a public speaking class 'cause I've always had this fear.  And this woman was talking about--never forget this, she was talking about treasure mapping, a treasure map is, is a board where you put picture up represent your goals and dreams, where do you want to be in the future.  And I remember just being amazed by the--interesting I thought the concept as interesting but I never did one.  In 2001, in January 2001, when my girlfriend and I were trying to figure out what we wanted to do for our WATTS meeting, this is years later I said, "Let's do treasure maps," she said, "What are they?"  So I start describing them, she said, "I've never done one." I said, "Neither have I."  So we started bringing women together every January to do their treasure maps.  And it is probably one of the most fascinating things I do because number one when I go to describe it to most, most--well, it's always women that I'd be talking with.  Talking to them they go, "Wow, that sounds great, why--," and just this last, last week, last Sun- Sunday a few days ago.  I had thirty women in here doing treasure maps laying out on these boards or in a book their pictures that represented their goals and dreams for this year and beyond, it is probably one of things that gives me the most joy to do.  Because most of these women have never--I would say half them had known about it half of that half had done it and probably half of them had never done it before.  And there were women we started the meeting at three o'clock, there were women here 'til 8:30, left my house.  So maybe part of my legacy is exposing particular I would say young girls to a process of thinking bigger about themselves.  About taking their goals and dreams and putting them on a board so they can see them every day.  That's how it would the process, the--how the process is supposed work, is you take a look you have this treasure map, as I said it's on a board or book and them you look it on an ongoing basis, and it helps you stay focused on your goals and dreams.  And the very first treasure map I ever did I had a picture of [HistoryMaker] Les Brown on there before I knew him.  And I have things I've done with him.  So maybe that's part of my legacy, maybe that's it, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we want to thank you so much for taking the time to do this interview. The future generations--you have you have just shared your life, the future generations and we really appreciate it.
Speaker 2: Well I have very honored to be selected to be part of this project, I I thank those you were involved in making the decision it is quite an honor.  When I look at the list of people that are involved in this it's quite an honor to to be selected and to be part of this, thank you.
Story_ID: 394749
Speaker 1: That's me as a little baby, that's December 20th, 1951 or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's it.  That's me and Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Horton Gay] at probably the Bronx Zoo I believe in, in New York [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's all I'm gonna say about (unclear).  Okay that's me and Gale, my sister, one Easter.  My mother [Jennie Richardson Campbell] had made those dresses for us.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's the house I lived in, in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It was red and white and was 123 South 1st Avenue in Mount Vernon.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next photo please, okay go ahead.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) that's me and Gale with my [maternal] grandfather [William Richardson].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Year?
Speaker 1: Oh, in Mount Vernon.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Oh I don't I don't remember the year.  Looks like I was probably about eight years old then.  Yeah I would say I looked like about eight.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me and Gale with my [maternal] grandmother [Euphima Davis Richardson] and I was probably around eight or nine then.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's my mother with my Aunt Merkel [ph.], and I think they might have been Jamaica.  But that's the two of them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead next.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, I believe she was in high school then.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's myself and a good girlfriend Janice Savoy [ph.] with Jacob Lawrence, the famous artist.  That was taken here in Atlanta [Georgia] at the High Museum [High Museum of Art].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 1: I--a couple of years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's myself and [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, and that was taken probably 2002. That was right after Motivational Monday.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me after a very long day working at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] at--we used to do these festivals.  And it was a Hispanic festival I was manning the booth.  So that's me with my Miss Clairol tee shirt on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.  What year was that the last one?
Speaker 1: I am not sure of the year, I would say probably 1990 or '91 [1991] for the last one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of myself and my mom, one of my favorite pictures we were at, she came to visit me--she was living in Texas, she came to visit me in New York [New York] and we were in front of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's a copy, oh--that's a picture of my grandmother, I don't know the year for it, I don't know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please, okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I was--one of my first, my first job at Mutual of New York [Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York; The MONY Group, Inc., New York, New York] years ago as a, a clerk.  I was out in the hallway of the human res- the floor was human resources and I was out in the hallway by the elevator.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother and--my mom and dad [J.C. Horton].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).  Okay good next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of when I graduated from college--oh--picture of when I graduated from college, when I got my bachelor's degree from Mercy College [Dobbs Ferry, New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures, this picture of myself, my mother's in the middle, my sister is on the far right, and my grandmother is in the center of the picture, or she's, yeah she's in the center.  I'm not sure of the year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture when I--that's a picture when I graduated from Ophelia DeVore Modeling school [Ophelia DeVore School of Self-Development and Modeling, New York, New York] in that me red, black and green dress I had made.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me, my sister and my niece, Imani [Imani Gay], and that was taken a couple of years ago.
