Story_ID: 47883
Speaker 1: Okay.  Uh, my name is Jason Hausen.  The date is May 25th, 2001.  I am conducting an interview with Senator William, Bill, Shaw.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Jason.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We need him to tell us that.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So I need his voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You want me--the whole thing?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ask him those--just Jason you ask him his name and spelling--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Your name sir.
Speaker 1: William Shaw [HistoryMaker William E. Shaw]. William "Bill" Shaw.
Speaker 2: The date?
Speaker 1: The date, May, uh, May 21st, 25th.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The city, state and co- uh, city--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Springfield, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Very good.
Speaker 1: In the capital.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now sir, uh, can you give us your name once again and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: William "Bill" Shaw.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M, S--uh, B-I-L-L, and Shaw, S-H-A-W.
Speaker 2: And uh...
Speaker 1: Take that S off of William.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, uh, nickname?
Speaker 1: Bill.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Birth date.
Speaker 1: Seven, thirty-one, thirty-seven [July 31, 1937].
Speaker 2: Age?
Speaker 1: Uh, fif- uh, sixty-three.
Speaker 2: And, uh, city of--city in which you were born.
Speaker 1: Hope, Arkansas.
Story_ID: 47884
Speaker 1: Okay now sir for us, just to kind of break the ice, I just want to ask you a few really basic questions.  We ask this of everybody.  Uh, no special significance but just to kind of, uh, get us started here.  Sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: All time.  Uh, any time.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well a dark color.  Mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Haven't had one in a long time.  So (laughter) it's hard to say.  New Orleans.  I'd like to go to New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: Um I believe in the John Kennedy philosophy.  "Those who seek power by riding the back of the tiger winds up inside."
Story_ID: 47885
Speaker 1: Okay sir, can you tell us a little bit about your, your parents, your childhood?  First can you tell us the names of your parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Uh, William McKinley Shaw and, Gertrude Shaw.  And, they were good parents.  They were basically share croppers, uh, in Arkansas.  And, I guess they stayed there until all of us were born.  And when I was about seven years old, we moved away.  And, we came to St. Louis [Missouri].  I moved to St. Louis and from St. Louis to, to Illinois.  Chicago.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: It was, uh, six of us altogether.  Five brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: And what... what are their names?
Speaker 2: The oldest one was name, Rufus Shaw, Eugene Shaw, Charles Shaw, Robert Shaw, William Shaw, and Bobbie Shaw, uh, Brown.
Story_ID: 47886
Speaker 1: You remember any incidents or memories from your childhood that still stand out today?
Speaker 2: Uh, other than, what our parents always told us that, yeah.   You be together and work together and try and stay together.  And they instilled that in us.
Speaker 1: As a youngster, uh, what did you see your future career to be?  What did you aspire to be?  What did you think you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, well I always liked, from a very young, uh, boy I always enjoyed politics.  And other... I saw people elected, at the age of about ten I guess.  I saw other elected people at the local level, being elected to public office and my parents were voting.  And, I always wanted to be that person that was running for office.  And felt that was important.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember the move from Hope Arpan... Arkansas to St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about it that was significant, uh, some of the sites you saw?  Some of the changes in environment that you witnessed?  Experienced?
Speaker 2: Well we ex- we experienced a, some--my father did.  In Texas, they wouldn't sell us any gas coming across, Texas there.  They wouldn't sell us any gas. I remember that.  And, we almost ran out of gas. And, that was basically it.  We cane from Arkansas by car to Missouri.
Speaker 1: And how long did you live in Missouri?
Speaker 2: Uh, about ten years I guess.
Speaker 1: So that would put you... About how old were you...
Speaker 2: About seventeen.
Speaker 1: About seventeen.  And so you came to, uh, came to Chicago [Illinois] as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school in Chicago.  Crane [Technical] High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Uh, when you were in St. Louis what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Vashon [High School].
Speaker 1: So, uh--
Story_ID: 47887
Speaker 1: And that's what really convinced me that I wanted to en- be in politics.  I tried to be a boxer there.  And a little bitty fellow knocked me out.  Well he almost knocked me out (laughter) but I was convinced that I needed something other than (laughter) than boxing.
Speaker 2: So you moved to Chicago [Illinois] at the age of seventeen.  And once you graduated from high school, where did you find yourself in terms of occupation?
Speaker 1: Well I had made a full time career out of politics by that time.  In, at that time I was a precinct captain and, just moving forward to help people.
Speaker 2: And this was the South Side of Chicago?
Speaker 1: That was the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then what was your next career move inside of politics?
Speaker 1: Well that was--well I probably went from job to job, and kept getting promoted and so forth.  And then it wasn't until later on that I ran for elective office.
Speaker 2: I see.  So what are the names of your children?
Speaker 1: Gina is the oldest.  Andre, Sean, and Melanie who is deceased.
Story_ID: 47888
Speaker 1: Okay let's talk a little bit about, uh, your career in politics.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now you actually have really a dual career in politics.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You are a state senator and you're also the mayor of Dolton, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now in each of these positions you have specific duties.  How would you compare the duties as state senator to those as being the mayor of a city?  Or village?
Speaker 2: Well it's a city.  The senator, you have to form coalitions to get things done.  As a mayor, you can order it done and it is done.
Speaker 1: And also as a state senator, you are the minority whip.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you explain to us exactly what that entails?
Speaker 2: That entails lining up votes for, uh, various issues.  Talking to the Democratic Members of the, of the senate on certain issues that's coming up for vote.  You know, in other words, trying to get the votes for the issues that affect our issues which is Democratic Issues.
Speaker 1: Now you're--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Or against them too.  Those issues that doesn't--that adversely affect 'em.
Speaker 1: Now your district actually, uh, is, uh, it sits a little bit on the South Side of Chicago and a little bit in the south suburbs. Now, now what types of issues are kind of specific to each of those areas?  Does that lead to some sort of conflict at times in terms of, uh, your constituents?
Speaker 2: Naw.  Uh, people say that but the issues are the same.  Uh, primarily in the suburbs, the same issues you have in the suburbs you have in the city.  Same issues you have in the city, you have in the suburb.  And, uh, those--the primary issue is funding for education.  In crime, uh, seniors' issues.  Those are the real issues and they exist in the city and in the suburbs.  And it's no different.  People like to alu- allude to that, that are trying create a difference.  But there isn't a lot of difference in those issues.  Because all those issues is, you're confronted with those issues daily.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other siblings that are involved in politics?
Speaker 2: My son.
Speaker 1: And, uh, what position is that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Uh the sibling's my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother [Robert Shaw] (laughter).  Uh, he's the county commissioner at the Board of Review.
Story_ID: 47889
Speaker 1: Now as, uh, as an Illinois Senator, you have been involved in redevelopment of historic Pullman District.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit more about that?  A little more detail?
Speaker 2: Well certainly I am a... I'm very big on preserving history.  And I think that, even though the history was not always good but we have to preserve it to make sure that we never get in that position again.  And the dollars that I've helped to put in there uh, to preserve that history and make sure that the next generation that follows myself and you have something that guide 'em, in terms of moving ahead in life.  And I think it's, uh, it's a very important thing that we preserve the history of, uh, of North Pullman as well as Pullman.  North Pullman is where A. Philip Randolph Center is.  And certainly when you talk about the Pullman Porters and all of that and what they went through in terms of trying to make a living.  And when didn't--and when they didn't want 'em to organize the labor unions and so forth.  And the sacrifices that they made.  Many of 'em got fired as the results of trying to organize the Labor Union.  And I think that our young people should know that.  And it should be preserved and I can't think of a better place to preserve it.  And where the Pullman car started and was built at.
Story_ID: 47890
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what significant events happened in your adult life?  It's a very... of course a very broad question...
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Anything that--I mean anything in your adult life that really stands out in terms of influencing you, uh, influencing your life.
Speaker 2: Well I think that, uh not as an adult but as a child I, I think, uh, my father and my mother had more influence on my life probably than any other single thing.  I look at... look back at what they had been through.  And didn't--could barely make a living.  And I never wanted to be in that position.  And I didn't want other people in that position.  And that's why I sought the political route, is to try and do whatever I could to enhance other people's life.  As mine had been enhanced from the basic guidance that I received from my parents.
Story_ID: 47891
Speaker 1: Now you both, you served both in the Illinois [General Assembly] House of Representatives and the Senate.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us some of the similarities and differences in the upper house from the lower house?
Speaker 2: Well ten years in the, in the lower house, you're glad to get away from there.  But they are both good bodies.  And certainly, you have to put a larger coalition together in the, in the, uh, Illinois House because you're dealing with a hundred and eighteen members.  And in the Senate, you're dealing with fifty-nine members.  So you need thirty votes in the Senate and, uh, sixty in the house.  And some time, even in the house it's harder... it's just as hard to get the sixty and in the senate certainly it's, it's almost the exact Congress to get thirty some time.  So it, it's very sim- uh similar.  But the, the--it's more the, I would say it's more decorum in the Senate than it is in the House.  As you probably noticed today you walk around.  If you were, (laughter) if you were here when they was in session, you wonder how anybody realize what's happening over there.  And, but in the Senate, you don't have that same, I guess noise level that you would have in the House.  But they, they're all are cognizant of what they're doing and when a bill hit the floor or the board, and they immediately recognize it, if they're opposed to the bill or if they're for the bill they immediately recognize that. And it's just come by... just being involved in the process.
Story_ID: 47892
Speaker 1: What legislative committees do you, do you currently serve on?
Speaker 2: Energy and environment, local government and transportation.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a little bit of deta- a little bit of, little bit of detail about each of those committees?
Speaker 2: Well the, uh, energy and environment regulates all of the utility, utilities in Illinois.  That's the... what we were just doing this evening.  Is, is doing a rewrite because our utilities act sunsets, uh, this year.  So we have to do a rewrite on that.  The--and that's what energy and environment does.  Over at local government all legislation that effect local government comes through that committee.  Most times.  And certainly that's why I would want to sit on that committee because I'm very interested in local government.  And being a mayor, it's, it's very important to me to see what legislation is coming through there.  And I sit there on that committee and sometimes introduce legislation that comes through that committee.  And sometimes stop it when it adverse to the cities and villages.  And that's important. I said transportation and licen- that's the other committee I sit on.  And I sit on the License Committee because various groups in the state, social workers just for an example, barbers, beauticians, all of those license come through that committee.  And any person, agency, that want to be licensed, would come through that committee.  And think that could be very helpful to many people in the ... in my community.
Story_ID: 47893
Speaker 1: So you start the Illinois General Assembly for quite some time.  But we're working on a--we're actually working on a project where we're documenting the one hundred plus year history of African American serving in the Illinois General assembly, in the House of Representatives and in the Senate.  Were there any--did you have any predecessors in either house that inspired you, influenced you, representatives or senators prior to you becoming a legislator or even during your tenure in the House or Senate?
Speaker 2: I think that, when you look at legislators, even though we, we have served the last nineteen years together, but Senator Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] is probably one of the outstanding members of the Illinois General Assembly of all times.  Because he recognize your process and he recognize what the process supposed to do for people.  And he also recognizes how to get it done.  And he is one who don't accept rhetoric over substance.  And I subscribe to that philosophy.  Certainly it's a lot of rhetoric and many time politicians, uh, go out and blow out a lot of hot air.  But it's no substance to what they are saying.  And in this body, you have to, you have to look at the subsidy part of it.  And, it's not emotional, down here.  You set those aside and what is this legislation gotta do to benefit the local community rather than giving 'em a lot of hot air.  And I think that certainly I--he's impacted my legislative career.  And I think that, probably all the members of this body, when they first come here, uh, they're idealistic in some sense.  But as time go on, certainly you should... one should develop and be able to separate the, the rhetoric from the substance.  And, I always appreciate that and we sit down and talk many, many times about things... uh, legislation that we have sponsored together here and what's coming up and so forth.  And, I enjoy that.
Story_ID: 47894
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well.  Let's see.  Any plans for the future in terms of your political career?
Speaker 2: Well if you're talking about my running for some other office, I don't have any intentions of running for any other office.  I've--when th- when I finish this term, I would have been down here for twenty years.  And, uh, that's not to say that I'm leaving.  Uh, certainly, uh, I think that one should never say never.  But, I'm amenable to training young people and open the door of opportunity for them.  And I would like to see particularly more African Americans involved in this process.  Because it's a good process.  And uh certainly they can be in a position to help our people.  And that's what I'd like to see.  But, old people can't stay around always and you have to make room for young people.  And I'm not ready to do that yet but (laughing), but I look forward to the day that some youngster will come along and want to take my place.
Story_ID: 47895
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let's see.  I know you're anxious to uh, get back to the constituency of, up in Dalton.  So I want to just kind of leave just a couple of basic questions.  Well not really questions so much but, just a kind of a sum up.  How would you, how would you want... how would you want to be remembered?  What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Is uh, basically what I've done for people.  And every day of my life that I get up, I try and help somebody. And when I'm gone, I don't want people to get up and talk about, and tell lies.  I want 'em to talk, tell the facts about what it is that I've done.  And I think that whether you dealing with bringing people into government and helping 'em stay in there or whether it's helping seniors or helping youngsters, I think my life is exemplary for that.  And this is what I enjoy doing.  And I've done this all my life and I guess I'll do it the rest of it.  And that's the way I want people to remember me.
Speaker 1: Anything else to add sir?
Speaker 2: Other than the fact that I want to do as many years as I've done it, I want to do as many years in the future.  That means (laughter) I don't plan on leaving soon.
Story_ID: 47896
Speaker 1: Well than you very much Senator Shaw for--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We got a few minutes, just a couple minutes of tape, like two questions?
Speaker 1: Two questions--
Speaker 2: Go ahead, we'll deal with that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Keep talking to him but I, I was just curious.  I know you said that, that you had started out as a boxer and then you, you--
Speaker 2: (Laughing).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And then you decided politics might be the better way to go.  But when was your first... when was you first run for office and how did you come to do that and what was that like?
Speaker 2: I ran in my first elective office was 1982.  And uh, I ran for the [Illinois] house.  And I won.  It was very exciting.  And coming to Springfield [Illinois] and I felt that as though that I could make a difference.  And I feel as though that I have.  You know you wouldn't have a transplant ordinance, a law in this state.  Organ transplant if it wasn't for Senator Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] and myself.  I sponsored it in the [Illinois] House and he sponsored it in the Illinois Senate.  Uh, Chicago State University wouldn't... probably wouldn't have a track there today.  We put the track there.  We gave 'em the money to put the track there in 1983.  And these are just some of the stuff.  Black history in the schools.  You wouldn't be able--even though some school districts don't teach it.  But this is something that legislation that I've sponsored to make sure that history is remembered and for youngsters to know about black history in--for it to be taught in the schools as a part of the curriculum.  Uh, this is the kind of stuff that you do and, and I think it's of substance.  And uh, because certainly I, I have to say that I admire the, uh, the Jewish Community because they always make people remember the Holocaust.  But sometime too many of our own people want to forget the past.  Don't want to remember the past.  And sometime we have that with our educated people in our community.  They don't re- want to remember slavery.  They don't want to remember sharecropping. They don't want to remember none of that.  And I think that is bad for young people who are coming up.  I'd love to see a museum set up with all of this in it.  And some day if I'm in the legislature long enough, that's going to happen.  And I envision that.  Because I think it's important to young people to put 'em on the right path.  And I... if you don't remember your past, certainly you have no guidance.  And I just think that's what we should be doing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's the end of the tape.  Unless we put another one in.
Speaker 2: That's good enough! (Laughing).  That's good enough.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That is all.  Just... We're gonna sit here just for thirty seconds.
