Story_ID: 664505
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Beverly Lyn Smith [HistoryMaker Bev Smith].  B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, L-Y-N, only one N, Smith--everybody knows that, S-M-I-T-H, just like the cough drop.
Speaker 1: All right.  And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, four, nineteen forty-three [March 4, 1943], Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Allegheny County.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: That is a very good question, it depends on what day of the week.  I'm an independent entrepreneur.  Actually, I'm a national talk show host.  I own my own company, and then I am in a company with Rivers industry [River Industries].  We do diversity training, we do self-esteem workshops.  I'm a life coach,
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That is such a good question.  June 9, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: I'm going to be like B. Smith after a minute, we're in my house in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (laughter).
Story_ID: 664506
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that are sort of like a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first, first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And what is it?
Speaker 1: Yellow batter cake with chocolate icing.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: Pretty--color, I would say no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, really.  I'm kind of eclectic, it depends on the mood I'm in.  I may go through a period where I like all black.  I would say black.  If I do anything, my color is black.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: I like fall, I love fall.  I love the transition of fall, I like the weather, I like the way it smells.  And I love the fact that you can get up in the morning and it's cool; go to work and it's warm; and come back at night and leave your window open, unless you live in the inner city with the stuff that's going on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Nassau, Bahamas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: My favorite saying that I'm known for, both nationally and internationally is: Stand up, be counted, get involved.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 664507
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [John Sloan] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first, and then we'll put them together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Isabelle, I-S-A-B-E-L-L-E, Doris, her middle name, D-O-R-I-S, Sloan, S-L-O-A-N, that's her married name.  Her maiden name was Jones [Isabelle Jones Sloan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is November 2, 1921, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace her side of the family, and what were they doing, what kind of occupations, or what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: My mother has a fascinating life.  My mother was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  And my, her biological father, was a millworker, and he worked in the coalmines.  He developed lung disease, and he died when she was eleven months old.  And she was taken back to her mother's ancestral home, which is Danville, Virginia.  And my mother, from the age of eleven months until nine years of age, lived in Danville, Virginia on a pig farm.  They supplied pork to the [U.S.] military in Virginia from my great-grandfather's farm.  And they had pork, chickens, they had a few cows, and a few sheep.  That was in Danville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can go back to my mother's grandmother's mother. That's as far back as I can go on her side.  I can go a little bit further--
Speaker 1: So, that would be your great-great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: My great-great-grandmother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, great-great-grandmother.  And what, was she enslaved, or did she--
Speaker 2: She was a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They're descendants--as a matter of fact, the property that my grandmother [Katie Thomas], my mother's biological mother, was raised on was actually property that was given to them at the end of slavery in the family.  So, they are one of the few African Americans who received forty acres and a mule.
Speaker 1: Now, did they get it directly from the owner of the--or--
Speaker 2: They lived and worked on the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother's, my, let's see--my mother's grandmother's mother, they worked on the farm, all of them from slavery on.  And so, when slavery was over, the owner of the plantation that they lived on gave them the land.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, was there any relationship, any biological relationship to that owner at all?
Speaker 2: Not that we talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not that we talk about.  And seriously, my father's side of the family talks about it.  My mother's side of the family likes to think pure, pure African, Ethiopian, and Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so are there any stories about, you know, that period of time, when Reconstruction--
Speaker 2: Oh, tons of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, African Americans were called coloreds, of course.  And it was very dangerous.  My grandfather, my great-great-grandfather, was able to go anywhere he wanted, because he had a reputation of being a man who would shoot you and kill you.  So, if the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came to my great-great-grandfather's house, they would be met with opposition.  And so, there were loads and loads of stories.  My grandmother is the oldest of five children.  One of her sisters had thirteen.  And they built their own church in Danville, Virginia.  And so, my uncles and cousins who I came to know and feel were--for a long time I thought they were my mother's brothers and sisters--because they were all at that age.  They used to go to the Pentecostal church that the family built.  And then they would be there all day long, and they would start shouting.  And the story is that they would shout, and then they would jump out of the window.  And then they would go to the after hours club while the church continued.  (Laughter) And that was the story they told, dozens of stories.  My grandfather had a drinking problem that was quite beneficial, because he made moonshine, along with pigs and cows and all of that.  So, whenever he would drink, he probably was his best customer.  So, whenever he would drink, he would take his rifle, tell my great-grandmother to get my--called my mother, the baby, and he would march her to my grandmother's sister's house in Danville, Virginia.  And they would stay there until the next morning, when he was through with his alcohol and his friends, and then he'd bring them back to the house.
Story_ID: 664508
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We used to go there [Danville, Virginia] every summer.  It was where we went for fun.  We stayed in the original house, no lights.  They built two.  There was a modern house besides the original house that my [maternal] grandmother [Katie Thomas] lived in, and that my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was taken to.  It had the same stove, there was the creek where we used to put the watermelons and the cantaloupes.  And then they had a box in the ground, which was truly the icebox, where they put the salt and the meat, and they put it in the ground.  And we used an outhouse.  That was our summer vacation.  We thought it was wonderful, because you would walk--we all stayed there, like, it was a camp.  And then, of course, if we wanted the modern things, we'd go to the modern built house.
Story_ID: 664509
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what did your mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] say about growing up?  What did she say it was like growing up?
Speaker 2: Until she was nine years old, she did not go to school.  She had not seen electric lights, she had not seen indoor toilets.  And my grandmother remarried.  And my grandfather, which is the only grandfather that I knew, worked in the mill; had a new car.  And in those days, an African American man that worked in the mill had a little money.  And so, he decided that that was my mother's child.  My mother was--that was my grandmother's child.  And he married my grandmother, and he was going to make my grandmother's child his child, and that's exactly what he did.  And so my mother did not come to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania--after she was born here and left--until she was nine years old.  She thought that her grandmother was her mother, and that her mother was her sister.  And she used to call her Sister Kate [Katie Thomas].  So, when she moved, she moved with Sister Kate and Daddy Len--that's what she called--my grandfather's name was Lenwood [Lenwood Thomas].  And every child has a derivative of his name and their name.  I'm Beverly Lyn [HistoryMaker Bev Smith], my daughter is Heather Lyn [Heather Williams]; my brother is Lenwood [Lenwood Sloan].  We all have some form of my grandfather's name.  That's the only grandfather I knew.  And so, he taught my mother how to read, how to write, how to recognize lights, how to cut on a light.  She was fascinated with the lights.  And she used to cut them on and flick them on all the time, because she'd never seen indoor plumbing, she'd never see electric lights.  She'd never seen an outdoor light.  Like the street lights--when she was nine years old she never--so my grandfather, who escaped, you might say, the mundane segregated Washington, D.C., hopped a train and rode the train for a long, long time until he settled in Pittsburgh.  He taught her--he quit school in the third grade, but he taught my mother how to read, how to write, and how to add and subtract and divide before she went to school, so that she could catch up and not be ridiculed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, she was able to join her class, I mean, her peers in school?
Speaker 2: Not right away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my grandfather was determined that he would teach her how to do all of that.  And of course, he did.  And that was what he did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, did your mother finish high school?
Speaker 2: Not only finished high school, but she went back to college; she has an associate's degree.  She had her own company, a catering service.  She was an assistant to the dean of students at Pitt university [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  She came a long way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did she finish high school?
Speaker 2: She finished high school here in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  She graduated from Schenley High School.
Speaker 1: Oh, Schenley, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Schenley High School.  And she went to college--
Speaker 2: She went to Allegheny community college [Community College of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And got her associate's degree.  And she took courses at Pitt while she was there acting as an assistant to the dean of students.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, she did all right for someone who hadn't been to school--
Speaker 2: She sure did.
Speaker 1: --until she was nine.
Speaker 2: She sure did, she sure did.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm, I want to go to your father's [John Sloan] side--
Speaker 2: One thing about my mother that I want people to know, is my mother not only was self-taught, but my mother believed--she was a true southern woman, is, because my mother will be ninety-three this year, true southern woman.  And she believed in curtsying, so we did that.  Piano lessons, Sunday school clothes that you took off when you came home and put your play clothes--she believed in reading.  The story goes that when I was born, she handed me a book to read.  And when my brother [George Sloan] was born, exactly I think nine and a half months later, I used to read to him.  And I was only, not even a year older than him.  But they thought I was reading.  I really memorized, (laughter) and the book was upside down.  But my mother wanted all of her children to read, because she didn't have a chance to.  And so, that was something that we did from the time we were born.
Story_ID: 664510
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you more about growing up, but I want to go to your father's side, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is John Wesley Sloan [John Sloan], S-L-O-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is February the 15th, 1922.  He used to like to say he married an older woman [Smith's mother, Isabelle Jones Sloan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Arkansas, so the story goes.  There are about five different stories, so we're not quite sure.  And then he moved to Carthage, Arkansas.  Then he moved to Ohio.  And we're not quite clear which part of Ohio it was.  Because, and as the story continues, you'll understand why.  And then they moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to Ludlow Street [ph.], in an area called the Hill District.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the famous Hill District--
Speaker 2: Yes, he's the oldest of ten.
Speaker 1: --celebrated by August Wilson in his plays.
Speaker 2: And everyone else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: And he lived next door to a club that used to be an exclusive black club.  It was called the Loendi Club [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And oddly enough, someone my color was not welcome in that club.  And it was--
Speaker 1: It was called the what, called the?
Speaker 2: Loendi, L-O-E-N-D-I.
Speaker 1: Loendi, okay.
Speaker 2: And I had my wedding reception there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, so what is the story about his origins?  Carthage, Arkansas or not, then they moved to Ohio, and they--
Speaker 2: And then they moved here.  My grandmother's father [Thomas Moore] was Irish.  He was an illegal immigrant who left Ireland with five of his brothers, because they killed a Protestant, and they were being chased.  And so, for some reason, they settled in Arkansas, the Moores--because my grandmother [Molly Moore Sloan] was a Moore.  And he met a woman who was half Native American and half African; I don't how you take the half.  But her father was Native American and her mother was an African, African slave, and they married.  So, when they married, they--then she was born.  And it was, it's just a whole lot of things, because they don't really talk about the Moores too much, because they were hunted by the police.  And so, they settled in--he married my grandmother's mother, and she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they're Irish.  My brother [Lenwood Sloan] has traced the whole history of the black and Irish, designed a course, and teaches it every February at the University of Ireland in Dublin [sic.]--about blacks and Irish--and about the race riot between blacks and Irish in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the 1863 draft riots, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, he teaches all of that.  And he can trace our lineage from the Irish side all the way back to those dates.
Story_ID: 664511
Speaker 1: Now, he's--so, I'm going to ask you about your siblings later then, I'll just save it for then.  But he's a history teacher then at--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no--
Speaker 1: No, he's not?
Speaker 2: No, but that's what he does.  Actually, we are a lot of different things.  Because my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] and father [John Sloan] always taught us that, all right, you lose a job--my brother was the film commissioner for Pennsylvania.  Prior to that, he was the director of arts and tourism for Pennsylvania. Prior to that, he was the director of arts and tourism in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Prior to that, he was--this is my younger brother--he was the, in the National Endowment for the Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in charge of the money for the national endowment, the grant department.  So, he's done a lot of different things.  And he is Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nominated, he's done plays.  His last play, 'Three Blacks and Three Whites in a Traveling Minstrel Show' [sic. 'Three Black and Three White Refined Jubilee Minstrels'] performed on the Elizabeth [ph.] before the ship was docked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he's very well known in the arts.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Leni, L-E-N-I, short for Lenwood Sloan, S-L-O-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my baby brother.
Story_ID: 664512
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, back to your father [John Sloan]. So they came through Ohio.  Do you know where they lived in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Now, there's some people in Columbus [Ohio]--some people say Columbus.  Some people say Youngstown [Ohio], because my mother's [Isabelle Jones Sloan] family has folks in Youngstown.  And we still have relatives in the Columbus, Ohio area on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Canonsburg, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's all coming back to me as we're talking about it.
Speaker 1: Canonsburg, PA--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then finally Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: And then finally Pittsburgh.  And my grandmother [Molly Moore Sloan] met my grandfather [George Sloan], my father's father, whose people were Ethiopian.  And they married and they had ten children, of which my father was the oldest.  So, my father is Ethiopian, Native American and Irish.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about--because you don't find many Ethiopians in the United--not in those days.  That was before Haile Selassie's government toppled.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how they came?
Speaker 2: Yes, they came illegally also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He and his brother.  As a matter of fact, we don't know where they are.  We don't know where my father's--and so, when we go somewhere and we hear the name Sloan, we're always interested in the history of those people, because we're trying to find. Last year, we had a family reunion on the Moore side, which is what my grandmother was.  And so, all of the relatives that are related on my grandmother's side, it's my father's side, they all came.  And so, the stories continued.  But most of the elders have died.  I find myself and a few of my cousins and my aunts as the oldest in the family now.  Our relatives lived--on both sides of the family--my relatives lived for a long time, but my father died in his eighties.  And so, that was relatively young for his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, the Ethiopian influence came through in your father's grandparents?  Well, your father's grandparents, or--?
Speaker 2: My father's, father's father--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was Ethiopian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he's Ethiopian.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Grandfather on your father's side, okay.
Speaker 2: So, my great-grandfather was Ethiopian.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, that would have been in 19--well, it should be--
Speaker 2: Early--
Speaker 1: --around the turn of the century, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, early '20s [1920s], '30s [1930s], yeah.  The interesting thing is that my mother's side of the family and my father's side of the family have Ethiopian blood.  We're just discovering this as the history is told.  But there seems to be on both sides of the family--because of the, some of the things that they would now call criminal that were ways that people made money--selling moonshine--there seemed to be some secrecy--don't tell.  And on my father's side of the family, the Moore side, which is the Irish side, the fact that they killed someone and left illegally, Ireland, to come to the United States. That was quiet all of my life.  I didn't discover that until my brother went looking for our history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Grandpa Moore [Smith's paternal great-grandfather, Thomas Moore], to tell you the truth, we never thought about him being white.  He was just Grandpa Moore.  Because in those days, I didn't know any black people that didn't have white folks in their family somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, your father comes to Pittsburgh with his family, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: His parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now, what--
Speaker 2: He was born here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, what did his parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: They were un-educated.  My grandfather was in World War I [WWI].  Came out of the hospital and went into the mill, contracted tuberculosis, and lived in the veterans hospital [Veterans Administration Medical Center Aspinwall Division, Aspinwall, Pennsylvania] until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, your grandmother was left to try to raise the family by herself?
Speaker 2: Ten children while he was in the hospital, which was very interesting, because my grandmother was not educated.  But she knew enough to write to Mrs. Roosevelt.  And she wrote a letter, which is in our family; my aunts have the letter.  My dad had it, and now my aunts have the letter.  And I think my brother may have confiscated the letter from one of my aunts.  But she wrote a letter to Eleanor Roosevelt.  And she said, "I have these children, and I can't feed them."  My father was told that he had to be the head of the house.  And so, he had to quit school.  And he quit school in the twelfth grade, and he hated it, hated it.  He wanted to be educated, and he wanted to be a lawyer.  And so my father, all of my life, that he lived, read law books--any book that I could get him from the library, any book that he could get himself.  He read law books, because that's what he wanted.  But what he had to do is go out and buy and find a way to make food.  And so, when my grandmother wrote the letter to Mrs. Roosevelt, she said, "Someone has to help me feed these kids."  And Mrs. Roosevelt paid a visit to 18 Ludlow Street [ph.] in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and brought food to my father's family.
Speaker 1: Wow, now was this documented in the paper or anything?  It seems like it would be a celebrated event (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had a bunch. Now, Lenwood [Lenwood Sloan] would know, because Lenwood found all of this stuff out.  These were stories that we heard.  We didn't, all of our life we just took them as the gospel.  But my younger brother went out and actually started looking for some of the papers.  But the story has been told forever and a day.  And the letter that she wrote, and the letter that Mrs. Roosevelt wrote back, had been in my father's Bible until he died.
Story_ID: 664513
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [John Sloan] ever have a chance to go to school, or did he--
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: Jus- okay.
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: So, what was his--but he became a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was educated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was educated.  He had to quit in the twelfth grade.  My father was six foot, six and a half inches tall. You would never know it, because I'm short.  But he was six foot, six and a half inches tall.  And in those days, they were poor.  And so, all he wore was short pants, and he hated that.  And he had to quit.  And he would go down to what they called the Strip District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  It's where the trucks would come in and load up for the vegetables.  Every city has that.  So, the hotels and the restaurants would come down to the Strip District and get a--and my father made friends with the truck drivers, and they would drop things off on the ground.  And my father and my two uncles would pick them up.  And that's how they would get food for the day for their family.  So, daddy spent a great deal of his time trying to make a living for his family, which was his sisters and brothers and mother [Molly Moore Sloan].  And then later, for us.  But that time, he had become a skilled laborer.  And my father was one of the organizers of the black union here in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Local 11 [International Hod Carriers' Building and Common Laborers' Union of America Local 11].  The rules and everything were written on the paper on the table in my kitchen.  And my father was asked to go testify before Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] in Washington, D.C. when he was the attorney general, about corruption in the predominantly white construction union.  And my father got on the train here in Pittsburgh at the Pennsylvania Station, and he went into Washington, D.C., and there were some hoodlums waiting for him.  They beat him.  They beat him terribly.  I can close my eyes and see my father.  And they told him he was not to go near Robert Kennedy, and they put him back on the train.  My father came home, he changed his clothes.  My mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] mended his wounds.  Two of my brothers--my uncles, Uncle George [George Sloan] and Uncle Ernie [Ernest Sloan], got their guns, and my father went back to Washington, D.C.  He could not testify before Robert Kennedy, because the hearing was over.  But he had a private meeting with Robert Kennedy.  Fast forward, I was a friend of the Kennedys.  I've been to the Kennedy compound, and there's a picture right now in my office of me and Ethel Kennedy [Ethel Skakel Kennedy].  And there's a picture that my mother has of me with Ethel Kennedy--with Jacqueline Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] and John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  So, here my father, who was beaten and not allowed to testify, I stayed in the home of the family of the man, and campaigned for him for president when he ran for president.  My parents were very involved politically; that's where I get it from, and socially.  We were in all the marches.  I've been the first black hired by United Parcel Service, the first black hired in Lerners department store [Lerner Stores; New York and Company], the first black this, first black that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to get to that.  But, now what was the name of the union your father--
Speaker 2: Local 11.
Speaker 1: Local 11, of the, of what--?
Speaker 2: It was construction workers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: African American union.  But they called it the black labor union, Local 11.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there's a young man who my father gave a job to when he came out of prison, by the name of Nate Smith.  And Nate is oftentimes credited with putting the plan together for unions that was a model.  But my father did that on our kitchen table.  I know, because I had an Underwood typewriter, and I typed up a lot of the things that they did.
Story_ID: 664514
Speaker 1: So, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father [John Sloan] was extremely handsome.  My mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan]--because she was in the South and because she would, didn't read when she first came here--was very shy.  My father took a liking to my mother right away.  But my mother was frightened by my father.  Yeah, because he was handsome, and all the girls wanted him.  And she felt that she wasn't pretty, and she was a southern girl, and she was quiet, although an A student after she started school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, they met in college?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: --in high school.
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: This is at--
Speaker 2: I came about the same time the wedding did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was something that no one talked about either (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Schenley.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they met at Schenley High School?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And they were absolutely not supposed to be together.  My grandparents [Katie Thomas and Smith's step-grandfather, Lenwood Thomas] on my mother's side, who I closest to, were Baptists and Masons.  And you know--
Speaker 1: Pentecostals don't--
Speaker 2: Pentecostals don't associate with them, and they were Pentecostal.  Now, we had Pentecostals on my mother's side of the family, because my grandmother's sisters and brothers, they built a church in Danville, Virginia.  And they were Pentecostal.  But Baptists usually didn't associate with Pentecostal in those days.  Now, you can't tell the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in those days, and furthermore, my father was raised in the lower part of the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and my mother was raised in what they called Sugar Top [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what she did.
Story_ID: 664515
Speaker 1: So your parents met at Schenley High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, at first your mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was afraid of him?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Well, he was from the wrong side of the tracks, actually.  And his parents, well, his mother [Molly Moore Sloan] felt the same way about us, about my mother's side of the family.  They were Baptists, they weren't Pentecostal.  And they didn't do it the right way.  They were kind of like heathens.  None of my father's [John Sloan] family goes like this, but, that's the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it they would have met in the mid-'40s [1940s]?  This was about the end of the, or the middle of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they were in school and everything like that.  And my father had a job after school.  And then of course after he was made by my grandmother to quit school, he would go to the job.  And then he would sneak up to my mother's house when she got out of school; he would walk her home.  And my grandparents [Katie Thomas and Smith's step-grandfather, Lenwood Thomas] weren't there, and she wasn't supposed to have any company.  I'm the company (laughter).
Story_ID: 664516
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were born in '43 [1943]?
Speaker 2: I was born in '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  So, now did your, did your father [John Sloan] serve in, in the [U.S.] Army, or was he drafted (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in CC camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because my--
Speaker 1: Community Conservative Corps [sic. Civilian Conservation Corps].
Speaker 2: He wanted to go to the [U.S.] military, but my grandmother needed him at home.  So, he joined the corps.  And once again, my grandmother, who was un-educated, Grandma Sloan [Molly Moore Sloan], with her stern look, contacted the people that she knew and kept my father out of the military that way, and he joined the CC camps.  And they cleaned the streets--you know what the CC--conservation, they called it.  But really what they were was street cleaners and all that, according to my dad.  He hated it.
Speaker 1: They did a lot of manual labor.  They were building roads (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Um-hm, um-hm that's exactly what they did, yeah.
Story_ID: 664517
Speaker 1: So now who, where, who did they live with?  Did they live, live with your mother's family, or, or?
Speaker 2: When my parents got married?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was twenty-one.  My mother had graduated from high school [Schenley High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and they were dating.  And she was going to beautician school, she was going to open up a shop.  That's always what she wanted to do, she wanted to have her own business.  Because she came from a family--agribusiness.  They had stores, my mother's side of the family.  And so, she wanted to have her own business.  So, she went to beautician school.  And then I came along, and that changed everything.
Speaker 1: Now, was she going through any like, Annie Malone or Madam Walker [Madam C.J. Walker], or--
Speaker 2: No.  Here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] they had the Ellerene, the Ellerene Beauty School [ph.], and that's where my mother went.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Which was later changed to Ideal Beauty School [ph.], which is where I went.
Speaker 1: Now, is Ellerene spelled, E-L-L-E-R-I-N--
Speaker 2: E-N-E.
Speaker 1: E-N-E.
Speaker 2: Ellerene.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's defunct, it became the Ideal Beauty School.  And later, it became Evelyn--what was Miss Evelyn's [ph.] name?  I can't remember that far.  But mommy went to beautician school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so, she became a beautician?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, she didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was having children too fast.  The first four, we are a year and a half apart.  But my brother [George Sloan] and I are less than a, less than a year apart.
Story_ID: 664518
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's talk about them for--tell me about your siblings, from the ol- you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: And, you know--
Speaker 2: Next comes my brother George, George Wesley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wesley is my father's [John Sloan] middle name.  And George is my grandfather [George Sloan], my father's father.  So, he's named George Wesley Sloan [George Sloan].  George was the first black salesman to work for Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] when they owned KDKA.  And he was the first one hired for KDKA Radio [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and he represented the stars at that time, a lot of the people that were on the radio.  And he became one of the first black salesmen here in the City of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to sell radio time for Westinghouse.  And later, he went to the Petrie public sales firm [ph.], and all of that, as the first black, actually.
Speaker 1: KDKA, I mean is the first radio station in the country.
Speaker 2: I was on it, yes.
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty [1920]--
Speaker 2: That's when it--
Speaker 1: --the very first one.
Speaker 2: Can you hear me, California?  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), I'm going to put that down here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: And he was the first black.  So, they've been around since 1920, and never had any--
Speaker 2: Well, they--
Speaker 1: --blacks.
Speaker 2: Isn't that amazing?  And then we're talking about the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's when it was, the early '70s [1970s].  And all of that time--
Speaker 1: Fifty years.
Speaker 2: --there were no blacks.  The blacks that worked at KDKA worked as the help.  They were the janitors, they cleaned the building.  There were no black cameramen.  As a matter of fact, I went to work for KDKA, and we were the first wave of blacks to begin working at KDKA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the next, after George is--
Speaker 2: Cookie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her real name is Doris, D-O-R-I-S, Jean, J-E-A-N [Doris Sloan Palacios].  The Jean comes from my father's sister, Jean [ph.].  The Doris is my mother's [Isabelle Jones Sloan] middle name, Sloan.  Her name now is Palacios.  She married a guy from El Salvador.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a genius.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: She just retired as the director of human services in Virginia Beach [Virginia].  She's the person that would handle the welfare for the city, the floods and all that kind of stuff.  And then of course, she was in Dayton [Ohio].  And then she was here in Pittsburgh as the director of the YWCAs [Young Women's Christian Association] for the greater Pittsburgh area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And prior to that, she was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as an assistant in the housing department [Office of Housing and Community Development; Division of Housing and Community Development] after she graduated from Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, she's the same Cookie that was in Dayton that you were describing--
Speaker 2: That's it, the same person.
Speaker 1: --working with housing loans--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.  Okay, and who comes next?
Speaker 2: After Cookie, comes Lenwood [Lenwood Sloan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  L-E-N-W--
Speaker 2: L-E-N-W-O-O-D, Otis, O-T-I-S.  He's named after my mother's, one of my mother's favorite cousins, Otis Sloan [ph.].
Speaker 1: And he's, he's into history, but he's not an historian professionally, right?
Speaker 2: He is not.  But then he fell into it as the director of arts and tourism for New Orleans [Louisiana] for San Francisco [California], and for Pennsylvania.  He later became the film commissioner here in Pennsylvania, too.  So, he's had a lot of hats.  But his--from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], his degree was in arts and theater.  And so, he became interested in theater and in writing plays.  He did 'Voodoo Macbeth,' which he was nominated for an Emmy Award [sic.].  And Keith David, the famous television star.  And the young woman whose name, why can't I think of her name?  She was on 'Law and Order,' and she played the coroner.  Oh, why can't I think of her name?  Evelyn Tunie's daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What in the heck is her last? Tunie.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tamara.
Speaker 2: Tamara Tunie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: A little bird told us.
Speaker 2: A little bird told us.
Speaker 1: Yes, all right.  So, he's--and of course you were talking about his avocational mastery of the history of--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness--
Speaker 1: --black studies.
Speaker 2: His course, he teaches it at SUNY [State University of New York System].  He designed a complete course around blacks and Irish and the relationship between blacks and Irish, and how the battle between blacks and Irish in New York [New York]--how it was orchestrated by the politicians in New York.  Because the white Irish were immigrants, and they fought over the little crumbs of jobs.  And he traced all of that.  He does all that kind of stuff.  He's an historian.  He danced under Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison; he's toured all over.  He was an ambassador for arts to Liberia.  Cookie went to Liberia also, my sister Cookie, and helped build shacks and stuff like that.  They don't call them shacks, but you know, homes in the bush.
Story_ID: 664519
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the next two are twins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They are Joann [Joann Sloan Haynes], who just retired as the deputy director for human services in Pennsylvania [Pennsylvania Department of Human Services], and now is a consultant doing the same identical work for the City of Baltimore, Ohio.  She's supposed to be retired, but none of us retired.  And she's written laws, and all kinds of things.  And her sister is Joyce [Joyce Sloan], middle name Ann.  And Joyce Ann is retired [U.S.] military, an anesthesiologist in the [U.S.] Navy.  She retired, and the Navy hired her as a consultant at the Hershey hospital [Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center] in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is a very accomplished family.  Is that it?  Now, are the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's enough.
Speaker 1: Are the twins the youngest?
Speaker 2: The twins are the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's six, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, this is a very accomplished family.
Speaker 2: Girl, boy, girl, boy, girls.
Story_ID: 664520
Speaker 1: So, now, when you look back, you think about the personalities, the dispositions, sense of humor of your parents--how they walk, talk, what they look like, their--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of them.  We are a combination of both parents.  My father [John Sloan] had a natural affinity for politics.  He was a campaign director, he helped with the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] plan that I told you about, which was for Local 11 [International Hod Carriers' Building and Common Laborers' Union of America Local 11].  He handled many of the campaigns of many of the black politicians who ran as ward chairpersons here.  We were working the polls when I was eight, nine years old, passing out literature and things like that.  So, I get my love of politics and the law--because I became a consumer advocate, I helped pass laws and all that--from my father.  My mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was the person who appreciated the arts, and who wanted us to read.  And our Saturdays, if we wanted to go to the movie theater, we had to go to the library first.  And we would get, we were allowed to get six books on our library card.  And that was our thing that we did every two weeks. We could take our allowance and we could go to the movies, but we had to go to the library first.  So, any of our friends who went with us--and they tell these stories--they have to, they had to go the library.  The secretary for the Democratic Party here, Floretta Bird [sic. Floretta Irvin], was a high school friend of mine.  And every time we went to the movie on Saturday--seventeen cartoons and two full movies--she had to go to the library with me.  But I loved it, I loved it.  I loved books, they opened up a whole new world.  And that's because of my mother. Dancing lessons, piano lessons, ballet lessons, elocution lessons, all of that was my mother.  And she used to stand us up against the wall with books on our heads and say, "You will never walk with your head hung low."  Because she was born in the South in Danville [Virginia], where they were not allowed to lift their heads, not allowed to look at people in the face, in the eye.  And she was determined that her six children were going to do that.  So, that, we are a combination of both of my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting point, looking at other people in the eye--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you couldn't--
Speaker 1: --that's something that in the black community is missing about 70 percent of the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you talk to someone, they don't--I mean even with other black people--
Speaker 2: Yes.  No, we didn't--
Speaker 1: --they don't look--
Speaker 2: --but it's really kind of an inculcated behavior that dates back to slavery.  Because you could be killed if you looked white person. Can you say Emmett Till?  And I knew Mrs. Till [Mamie Till Mobley]; I knew his mother very well before she died.  And so, you could be killed.
Speaker 1: It's something you take for granted.  But I know as an interviewer--candidates for, to be VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteers--the black candidates wouldn't look me in the eye, unless they'd been to college for a certain period of time, you know.
Speaker 2: And they learned how to do that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But they kind of like, but then--
Speaker 1: They look off like this and talk to you.
Speaker 2: --we were teaching, we're doing diversity training--white kids do that, too now.
Speaker 1: Are they--
Speaker 2: We have no--and we found that out when we were doing diversity training today, before you came.  They don't look you in the face.  They hold their heads down.  I don't know why.  I know why black folks do it, it was a matter of safety for us to do it, and it became a way of life for us to do it.
Story_ID: 664521
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about growing up.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Which one do you want?
Speaker 1: The very first one that you can remember, the earliest.
Speaker 2: They're--oh--
Speaker 1: Is there one?
Speaker 2: One that I could pick that was a favorite story?
Speaker 1: No, an earliest childhood memory?  Not favorite.
Speaker 2: I think my earliest childhood memory might be of my German music teacher, and the lessons that I used to have to take on Saturdays.  My grandmother paid for those lessons, and I had to play. As a matter of fact, the piano that I did my lessons on are in my housekeeper's house right now--because she lives in a house--she's buying our house that we had.  So, that piano is still there.  I have that memory.  I have a memory of reciting.  Oh, that's probably it.  Okay, I have an early memory.  My, I talked, they said, when I came out of the womb.  Probably asked the doctor, "How did you do that" or something like that.  And my grandfather taught me how to sing 'Jingle Bells,' [James Lord Pierpont] and how to talk.  Now, no one believed that I could talk, because I was two years old.  And they did not believe that I could recite, and they did not believe that I could read.  So, my father--my grandfather, used to come and get me and take me for walks.  So, my grandfather came and got me and took me to the bar, where he had a--it's probably why I like sitting at the bar now, where--my mother's [Isabelle Jones Sloan] not going to like that statement either.  But my grandfather took me to the bar at two years of age.  And he would ask me questions, and I would answer the questions.  And he would hold his hand out, and he'd collect the money.  So, they said, "Well, she can do that, but can she--she can't sing."  And I sang 'Jingle Bells,' and danced on the bar at two years old.  That might be some indication of why (laughter) I don't mind a good bar now.
Speaker 1: Show business.
Speaker 2: Show business was in me from the very beginning.  That is a very vivid memory, and I was only two years old.  I can remember being in church plays.  My grandmother had a favorite word.  My mother will not like this, but it's the truth.  And it begins with S and it ends with T.  And she used to say that she would take--when she was using it, she would say, "Baby, put your hands over your ears.  Grandma's going to put her religion up on the shelf."  My mother, who has never echoed a swear word, never heard my father [John Sloan] swear.  My mother would be horrified at this.  So, I'm about maybe five years old, and I'm at church.  And you know, in the black community, Easter Sundays or Sundays when--they're big for children and all of that.
Speaker 1: And recitation.
Speaker 2: And recitation.  So, I had an A and B selection, at five years of age.  And I had to recite James Weldon Johnson's, "And God stepped out of--," ['The Creation'].  And no one believed that I could do this at five.  And so, I did, messed up when I first started.  And I echoed my grandmother's words.  I said, "Nana, I messed up, I'm going to put my religion on the shelf."  (Laughter) And I echoed that word in the prestigious hall of the Baptist church.  And that's a very early memory, very early memory.  I can still hear my mother saying to my grandmother, "I told you so, mother, that one day that would come to haunt you."  I do have that vivid memory.  And to this day, I tell my partners all the time, "I'm going to put a quarter in the jar, because I'm getting ready to say--," (laughter).  And I do, that's my favorite word.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite word.
Story_ID: 664522
Speaker 1: So, so now, you're a precocious little, little girl.
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us--now, did you live in the same house the entire time you grew up--did the family?
Speaker 2: Well, we first we lived with my grandmother.  When I was very small--when my brothers and sisters and four of us were all there--we lived in a place called Broadhead Manor [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And that time, it was housing that the [U.S.] military built for the soldiers returning home.  And my father [John Sloan] was very well known, and he was able to get one of these places; it was beautiful.  And then we moved from there, our family began to grow.  And when my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] got pregnant with my twin sisters [Joann Sloan Haynes and Joyce Sloan]--and we moved into the Hill District, Sugar Top [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and lived with my mother until--lived with my grandparents--until we bought our own home.  And I say we--
Speaker 1: Was the home in Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: It was in Homewood that we bought it, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Homewood.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about the demographics of Homewood.  You mentioned that, you alluded to it earlier, Sugar Top being the--
Speaker 2: Sugar Top was the prestigious area.  It's like, what's the area in Cleveland [Ohio]?  Shaker Heights [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Shaker Heights, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was like that, Sugar Top.  It's the upper part of the Hill District where affluent whites moved out, and affluent blacks moved in.
Speaker 1: Like Strivers Row in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Really, we were working, we had the masons, the doctors, the lawyers, all of them.  We lived up around that area, up around the reservoir in homes, because we were able to move out of the lower part of the Hill and up to that part.  So, that's where we lived.  But when we moved to Homewood, I moved to a community that was 80 percent white and 20 percent others.  It may have been higher than that.  I would say more than that, ninety.  But oddly enough--and the high school that I went to at the time, Westinghouse High School [Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--which is now considered a school that is a ghetto school. But when I went, it was one of the top fifty schools in the country.  And we can boast the likes of Earl "Fatha" Hines, and Erroll Garner, and Dakota Staton, and the late playwright, Amiri Baraka--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from here.  LeRoi Jones was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He graduated from high school when I went to high school.
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, I didn't realize he grew up in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Billy Eckstine, Pittsburgh, George Benson, Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Right, Little Georgie Benson.
Speaker 2: Little Georgie Benson.  You go back a ways.  If you call him Georgie, you go back a ways.  He likes to be called George now, yeah.  But, drummers and, we grew up with all of that.  Plus we had doctors, and lawyers, and blacks who owned grocery stores, and pharmacies, and hardware stores, and five and ten cents stores, and funeral parlors, and meat markets.  That's the community that I grew up, with Italian and black business folks, in a small Jewish community at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, all right.  Now, so, you start off in the Hill District--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on Sugar Top.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were there until you were how old?
Speaker 2: I was six years old.
Speaker 1: Six, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we moved to Homewood.
Speaker 1: Then you moved to Homewood.
Speaker 2: And Homewood became the place where, which we could call our real home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Actually, we were on the border between Homewood and an area called Penn Hills [Pennsylvania], which was the suburb.  And if you ever watch 'The Jeffersons,' and you heard the song, "Well, we're moving on up," ['Movin' On Up'], that was the way it went.  You move from Homewood to Penn Hills to Monroeville [Pennsylvania], and this was all moving on up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 664523
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I lived in a community, when we lived in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] that had a bakery.  And the bakery was run, run by German nuns, and they prepared everything at night.  And that smell. Now, my father [John Sloan] at that time was starting his own business.  And he and my uncles and my mother's cousins, they would go knock on the door of the bakery around four o'clock in the morning.  And the nuns, the German nuns, would have these baked goods.  And my father would always get enough.  So, he would bring the donuts and all that.  And even now, I'm talking to you, but I can still smell that bakery.  That was one of the sights.  Air was clean and pure then.  Everyone had a garden.  I can still smell the apples and the grapes.  And my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] canned and baked, and everyone did in those days.  I can hear Italian day.  Italian day, although it was Italian, everybody in the community became Italian for that day, much like, you know, the Irish Day.
Speaker 1: St. Patrick's Day?
Speaker 2: The same thing.  All of us are Irish for a moment, although I can claim it as the real deal.  But all of us claim it.  That's the way we did Italian day.  And there would be, oh, carnivals, and rides, and everything Italian.  That's how I learned to appreciate cannoli.  Because the woman, Mrs. Ginatti [ph.], who lived one door from our home, she made spaghetti sauce, and she made cannoli, and we traded.  My parents, my mother, traded recipes with her.  My mother made homemade bread like you wouldn't believe.  She made her own pecan rolls, and all kind of stuff like that.  So, there was the trading.  I can smell those smells.  I can hear the sounds, even looking at you, I can hear the sounds of us playing in the street.  Because in those days, you played in the street in front of your neighborhood with all the kids.  And the parents sat out on the porch.  You didn't have to worry about drive by shootings, and no one had air conditioning.  You had fans in those days.  So, on a hot night, you would sit out on the porch.  And the neighbors would talk back and forth.  And we, the young ones, would play in the street.  And we would play, "I spy, stick them in the eye, who's not ready all or I?"  I was a teenager playing those games.  I can still hear the sounds.  We would play one, two, three, four, red light.  We would play, "That's my car."  A car would ride up the street. We thought we made that up, but you're shaking your head like you knew about that game.  "That's my car."  "No, that's my car."  "No, that's my car."  Sunday was a very important time.  After church, we would go to my grandmother's.  I can still taste her pound cake.  And then we would go home for dinner with my mother after church.  And Sunday was the day when my father would take us out.  And my mother would have that time to herself, after dinner, to relax.  Or, she would go with us.  And daddy would take us to the airport.  He had his own business at that time, and he had a truck.  And we would all pile in the truck, and any neighborhood kid who was lucky enough to be included.  And we would go to the Big Isaly's [Isaly Dairy Company; Isaly's LLC], and we would get Klondikes, because it all began here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And we would get the ice cream cones that were shaped like a pyramid, which began here in Pittsburgh.  And then we'd ride out to the airport.
Speaker 1: Klondike bars began in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: In Pittsburgh, yeah [sic. Mansfield, Ohio].
Speaker 1: They did not begin in Alaska--
Speaker 2: No, they did not.
Speaker 1: --where (unclear)--(laughter).
Speaker 2: No, that's just a photograph on the front of the package (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But the scoop cones that you can get at--in Atlantic City [New Jersey] on the boardwalk--that began here in Pittsburgh.  And so, you get a pyramid cone--and I mean, the ice cream was like that.  And then we'd all sit in the back of the truck, and then we'd go out to the airport and we'd watch the planes go by.  And we'd talk about when we grow up, we were going to fly in those planes.  I've had about enough of flying, it's not fun anymore.  And just to think I came from thinking, daddy, do you ever think we're going to fly? To, I don't care, can we drive?  Because flying is no longer a treat.  It's become a chore, really, it has.  Those are the memories that I have.  I remember the county fairs, where our family would all pile in the truck.  And my uncles, my father's brothers, they would go out.  And my mother and father's family, we all became close.  When you marry into our family, whether you're Pentecostal or Presbyterian or Catholic, or good old Baptist, we're all together.  So, my daughter's husband and my family are close.  So, that's the way we were.  So, that's--we would have family reunion out at the county fair with the cows.  And my mother would sometimes enter her jams and her canning into the contest.  But in those days, blacks never won.  But my mother always entered, because she said, "They can stop you, but they can't prevent you.  They can't prevent you from making them.  They can't prevent you from learning how to do it.  They can stop you from selling it to the public, but they can't stop you from, they cannot prevent you from selling it."  And so, that's what we did.  I have that memory very vividly in my mind.
Story_ID: 664524
Speaker 1: We were a big family who did family things.  Friday night was my father's [John Sloan] night to go out.  But he never stayed out late.  He would call my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan], and he would say, "How many kids are up?"  And I was always up.  And so, maybe there were five of us, maybe four, the four oldest kids.  And the babies would be in bed, and he would bring us treats.  And he would put on Nat King Cole, Patti Page, Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], and his favorite, Dinah Washington.  And I had a chance to let her talk to my father before she died.  And that was like a big, big, deal for him, a big, big, big, big deal.  And so, we would dance, and we all danced together.
Story_ID: 664525
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, you were born during the heyday of the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].  And I guess when you were a child, I mean, people all over the country read Robert Vann's [Robert Lee Vann] Pittsburgh Courier.
Speaker 2: And I wrote for the Courier.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: As a young person?
Speaker 2: I wrote an article called "Bev Says" [ph.].
Speaker 1: How old were you when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was the director of consumer--
Speaker 1: Oh, you were grown.
Speaker 2: I was grown.
Speaker 1: All right, well, still anyway--
Speaker 2: But in those days, if you're talking about the early days of the Courier, the Courier was a prestigious newspaper.  And to know them--and I had an uncle on my mother's [Isabelle Jones Sloan] side, her first cousin.  We called him Uncle Jessie [ph.].  But he was the head printer for the Pittsburgh Courier.  So when I was in high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I got a chance to arrange for my graduating class to go to the Courier and take a tour.  And in those days, the Pittsburgh Courier was located in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and it took up a whole corner.  And it was a real sense of pride for us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Courier was the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --inventors of the Double V--
Speaker 2: It was one of the few black--
Speaker 1: --campaign.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Home of Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris], the photographer.
Speaker 2: And Teenie was a personal friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  Took pictures of me when, because I became the first, and he was the one taking the Courier, for the Courier paper.  But the first time that I ever appeared in the Courier paper, it was like a big thing in my family.  You bought every Courier paper you could find, and you sent it.  And I was in high school at the time, and I was with the junior town hall Meeting of the Air ['Junior Town Meeting of the Air'].  And we had just won some sort of a competition, or something like that.  I don't even know if my mother still has it.  But I have a lot of the Courier pictures that I was in for a while.
Story_ID: 664526
Speaker 1: Let me go, go back to grade school.  Now, now you started school at Crescent Elementary School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about--did you like school in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved it, loved it.  Never got tired, loved school.  The things that I really loved, I wanted to be an artist.  Well, I wanted to be a lot of things.  I wanted to be an artist, and so my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] put me in art classes on Saturday.  Because my art teacher at the time, in grade school, Miss Hyman [ph.], recommended that I go to Saturday classes at the Carnegie Museum of Art [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, what inspired--or what, or who, inspired you to be an artist?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She bought us paint sets.  She did not believe in idle time.  You had to do something.  Even if you played, it was a part of your schedule.  And I liked to draw.  And so, my mother bought me ink, and pens, and paint, and water color, and everything--easels.  And that's when I started.  And I was particularly in love with trees.  And so, that's all I did was write about trees, draw trees.
Story_ID: 664527
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I've read that--well, actually, I've heard, that you were a fan of Brenda Starr, Reporter.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Because I was the oldest, and both my parents [Isabelle Jones Sloan and John Sloan] worked, I didn't have much time as a child.  Like, everybody could go to the playground or something like.  But I couldn't do that, because I had to watch my sisters and my brothers.  And in those days, if your parents told you to stay in your yard until I got home, that's exactly what you did.  There was no, "Oh, mommy, can I?"  You were the oldest.  You have to make sure that the lunch is done, the table is set when I come home, so I can cook dinner, that kind of thing.  So, my one escape, again, was reading.  And I, my mother bought me a comic book of Brenda Starr.  Now, you're too young to know who Brenda Starr was.  But Brenda Starr was a redhead reporter that was in love with a guy that had a patch over his eye--daring, handsome, wonderful.  And she lived this exciting life as a journalist.  And that's what I wanted, that was in the back of my mind, that one day I was going to do what Brenda Starr did.  So, you can check that out.  And then there was Loretta Young.  And no one could go through a door, and turn and pivot, like Loretta Young and Lena Horne.
Speaker 1: Well, so you, you're--Loretta Young, the impression she made on you was from television, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: The Loretta Young ['The Loretta Young Show']--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  So, you get a Brenda Starr, a Loretta Young, a Lena Horne, and a Pearl Bailey--you've got a [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith.  Sprinkle a little bit--
Speaker 1: Those were all the--
Speaker 2: Those were the people that I admired.  Those were the people that I wanted to be like.  Because I, and I also wanted to be Sojourner Truth, and Joan of Arc.  These were the, these were the people that I read, that I fantasized with.  I wanted to ride in and rescue my people from the domination of slavery.  So, I joined every group.
Story_ID: 664528
Speaker 1: In terms of black history, I remember the--I know, I know that the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] was one of the few papers in the country that carried J.A. Rogers' 'Your History' ['Your History: From the Beginning of Time to the Present,' Joel Augustus Rogers].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Always had it.
Speaker 2: Always had a cartoon with black--always had editorials.  And we had to read the Courier.  It was something we read, as we read the Sunday paper.  In those days it came out once a week, as it did around the world, around the world.  And it still does.  And we read it, we read it just like you listen to the radio.  My family was great radio listeners.  And we as a family would read it.  And then my father [John Sloan] would say, "Beverly [HistoryMaker Bev Smith], what did the Courier say the president did today?"  And I would have to say, "Mr. Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] did such and such and such and such."  Or, "What about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?  Where is he this week?"  And I would have to say, "He's in Montgomery, Alabama," never realizing that Rosa Parks would one day be in my home.
Speaker 1: Now, was this like dinner table discussion?
Speaker 2: Dinner table discussions, yeah, around the table.  We had formal dinners, because my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] had a catering service.  And so, we had formal dinners, sit down dinners.  And one, each one of us was allowed to have a guest--one of our friends that would sit down. We had candlelight dinners, and all that kind of stuff.  That's what my mother did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, in terms of the dinners, now this was a feature of life in those days that is largely missing today.
Speaker 2: It's gone forever, forever.  I carried it on as a separated woman raising my child, a single mother raising a child.  Because I was married for four years before I got pregnant.  So, as a single woman, I made sure that I sat down with my daughter [Heather Williams] for dinner, even when I worked two jobs, radio and television combined.  Even when I worked three jobs, political appointment, radio, and television, I had dinner with my daughter.  I'd pick her up--my father would pick her up if I couldn't get there--and bring her there, and she had dinner with my parents.  When I did the six o'clock news [for WIIC-TV; WPIX-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I would get there and have dinner, or have a--that's the way I was raised, and that's what I like now.  And my two best friends, we sit down for dinner--my sister friends, my partners.  We go to--if I go to lunch at their house, or they come here, we all sit down together.  Because that's the way we were raised.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's, as we speak today in 2014, I guess for the last twenty years at least, many families, even well to do families, the son or daughter may have a bag of McDonald's, or somebody might have a pizza-
Speaker 2: And eat it in their bedroom.
Speaker 1: --microwave and eat it in their bedroom yeah, watching their own TV.
Speaker 2: No, we weren't allowed to do that, we weren't allowed to do that.  And I did not allow my daughter to have a TV in her room until she was nine years old.  But now, they have TVs in their room when they're five, six years old, and that was not allowed.  And you ate dinner.  Whenever you were, whatever meeting you had. When my father came home, you'd better be ready.  And you changed your clothes.  You changed your clothes when you came home from school, and you put on your play clothes.  And then you'd change your clothes, and you'd put a--so, it was a lot of washing and ironing of clothes when I grew up.
Speaker 1: So, you would dress for dinner, too, after you--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Now, I did not carry that through.
Speaker 1: Not everyone did that (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: But our friends, who we were allowed to have for dinner as a guest, they got dressed, too.  They loved it.  And we would sit around and discuss politics and listen to the radio, the amateur hours ['The Original Amateur Hour'] and all kind of stuff like that.
Story_ID: 664529
Speaker 1: What was your favorite--was, was your favorite TV show Loretta Young's ['The Loretta Young Show']--?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was it.  And the news.
Speaker 1: And the news.  In those days, I guess the first TV, one of the first--
Speaker 2: Walter Cronkite, all of those people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Douglas Edwards.
Speaker 2: Douglas Edwards, yes, oh, Douglas Edwards.  Oh, you are in my age category.  Absolutely.  Those were the people that we admired.  But you see, I had also as somebody to admire, Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode].  Mal Goode, I knew personally.  His brother owned the drugstore where we, where one of my brothers delivered from.  And so, Mal Goode also was one of the sponsors of me in an editorial, oh, what was it that I was in?  And he sponsored me, where we had to give a speech.  And his nephew won, and I came in second place.  He cheated.  He sponsored both of us, God rest his memory.  But Mal Goode was an inspiration to me also.  And because he was closer--and because I could go watch he and his sister, [HistoryMaker] Merri Dee, of the Merri Dee fame that's in Chicago [Illinois] right now--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: That's the daughter, and that was his niece.  Yeah, Merri Dee took after her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a radio station called WHOD [WHOD Radio; WAOB Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and WILY [WILY Radio; WWNL Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and it was on a corner in our community.  And they would broadcast from the window.  And you would sneak--because you weren't allowed down in that part--you would sneak down there and watch them.
Speaker 1: This is W--
Speaker 2: This was WHOD.
Speaker 1: HOD?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this, so, were they on--
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], '60s [1960s], okay.  Did they have a black format?
Speaker 2: Formats then.  All of this, there were a lot, we don't have a black station in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] now.  One of the--not one.  Can you even believe it?  And the station that was the oldest, WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], they teach about WAMO.  And jock--one of the jocks who's no longer alive, Jack [ph.], he talked about it when I moved to Florida, because he had retired in Florida.  But we don't have one in Pittsburgh now, and I worked for the station that was black owned and operated.  But in those days, you had two stations who were programming black, and--
Speaker 1: That is strange.  That's really strange, because even Dayton [Ohio] has a couple of black stations.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I just came back from Atlanta [Georgia].  To go to Atlanta and have several--I'm on one of them, WAOK [WAOK Radio], thank you, Atlanta.  And then to come back to Pittsburgh, where you have nothing.  You had more--once upon a time when we were segregated--than we do now.
Story_ID: 664530
Speaker 1: Now, what is the, what was the black population of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] when you were growing up, in terms, proportionately, you don't have to give me the figure.  But would you say a third of this city?  I mean a fourth, a fifth, what?
Speaker 2: I would say a third of the city.  Yeah, maybe a little more, yeah, because we were spread out.  Because there were different communities.  There was the North Side.  The North Side is where the Mellons and the Carnegies live.  Before bridges were made, you crossed over with a boat.  And so, there were the beautiful homes.  And their help lived in that community, which later became the North Side.  So, we had our, the black community was spread out.  So, it's hard to tell exactly.  But I would say that it isn't that much different than it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In terms of the population, it stayed pretty set.  It's not half, it's not half, but it's a little bit less than half.
Speaker 1: There's never been a black mayor of Pittsburgh, right?
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never.  And we still have only had a--we have more blacks now on city council [Pittsburgh City Council] than we ever had.  But for a long time, we had one police chief, one police inspector, one this, one black principal.  And that was until I was grown.  And sometimes I forget about Pittsburgh, and I call it Pissie-burg but I'm not supposed to say that either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, you're not supposed to say that.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 664531
Speaker 1: So, now, did, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school, elementary school [Crescent Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: In elementary school it was Mrs. Hyman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was the art teacher, I loved her.
Speaker 1: Did you have black teachers in--
Speaker 2: No, not in grade school.
Speaker 1: Not in grade school?  Okay, all right.  Now, did you go to a junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Baxter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then they eliminated the junior high school, and I went to--as a matter of fact, I was the last one to go to--my class was the last one to go to the junior high school.  And they merged the junior with the senior high school in those days.  But at one time, it was separate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And in high school, our high school was extremely popular--one of the top fifty schools now in the country.  Now, we're one of the top fifty schools going the other way down.
Speaker 1: This is Westinghouse--
Speaker 2: Westinghouse High School [Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: --High School, okay.
Speaker 2: --black symphony workers, piano players; people that worked with Dr. Salk [Jonas Salk], inventors--
Speaker 1: Who's the black game show host [HistoryMaker Adam Wade], the first black game show host?  He worked with Dr. Salk in the laboratory.  We interviewed him in, I think in New York [sic. Chicago, Illinois], but he's from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  He worked with, in Salk's laboratory.
Speaker 2: There were a lot of them.  There was Lamar Cato, he was a doctor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a, you know--
Speaker 2: Then--I can't think of the name right off, but I'm sure--
Speaker 1: I can't think of his name.  But he was the first black person to host a TV talk, I mean, a game show--
Speaker 2: A game show?
Speaker 1: Game show, yeah.  He's a Pittsburgher.  But, but, we'll go, we'll go on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because you have to jog my memory.  Because I thought I knew--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --all about the history.  See, you're teaching me something new about my own home town.
Speaker 1: If I can remember his name--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably would get it right away.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I just can't, I'm sorry I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: I am, too.
Speaker 1: But, yeah, so Baxter Junior High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  So, in junior high--you're in junior high school in the (background noise) late '50s [1950s], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Heading towards, and (background noise)--
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1961.
Story_ID: 664532
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, during this period of time, urban renewal was hitting Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and also the interstate highway system was--
Speaker 2: Coming through.
Speaker 1: --coming through (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The parkway [Penn-Lincoln Parkway], the highway--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: My brother was, my brother, George [George Sloan], was one of the first industrial engineers.  He was trained to be; he didn't go to school for it.  But he, we were Democrats, and he decided he wanted to be a Republican.  And in those days, my father [John Sloan]--as long as we were involved--he was a Democrat, and he would prefer that you were a Democrat.  But George became a Republican and worked on a milk truck of a Republican, who was very, very active, and got him the job as the industrial engineer that helped plan the highway, which hasn't changed since then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is the parkway.  And if you came into Pittsburgh, you came on one of those parkways.
Speaker 1: Now, a Republican in those days was, I mean, how would you--?  Did they have a--?  Well, as we speak in 2014, Republicans are really polarizing--
Speaker 2: They're the same--
Speaker 1: --Democrats.
Speaker 2: They were the same.
Speaker 1: Basically?
Speaker 2: Very polarized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I lived in a county and in a city that is Democrat.  So, the Republicans were very rare.  But because blacks were Republicans first, because of [President] Abraham Lincoln--when we learned--we registered as Republicans.  The Democrats were the southerners who were members of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], the white sheet folks, the John Birches [John Birch Society], the White Citizens Party [White Citizens Parties]; the Democrats were part of that.  And the Republicans were the ones who were talking to us in those days--and that was before I started voting--in those days.  But then later on, George was very active as a Republican, and I was very active as a Democrat.  It was an interesting household.
Story_ID: 664533
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, high school at Westinghouse [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], you're--now, oh, I mentioned urban renewal, because I heard they had a really traumatic effect on the, on the--
Speaker 2: On the black community?
Speaker 1: Yeah, black community.
Speaker 2: I was on the radio at that time.  And I was asking--because I had a talk show called, 'In the Public Eye' [ph.], and I begged people not to sell their homes in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which is where I live now.  This was all black, black and Jewish, black and German.  And this was where the community was considered the lower Hill.  This was the part of the Hill where you had to throw your hat in, where I'm living right now.  You would throw your hat in.  It was the lower Hill, and you didn't go to the lower Hill.  Although you did go, because they had the best jazz clubs, and stuff like that.  And then, yes, the city--the organizers, the fathers, the developers--started to push and push.  And they started to push blacks out of the Hill District, because they had moved whites to the suburbs.  And the suburbs had high taxes, very little, if any, transportation.  And black people--white people wanted to move back into the city that they fled.  And so, gentrification began, and continues even to this day.
Story_ID: 664534
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good sch- student in high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I had no choice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My parents demanded that if, if you could- if you couldn't be a C student--you had to be a C student.  If you made a D, you had to make that up, and you lost your privileges and everything.  Because anyone can be average, C is an average.  But my parents said if you were average, you had to put a plus beside it.  So, you had to have a C plus.  So, my parents, my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] used to post our grades on the door leading down into the basement playroom.  In those days, you called it going down in the basement.  But it was the playroom, it was the family room, TVs, all of that.  And so, my father [John Sloan] and mother would post our grades--my mother--on the door, on the billboard going down into--so, you would see what everybody, what everyone made in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you got money.  You got a dollar for an A, seventy-five cents for--yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I suppose that created, like, peer pressure amongst the siblings?
Speaker 2: I would say, I would say.
Speaker 1: Some competition.
Speaker 2: But my mother did not believe in peer pressure.  She believed that all her children--she never allowed us to argue among us.  And if we did, and we did, we had to do it in private.  We were not allowed to call each other black.  Isn't it interesting how we refer to ourselves now?  You could never say, "You black dog."  No, my goodness, my mother might wash our mouth out with soap.  That's what that was.  So, yeah, that was very interesting.
Story_ID: 664535
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, did you work on the school paper in school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I was in drama club, debate club.  My favorite high school teacher was a man by the name of Herman McClain, and he was African American.  When I went to school, we only had two black teachers.  One was Herman McClain, who was the English and speech teacher.  And the other one was a man by the name of Mr. Wade [Isaac Wade], who was the biology teacher, who later opened up a driving school of his own.  So, that was the two blacks that we had.
Speaker 1: That just reminded me.  [HistoryMaker] Adam Wade is the--
Speaker 2: Adam Wade!
Speaker 1: --is the host of the first black game show (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know Adam Wade--
Speaker 1: --who worked with Jonas Salk--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yes, absolutely--
Speaker 1: --from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Adam Wade.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, at Pitt university [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: See--
Speaker 1: But, but, Mr. Wade--I don't guess he's related to Adam Wade, I don't know.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Mr. Wade.  But that, that clears up, for anybody that's watching, it's Adam Wade.
Speaker 2: Oh, Adam Wade, absolutely.  And I used to have him on my television show, when I was with BET [Black Entertainment Television], all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, in drama club and--
Speaker 2: Speech, debate, current events, that's what I was into.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Politics, I was in the political club.
Speaker 1: Could you get a decent role in drama club?
Speaker 2: Yes, because of Mr. McClain.  And Mr. McClain talked about Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], and he would have the class divided by rows.  And because I just--anything he wanted me to read--and I was one of his favorite students.  So, he would recommend books that were not a part of the regular curriculum.  And I became fascinated with professional literature, I read James Baldwin, and all of that.  He introduced me to Nora [ph.], Zora [Zora Neale Hurston]--I'm trying to think of all the things that he introduced me to.
Story_ID: 664536
Speaker 1: So, these, this is the period of time when--well, I'm suppose you always had a resonant, you know, pleasant voice.  You know, you're well spoken.  I mean, I don't know if there was a time when you were not.
Speaker 2: I wasn't allowed to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were not allowed to use slang.  Slang was the first thing that I wanted to learn how to use.  But you were not allowed to.  Because in those days, you came up in a time when one black represented all blacks.  Too bad, we didn't teach the lesson to young people today.  Because along--that's why we're doing diversity training, my partners and I.  Because there is a perception that leads to the stereotype that all blacks are this way, all blacks are that way.  And so, when I came up, you were not allowed to use slang.
Speaker 1: Did you have a role model for your voice?  I mean for your, for the kind of-- I have a friend who used to say that you can choose any kind of personality you want.  But I guess you can choose any kind of voice that you want, if you are capable of producing it (laughter).  Did you have a role model for that?
Speaker 2: I never thought about my voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never really thought about my voice.  Because, like I said, I came out of the womb talking and reading.  So, I never really thought about my voice.  And I don't hear what you hear.
Speaker 1: We interviewed a Texan, who intimated that Barbara Jordan's voice was not really the way that she talked, you know.  But--
Speaker 2: I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: She enunciated.  But, and she was always professional and always articulate.  But the voice that was like this--that said, "Tell me about Watergate."  That was, that was who she was.
Speaker 1: In perspective, yeah.
Speaker 2: That was her political voice, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you have a mellow voice, articulate.  But it's not, it doesn't sound forced, you know, like, I mean, you know, it's just my opinion, I guess.  But I'm more into listening--
Speaker 2: People mention my voice, but to me, I don't hear what you're hearing.  It's like when you, you sing.  When I'm in the bathroom, I mean, come on, I'm Patti LaBelle.  I'm at least Gladys Knight, until I, until my daughter [Heather Williams] used to yell in the bathroom, "Mom, please quit singing."  And I used to sing in a jazz group.  So, I, you know, but you can't hear what you sound like.
Speaker 1: Well, you have a mellow sounding voice.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: It's a mellow voice, and it's--
Speaker 2: Thank you, disk jockey voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and, so you're reciting Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you're speech and drama--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You like speech and drama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Debate.
Speaker 1: And politics as well, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, politics--my love.  Yes, I've had an opportunity many, many times to run for office; I haven't.  I've had political appointment.  I like being, like my father [John Sloan] was, I like to be the puppeteer.
Story_ID: 664537
Speaker 1: Now, did you, were you a fan of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  But I learned--because I became close to them, I became an activist for them.  I was out of high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and Kennedy came to town, and that was all it took.  But I really became more connected to Ted Kennedy in the latter years of his life.  Somewhere there's a letter from him.  When I was director of consumer affairs, I ran his campaign here.  My Democratic Party went for Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and I went for Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy].  And we lost our budget, as a result of it, in my office.  But yeah, I was a Kennedy person.  But I, but I think that Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], of all of the Kennedys, was the brightest, the more articulate.  And he was the one that convinced John Kennedy to allow the March on Washington.  He was the one that told John Kennedy--this is the history we don't talk about much, because everyone says it's John Kennedy.  But really, it was Robert Kennedy.  And then Ted Kennedy came along and carried out the theme of all the Kennedy family.
Story_ID: 664538
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because the, the, the election in 1960 pitted Rob- John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] against Richard Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon].
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was the year before you graduated from high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And I took the debate, it was very very interesting.  Max Robinson's first wife, Beverly Hamilton [Beverly Hamilton Robinson], she was a black Republican.  And I was the Democrat.  And she took Nixon's side, and I took Kennedy's side, and we debated in front of the school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Beverly, with the blondish hair--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that, yeah, I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And she didn't have all that when I, when we went to school, and I didn't have this either.  Yeah, but Beverly and I, we graduated together.  We were in the same club together.  And in those days, Beverly was a very rare name.  I went to school with three Beverlys, so there were four of us all through school.  Beverly Malone, Beverly White, Beverly Harris [ph.], and Beverly Sloan [HistoryMaker Bev Smith].  And we had a little friendship going.  And so, Max's, the late Max Robinson's wife, Beverly, she and I debated all the time.  I mean, it was like something we did.  She was the Republican for Nixon, and I was the Democrat for Kennedy.  And so, not only did we debate in school, but we debated with the junior high meeting on the air ['Junior Town Meeting of the Air'], which was a radio show which was broadcast locally here.
Speaker 1: Now, was this the junior town hall meeting that you--
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: That you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Class- schools, high schools competed, high schools took on--and the junior high kids would come on, and they would debate the news issues and things like that.
Story_ID: 664539
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, as a senior in high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], this would be 1961, right?
Speaker 2: Um hm.  I graduated in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: What kind of advice were you getting?  Now, you're the oldest, the eldest of your siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're the first one to get out here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and think about going to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What advice, what counseling did you get about college?
Speaker 2: About college?  You mean, other than you will go to school, you will go to some kind of school.  And preferable, a historically black college [HBCU].  But I was the oldest.  My father [John Sloan] was a construction worker at a company.  And so, when I got ready to go to college, my father didn't have a job.  And scholarships were not available like they are now.  I'd won a scholarship in an oratorical contest, which Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode] was supposed to be my advisor, but he was advising both sides of the fence.  And so, that money was used.  But that money had to go to the home, and I used it to go to beautician school.  But I really wanted to go to Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: So, was that really a tough period of time?
Speaker 2: It was very hard for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very hard, very hard.  Because shortly after that, my father's company began to do well.  But I have always been the oldest, so that when I got a job, I had to pay, I had to give allowance.  And then it was a way of life.
Story_ID: 664540
Speaker 1: Paid the bills, talked to folks, cooked dinner--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --did hair.
Speaker 2: So, so we were just talking about all the responsibility you had as the, as the eldest child.  You said your father [John Sloan] was giving you his check?
Speaker 1: Yeah, daddy would come home, because my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] would have a catering job.  Usually, that was in the evening.  As a matter of fact, one of the people that she catered for, Judge Teitelbaum [Hubert Irving Teitelbaum], swore me into office when I had my political appointment.  So, she would have those jobs at night.  And so, daddy would get his paycheck.  And he was working two jobs.  So, he would come home and he would give me the paycheck.  And he would tell me, "Give this to your mother, so and so and so."  And so, when my mother came home, she would write out the bills.  And she would say, "I want you to make sure that you go to the water company and pay the water company."  So, we'd walk to the water company, pay the water company.  I was paying bills long before I even knew what paying bills was like.
Story_ID: 664541
Speaker 1: So, so, well, so after high school [Westinghouse High School; Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--I mean was there anything special about graduation, before we get you completely away from high school?
Speaker 2: I don't really think so, although we were the last class to graduate in January.  Now, most schools graduate once a year, and all the classes join together.  But I enjoyed high school.  I was teased a lot.
Speaker 1: Teased about what?
Speaker 2: I was very thin.  You wouldn't know it now, sweetie (laughter).  But in those days I was very, very small.  Some of the--
Speaker 1: What did they call you?  Did they have a name for you?
Speaker 2: Skinny Minnie.  There was a song, I don't know whether you remember it or not.
Speaker 1: By the Coasters [sic. Bill Haley and His Comets] or something?
Speaker 2: (Singing), "My skinny Minnie is a crazy chick," ['Skinny Minnie'], and they would do that.  And then because I was in the oratorical contest, the debate team, and all of that--they would sing this song, and I know you know this one, too.  (Singing), "She talks too much, she worries me to death."  I hated that song; now I appreciate it.
Speaker 1: Is that the Coasters? I think--
Speaker 2: The Coasters (nods head) [sic. Joe Jones].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'You Talk Too Much,' right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they, if I got up on stage to do a play, they would tease me.  I was teased a lot.  But I also was popular, and in a club, and all that other kind of stuff.  So, it was a dichotomy.
Story_ID: 664542
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, what was the name of the beauty college you attended?
Speaker 2: Ideal [Ideal Beauty School (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Ideal, okay, so that's Ideal.  And well, you know--okay.
Speaker 2: And I used the money that I made, I mean, I was the first 'Shampoo.'  You thought it was Warren Beatty; it was me.  I used to take my case, and I did neighborhood. I traveled.  I would take my beauty case, and if your wife needed her hair done, she'd make an appointment, and I'd show up and do her hair.  And I used that money to put myself through business school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, you start business school in 1962, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're--
Speaker 2: Duff's business school [Duff's Business Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], yeah.
Speaker 1: And you earned an associate's degree?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is, this is Duff's business school?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.  It isn't even around anymore.  I don't even know what, where it used to be.  But it was the Duff business school.  And a woman by the name of Jane Orie, who later became a politician with the Orie family, she was my teacher, one of my teachers then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your idea of going to business school?  I mean, you thought you would help your father [John Sloan] with his business, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or to just start your own?
Speaker 2: I wanted to open up a business of my own, I always did.  Thus, look at me.  But I always wanted to.  And I thought, okay, you can do what you want to do, which was to go to school to become a lawyer.  But you can be a businessperson.  Because in those days, black people owned businesses.  It was not strange for your mother to have a business, your father to have a business.  Somebody did hair in the home, someone did, made cakes.  I mean, people had businesses, so it was not unusual.  And the business course in school began to talk about a science to it.  And so, I wanted to learn everything I could.  And so, I continued, even after I went out of school.  I went to Robert Morris [Robert Morris Junior College, Moon, Pennsylvania], which was called a junior college at the time.  It's just Robert Morris College [sic. Robert Morris University] now.  And I took courses in marketing, management; I always went back and took courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But by that time I was getting married, and then four years later, I had a daughter [Heather Williams].  And I even took classes, if I needed a course, a class, if I wanted to do something, I would find the money and pay for the class--go in the evening and work during the day.
Story_ID: 664543
Speaker 1: Now, this is a tumultuous period for civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Not just in the South--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but in the urban cities, too. CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] being very active--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --integrating department stores--
Speaker 2: We had it here.
Speaker 1: --city government, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a part of those marches.  I've had my, I've been spat at, in my face.  I would leave my job, where I was the first black salesperson at Lerners department store [Lerner Stores; New York and Company].  And in those days, Lerners, L-E-R-N-E-R-S, you remember that, it was a big deal, it was a huge deal.  And I would leave my job, my lunch, and go down and relieve the people who were on the picket line at Joseph Horne's department store [Joseph Horne Company, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and other places.  Joseph Horne's was owned by the May Company [The May Department Stores Company], and they were the last to really think about hiring blacks.  So, we targeted that, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And I was in the young adult chapter.  In those days--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if you were a responsible black family, you carried a membership to the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Now, in those, from what, the people that I've talked to, NAACP youth was the, really the, the movement--
Speaker 2: That was it, young adult chapter.
Speaker 1: --was the energy--
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: --in the NAACP.
Speaker 2: That's it.  And we were, we had a very active chapter.  I went to Selma and registered people, and that's how I became involved with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  My parents didn't even know.  We went, there was a Jewish group called the Friends of COFO [Council of Federated Organizations], Friends of COFO.  And they were big, and kind of a national movement.  And there was a chapter here, and they were members of our NAACP.  In those days, whites and blacks were members of the NAACP.  And so, they put us in the trucks, and we went down to Selma, Alabama in trucks with clothing over the top of us, because it wasn't safe in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, COFO was confederation of civil rights organizations--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly what it was.
Speaker 1: --working in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Working everywhere, yeah, working--
Speaker 1: --and Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, working everywhere.  But they had chapters in the East.  And so, there were chapters cropping up in cities around there--Friends of COFO.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I had a question, it just slipped, Oh, so, the NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council] here in town.  Did, let's see, did you participate in the March on Washington?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you go down--?
Speaker 2: We hired buses, we got buses, and we went and did all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you went down with the NAACP?
Speaker 2: NAACP, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And separate--we all followed the bus down, but my girlfriend drove, who's now dead, Cynthia [ph.], and we went down.  And my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] did not want me to go, because she thought it was going to, as most people did, turn out to be a very kind of disastrous kind of a thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--a lot of people thought that, and--
Speaker 2: But nothing happened.  It was, I don't think that I've had a feeling like that, until the Honorable Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] gave his march on Washington [Million Man March], and allowed me to be the woman that reported it on my radio show.  I had an NBC talk show when I was at BET [Black Entertainment Television] in the afternoon, it was extremely popular.  And he allowed me to broadcast from there.  And I didn't have that feeling, that feeling was unlike anything I've ever experienced.  To be a part of that, it was unbelievable, to be a part of--and there were more than a million men in Washington, D.C. then.  To be a part of that, yeah, I haven't experienced anything like that since.
Story_ID: 664544
Speaker 1: Now, did, at the time--I mean in '63 [1963], did you have a sense that Dr. King's address [I Have a Dream] was something that was going to go down in history as special?
Speaker 2: We knew it.  But if you ever were around Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], there was no way you could not even--it was like you were around some, Moses, a biblical--he had the biblical persona.  You knew that this was no ordinary man.  And so, you prayed for him.  Churches prayed for Dr. King.  And he did not have all the ministers, particularly Baptist ministers, supporting him.  But those of us who were young, he appealed to us--young white, young black, young Italians, I mean it didn't matter.  We were on fire for change.  I miss those days tremendously.
Speaker 1: Now, did Dr. King, you know, visit Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes, many, many times, yes.  And as a young person, and as a young person active in the community, I got a chance to be in his company.  But who would have ever thought that I would have interviewed him, as the youngest person, before he died in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that.  Well, how did this take place?  And what were you doing in '68 [1968] when--?
Speaker 2: In 1968, I was the first black to--in the office for the United Parcel Service.  And as a member of the young adult chapter of the NAACP [NAACP Youth Council], I got to meet anyone who was coming into town, as did the other members.  And Dr. King had come to town.  And my family went to visit, to see him at the old Forbes Field [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which was the Pirates [Pittsburgh Pirates] baseball field.  It's famous, it was famous.  And we went, as he spoke.  And so, the NAACP had a reception.  I begged my father [John Sloan], "Daddy, please, please, you have to let me go.  Mommy [Isabelle Jones Sloan], tell daddy to let me go."  And I got a chance before he died to see him, to be in his company.  And what was so amazing is that he was with Ralph Abernathy, and he was with Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].  And later, on the set of Black Entertainment Television [BET], I got a chance to meet them, and began to call them friends.  And I interviewed Reverend Abernathy for Black Entertainment Television three weeks before he died.  So, I had a personal connection to this.  But Dr. King had the ability to make you think that if you did not work for change, if you did not show that you cared for someone else. If you as a black person did not care about the black, because he was going to move his movement from the South.  He was moving here towards the North, towards the East, towards the West.  He wasn't only going to be in the South.  But they killed him before he could get there.  They killed him before he could do the work that--we now know he was right about Vietnam [Vietnam War], and the things that he said.  He was one of the first people to come out against it.  And they killed him because of his ideas.  But to have been there, to have seen him, to have talked to him, to have become later friends with Mrs. Coretta Scott King, to know the children, to be able to call Martin--at the time we called him Marty King.  That was something that I'll never shake.  And when Rosa Parks came to my home--and I have her picture signed in my hallway, now, here, right outside my studio in my home.  To have her in my home, to sit with her on my radio show for NBC at the time, who would have ever thought that a little girl from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, from Homewood, from the Hill District, from Westinghouse High School [Westinghouse Academy, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], would be able to say, "I know these people, I know them."  Unbelievable.
Story_ID: 664545
Speaker 1: So, in 19--April 4, 1968, do you remember where you were when you found out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was pregnant.  I just--no, I wasn't pregnant at the time, I was in the house.  I thought I was pregnant.  So, I didn't go to work that day.  And my high school friend, Laverle Edwards Jackson [ph.]. Laverle came and knocked on the door.  I didn't have the television on, I didn't have anything on.  And she knocked on the door of my home.  I was newly married, I was cooking dinner.  I was, you know, I'd been married for a couple of years, but it was still brand new--waiting for the husband to come home from work.  And we were going to go to the in-laws and do stuff like that.  And in comes this friend of mine.  And she knocked on the door.  I was living on Crestland Street [ph.], my husband [Smith's ex-husband, Ronald Smith] and I had a new home.  And she said, "Are you all right?"  And I'd just put some food in the oven, I was all right.  And she said to me, she said, "Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has just been shot."  And at that time, the phone started ringing and my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was crying.  And so, I left to call my husband at work, and told him I was going to my mother's house, going to my parents' house.  And Laverle and I, she drove at the time, she took me to my mother's house.  I remember that.  I remember it, I remember it well.  I remember the next day, because I was working at a black insurance company while I was going to school for business.  And it was the Provident Insurance Company [North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association; North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company], one of the last black insurance companies in the country, started out of Philadelphia [sic. Durham, North Carolina].  And it didn't seem real, it just did not seem real.  It didn't seem real at all.
Story_ID: 664546
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, you're--tell us how you met your husband [Smith's ex-husband, Ronald Smith].  He was a, now he, he, he was an executive with the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was, yes.  But I didn't meet him when he was an executive.  As a matter of fact, I don't really know what he was doing.  Oh, yes, I do.  He was working at Provident Insurance Company [North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association; North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company], okay.  I was the first black [sic.] in the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], and at Lerners [Lerner Stores; New York and Company].  And every day, I would walk outside on my way to lunch.  And there would be this man standing at the window, waiting for me to come out.  And he would stare at me.  I'm going to tell you.  Did you ever watch 'Spenser' ['Spenser: For Hire'] and Avery Brooks?  My husband looked, was a cross between Avery Brooks and Teddy Pendergrass.  So, you did not miss him.  He was a very handsome man, and very, very, well groomed and dressed.  He was one of the best dressed in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at the time.  I just thought he was a pest.  In those days, we didn't have stalking laws, or I'd have filed one against him.  And he would wait every day.  I really never paid him too much attention.  We'd go to lunch, and one of the girls that would go to lunch would say, "There's that guy.  He likes you, there's that guy.  Are you going to speak to him?"  "No, unh-uh."  So, my aunt is working for Provident Insurance Company.  I had no idea that's what he did.  And she was getting ready to have a child.  And Aunt Gloria [ph.] said, "You're going to business school.  Why don't you fill in for me, why don't you quit Lerners?  You don't want to do sales all your life."  And so, I left Lerners, and I went to work at the insurance company.  And that's when he applied the heat. (Laughter) That's when he courted me, and he courted me like I'd never been courted before.  My father raised us very disciplined, you know.  If you came to my house--I remember a young man came to my house to take me out on Valentine's Day.  I was getting ready to turn sixteen, I was fifteen.  And I thought, I'm fifteen years old, I can have a boyfriend Valentine's Day. His name was Teddy Alexander [ph.], he's no longer alive.  I'll never forget it.  He knocked on the door, and he had a gift.  And daddy said to him, in just this tone, "Who are you?"  He said, "Mr. Sloan [John Sloan]," everyone's afraid of my dad, "Mr. Sloan, I'm Teddy, and I have a Valentine's Day gift for Beverly [HistoryMaker Bev Smith]."  "Do you know how old my daughter is?"  He said, "Yes, sir?"  "How old is she?" "Fifteen."  Now, I'm standing in the back telling my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan], "He's going to mess it up, he's going to mess it up."  And he said, "My daughter can't date."  He said, "So, you're going to have to go, and you come back when my daughter is sixteen years old."  And he said, "Well, can I leave the present?"  And in those days, if a boy bought clothes for a girl, it was frowned--it meant the girl must have been doing something that she shouldn't have done.  And he bought me a sweater.  Because that was just at the beginning, when the guys were working and they could afford to buy you--and he bought me a sweater.  And it was the Westinghouse sweater, with the Westinghouse seal on it.  Daddy told him, "Unh-uh.  I don't know what you think my daughter is, but you can't date her."  And a year later, when I turned sixteen, Teddy Alexander bought me another Valentine's Day gift.  So, that's what happened in those days.  My husband dated me, so I didn't know about courtship, but he was a romantic from his heart--love letters, flowers, champagne.  I never had champagne before. I was a good girl, I didn't do all that kind of stuff.  And I was modeling.  And he would take me to the museums, to jazz concerts.  He poured it on.  And I was, and then I moved into my own apartment, and then he really poured it on.  And we got married.  It was a love affair.  And he's dead, but I will always love him, although I'm not in love with him.  But I always will love him.  He was my husband.  I married him in what they call the proper way, I was not pregnant, had a huge wedding that even the mayor came to.  And--
Speaker 1: So--so, what year is this when you got married?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1965.
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1965.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: August 27, 1965.
Story_ID: 664547
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're attending Robert Morris [Robert Morris Junior College; Robert Morris University, Moon, Pennsylvania] when you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --during that period of time.
Speaker 2: And I took courses at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I took courses anywhere they offered courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in, you became the office manager for the National Conference of Christian and Jews [sic. National Conference for Christians and Jews] in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what, how did that take place?
Speaker 2: I was working at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] as an office manager.  And a black sergeant by the name, a police sergeant by the name of Harvey Adams [Harvey Adams, Jr.], was starting a group of black police officers called the Guardians, which later became a national organization.  And I had marched with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and Harvey was involved with the NAACP.  And he told--and there was a young man, a man that was a part of the group--because this was, I mean we were hitting Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] and U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation,], and all of these companies, to hire blacks.  And so, Ralph King was the director of the office.  He'd been sent from New York [New York] to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to get the office off its feet for the National Conference of Christians and Jews.  And I was the office manager for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I'd had my daughter [Heather Williams], I'd separated from my husband [Ronald Smith], and it was time for me to go seriously back to work.  And so, I got the job at the Y; my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] helped me get the job at the Y.  And I would go to the meetings that they had at the Y.  I'd give them the space to have the meetings at the Y.  And Harvey said, "How would you like to be the office manager for the National Conference of Christians and Jews?"  And Ralph King was there, he said, "I'll hire you tonight."  And that's how that happened, which is the same way I got into television.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you were recruited, yeah, that's true.  So, well, just a little bit about the National Conference of Christians and Jews.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's now the National Conference for Community and Justice.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I, I'm sorry about that.  Because the National Conference of Christians and Jews was an organization that fought hard.  And it was an organization of blacks and Jews that worked together in a way I have not seen since.  And I miss the work that they did, and I miss the dedication and the passion.  I don't know what this other organization is doing, because you don't hear about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what, what issues were the kind of, was the conference taking on then in those days?
Speaker 2: Everything.  The conference was involved in everything--more blacks on the police force, more women, because that was at a time when the women's movement, and I was very much involved in the women's movement, and the NOW movement.  Because the two first presidents for the National Organization of Women [sic. National Organization for Women] came from Pittsburgh--Molly Yard and Ellie Smeal [Eleanor Smeal].  And so, I worked with them at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, Molly Yard, okay, all right.  Okay, so did you have a position with NOW?
Speaker 2: No, I was just an advocate; I worked hard.  I began volunteering to monitor television.  This was before I was in television, to monitor the television stations.  I had been monitoring the television stations locally, to see how they reported on blacks.  And so, we combined that, to work with how they reported on women.  And that's how I became involved in that movement--and I was involved.
Story_ID: 664548
Speaker 1: Now, it was at--now, what event was it that you were at where you were approached by David Chase of WIIC [WIIC-TV; WPXI-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: One of the big functions that the National Conference of Christians and Jews [sic. National Conference for Christians and Jews; National Conference for Community and Justice] used to give was the brotherhood dinner [Annual Brotherhood/Sisterhood Citation Award Dinner].  And as office manager, it was my job to coordinate the activities.  But I was an activist, and Ralph King knew that even though I had gone to business school, he knew that I wasn't going to be involved in business.  (Laughter) He knew.  So, he put me on as a greeter.  And so, I played, actually, I was the hostess with the most-est. I went around to make sure that all the guests and the dinner, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah--And then I introduced the people, and I was the hostess.  And so, that's how I met David Chase, and that's how I met the man who later became my news director, By Williams.  They were at the brotherhood dinner.  Well, David Chase had worked for ABC, and was called into Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to work for the NBC station, which was the station that later hired me.  I didn't know him from Adam, I mean, seriously.  I was not--he gave me his credentials and all, but none of the stations really had blacks.  They had one here, one there, one there, one there.  And they didn't treat the blacks who worked for them--.  As a matter of fact, one of the blacks who had a talk show on the radio, Ray Coleman, they gave him an office, and it was, had been the closet where they kept the brooms and the mops and things.  And they cleaned that out, and gave it to him, much like they did one of the black men who worked in government here in the county--they gave him that, too.  He was ward chairman, then they made him feel big--going to give you an office--and they gave him a broom closet.  That's the way it went in those days.
Speaker 1: Intentional insult.
Speaker 2: And so, I was not impressed.  Because these were the people that we were picketing and marching against, because they didn't have blacks, and because they didn't have women.  Well, anyway, to make a long story short, David Chase introduced himself to me.  Two weeks later, I'm at the press club with a man who's no longer on the planet, but who will be remembered forever.  His disc jockey name was Sir Walter Raleigh.  He came out of Youngstown [Ohio] and Steubenville, Ohio, and became famous across the country.  And his name was Sir Walter Raleigh.  But his real name was John Christian.  And John Christian took me to lunch after the brotherhood dinner at the press club.  And at the press club, seated at the table was a man I called my uncle, but he was my god-uncle.  His name was Walt Jones.  And Walt Jones was the first black manager of WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], which was the station owned by a Jewish man by the name of Leonard Walk, very active in the community.  See how all these things are interwoven with each other?  Well, anyway, they introduced me to David Chase, and he had a drink in his hand at the thing.  And he just kept following me around, much like he did at the brotherhood dinner.  And he said, "I want to hire you."  And it sounded much like, I want you to come--he said, "Why don't you come up to my office and everything, and just spend the day with me? I want to hire you away from the National Conference of Christians and Jews."  Well, my ego made me think he was trying to be fresh.  In those days I was modeling, I thought I was cute.  So, I said to him, and probably said it in this same voice, "The next thing I know, you're going to want me to come up and see your etchings."  He thought that was the funniest thing he had ever heard.  But I didn't pay him any attention.  And at that time, John Christian, who had taken me to lunch at the press club where my uncle was, had worked for him.  So, he told my uncle, "He's serious."  And I went up, finally made an appointment, and was--in three weeks, I was on television.  I had no idea what camera to look in.  I didn't know a B roll from D roll, if they had a D roll.  I knew nothing.  But it was a time when he recognized a talent in me, and he turned me over to By Williams.  And By Williams was the original Mousketeer for Disney [The Walt Disney Company].  All of that started out of Pittsburgh here [sic.], the Mouseketeers, here.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: As did wrestling, world wide wrestling came out of Pittsburgh [sic.].  Bruno Sammartino, and all of them.
Story_ID: 664549
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them came out of here, at the station that I worked for.  And so, I went up to the station, and he offered me a job.  And I didn't know what I was supposed to do.  And By Williams told me, I'll never forget it.  He said, "You're a new mother, you're a new wife.  Write fifty things down that you're interested in, that if I gave you a microphone, you'd like to go find out about."  And I started out as a staff reporter.  And my first assignment was at a turkey farm.  Now, I'd never been to a turkey farm, I had no knowledge of turkeys.  I knew chickens; I didn't know what turkeys were all about.  No one told me that they would come up to you like this, with fleas, and peck at you.  So, I went down to Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] and I bought a brand new outfit.  I bought white go-go boots, because they were in.  No one told me when you go to a farm, period, but when you go to poultry, they're nasty, they're filthy, they waddle in their own feces, which was every step of the way.  But the fleas, so, it was kind of like this, "Hi, I'm [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith," spitting and fanning and doing all this, "and I'm reporting live, to tell you how you should pick--if you want a live turkey--never mind a live turkey, go to the store and get one already picked."  And I ran off, and they played it on the six o'clock news, and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1971, right?
Speaker 2: This is 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were an investigative, consumer affairs--
Speaker 2: I became the investigative reporter, and then they named me the consumer advocate.  And I became Ralph Nader's, testified at the Pinto [Ford Pinto] hearing in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Did you do--did--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now Ralph Nader, he made big news.  I saw him on 'The Phil Donahue Show,' his book, 'Unsafe at Any Speed' ['Unsafe at Any Speed: The Designed-In Dangers of the American Automobile'].
Speaker 2: That was it, and that was the Pinto.  And I was one of the people that testified in Washington, D.C. at the hearing, yeah.  As a matter of fact, we walked in together, and they tried to keep us out, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's something, that's really-
Speaker 2: Yeah, funny.  You do these things, and you don't think about it at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, see, I just flashed back to those fleas.  It was terrible.  My hair was long, they were in my hair.  The odor, oh, my goodness.  And I'd used the best perfume I could, it was my first assignment.  I notified everyone I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're doing, you're doing, working for W--
Speaker 2: IIC [WIIC-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: IIC.
Speaker 2: Which later became W--what is it, WPXI [WPXI-TV].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's its name now, WPXI.
Story_ID: 664550
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were working with WII--
Speaker 2: C.
Speaker 1: --C [WIIC-TV; WPXI-TV].  And this is an NBC affiliate at that time on the air in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  You mentioned Ralph Nader.  Now, how did you become involved?  Through consumer affairs work?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I became, I'm an advocate.  That's naturally--Joan of Arc, you know, Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman. I'm an advocate.  And so, I became an advocate, and I began to get a little national coverage for the investigations that I did.  And he had newspapers, and I would write the things that, I would write to him.  And that's how he became familiar with me and made me a Nader's Raider for this district.  So it was a part of what I did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  And I was getting shot at and all, by, oh yeah, I've been--
Speaker 1: Shot at?
Speaker 2: Oh, dozens of times.
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us--
Speaker 2: Dozens of times.
Speaker 1: --about that, now.
Speaker 2: The first time I was shot at was because I went after some home improvement crooks.  And the first warning was they sent me a black orchid and a rubber knife in a box, and warned me not to go on the air.  And they shot at me.  That was in television.  The second time I got shot at was at WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I had, in a very kind of devious way, carried a tape recorder into prison--at that time, the Western Penitentiary [State Correctional Institution Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And they did not do the kind of thorough searching of women that they do now.  And I was able to get statements from young blacks who were being beaten and raped and thrown into solitary confinement.  And the police were doing much like they're doing now.  We have a serious Trayvon Martin kind of problem here in Pittsburgh.  And so, I became involved in that kind of movement.  The first thing they did was they took the tires off my car, and set them up on blocks.  The neighbors saw them.  The second thing they did was they shot out the windows of my Cadillac.  And the third thing they did was shoot at me, and shot the tire out at the station.  It was the second time, third time?  The fourth time was when I was in Miami [Florida], I got shot at.  Advocacy.
Speaker 1: So, things are getting hot around here and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they do.  I'm a lot calmer now.  But I learned to shoot back.
Story_ID: 664551
Speaker 1: You were at WIIC [WIIC-TV; WPXI-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for four years, I guess?
Speaker 2: Um hm.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned Ralph Nader.  I have to ask about another Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] figure, who's like a leader in reform, in his own way.  Mr. Rogers, Fred Rogers.
Speaker 2: Oh, Fred Rogers.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My brother, my younger brother, Lenwood [Lenwood Sloan], who's the one--he was one of the first producers of the Fred Rogers show ['Mister Rogers' Neighborhood'] at Channel 13 [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], when it was in a little building, like a house.  Yeah, we have his pictures and everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, we interviewed the general manager [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.] of, yeah--
Speaker 2: Fred Rogers was a unique individual.
Speaker 1: I was sure you knew that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He as was a unique individual, unlike any other.  And I believe that there are a lot of people who look human to you and to me, but they're not.  They're beings, masquerading as a human.  Fred Rogers was a human being, and he cared about human beings.  He wasn't masquerading.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Powerful, powerful man.
Story_ID: 664552
Speaker 1: Now, in '75 [1975], you joined Sheridan Broadcasting [Sheridan Broadcasting Network] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was WAMO.  That's where the shootings and the prisons, and all the other things.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about how you, how that--were you recruited by Sheridan?
Speaker 2: No.  I was at Channel 11 [WIIC-TV; WPXI-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and they hired a new news director after By Williams left.  And he did not like women in the newsroom, white or black.  But in my particular place, he did not like.  And I had just returned from Washington, D.C., where I had been named one of the fifty outstanding women in America.  And I walked into the newsroom, and he used the N word and he used the B word, and he said that I was fired.  So, I walked--I didn't have a car in those days.  And the hill was like this, Federal Street; the television station sat up there.  And I walked down that hill, all the way into town, to the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] where my husband [Smith's ex-husband, Ronald Smith] worked.  And I called my uncle Walt [ph.] at the radio station.  And he said, "You want a job?"  Now, my salary was here, black radio was here.  But I had a child [Heather Williams], I was separated, I had to work.  And so, I said, "Yes."   So, I went from being an NB to the news director for WAMO Radio [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], all in the same day.
Speaker 1: Now, did you consider a lawsuit?
Speaker 2: I did sue them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did sue them.  But in those days, a lawsuit was not like it is here.  So now you sue and have laws--and you have discriminatory laws, and all the kind of things. We're talking about the '60s [1960s], we're talking about the early '70s [1970s].  Those kinds of things did not exist.  But I had Teitelbaum [Hubert Irving Teitelbaum], a man who was a fabulous lawyer.  And we got a cash settlement.  And at the time, it looked like a lot of money.  But in lieu of everything that I went through at that time, it wasn't.  But I was able to get money.  But the funny thing about it is that was not the station; that was one man at the station, who had a horrible reputation to begin with.  Because when I returned to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in February of 2001--2001--some of the most interesting times that I had in television, I had at Channel 11, where my career began.  Because I was on MSNBC, and they would have me go up to Channel 11.  Isn't life interesting?  And right now, I think that the operations manager that they have now, Mark Barash, is one of the finest individuals I know, very kind man.  But he wasn't a part of that; he wasn't even there when that happened.  There was one man who had a reputation.  And shortly after I left, he did the same thing to the white woman there, Eleanor Schano [Eleanor Schano Feeney], and she used my lawyer to help her.
Story_ID: 664553
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, Sheridan Broadcasting [Sheridan Broadcasting Network], now were you excited about joining Sheridan?  Did, did you know anything about Sheridan?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was WAMO [WAMO Radio].  It was the station, it was what people did, it was how people operated; it was what they did.  You know, it was everything in those days.
Speaker 1: That was the black station in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: That was the black station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but, remember now, I was in television.  I'd just come from winning, being named one of the fifty outstanding women in the world, and called an NB, you know.  And so, I didn't think about it as if it was an opportunity.  All I could think of is that I was separated and I had a daughter [Heather Williams], and I had a house that I had just gotten.  And what was I going to do?  So, I never even looked for another job.  My uncle said, Uncle Walt [ph.] said--he's dead now--but Uncle Walt said, "Come work for me."  And I went to work for him, and I established quite a reputation in the business.  I had town hall meetings, I had entree to the mayor, the governor.  It was a wonderful experience, wonderful experience; wouldn't have traded it for anything.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the town hall meetings.  That seems like an interesting concept that--and you received a couple of awards, maybe more than that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for your town hall meetings.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The first town hall meeting that I gave was at WAMO.  And it was a town hall meeting that was about Pittsburgh, is it a place for blacks?  And I demanded that all of the people who were--and I say demanded; I demanded.  Because I remember the mayor, who's no longer alive, bless his memory, Dick Caliguiri [Richard S. Caliguiri].  He was supposed to come, and he decided not to come.  He decided to send his black representative, his aide.  And I really had great feelings for Jim [ph.], but let me make it perfectly clear, that I wanted the mayor.  I didn't want him to send the black man who sat by the door, I didn't want that. So, I went on the radio and said, "Mr. Caliguiri, we are friends with your assistant mayor, but you need to be here."  Willie Stargell was there--everyone was there.
Speaker 1: This is, yeah, I want to say--
Speaker 2: They were all friends of mine.
Speaker 1: --these are the days of the--
Speaker 2: The dynasties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Pittsburgh Pirate dynasties, baseball team [Pittsburgh Pirates].
Speaker 2: The Steelers [Pittsburgh Steelers].
Speaker 1: The Steelers, yeah.
Speaker 2: Frenchy Fuqua [John Fuqua] was there.  Every one of the Steelers that cared were there.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: Franco Harris, yeah, all of them.  And they were there at that meeting.  And the county commissioners came, and I wanted the mayor to be there.  And Dick and I were friends.  His daughter--his son [David Caliguiri] and my daughter went to the same school, and he didn't show.  So, we said, so I said, "We're not holding, we're, we're going to sit here until you come."
Story_ID: 664554
Speaker 1: Now, this is, I guess kind of a golden age for black Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in a lot of ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the golden age.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was a time when every corporation in town, we had the Fortune 500 here--Gulf Oil, Mellon bank [Mellon Financial Corporation; Bank of New York Mellon Corporation], U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation], Koppers corporation [Koppers Company; Koppers, Inc.], H.J. Heinz [H.J. Heinz Company], Mellon bank, Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], all of this was here.  And companies we don't even think about were here.  And so, at that time, it was exciting.  And each company had a black in management. And they loaned that black to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and we mentored schools, we adopted schools.  None of that is happening now, and it should, and it should.  So, this was--to say it was a golden time--it was a precious time, it was a come alive time; it was a time when you felt that you were contributing to people who could live better.  And you did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the baseball team, as I remember, could start an all-black baseball team.
Speaker 2: Yes, from here--
Speaker 1: From the pitcher--
Speaker 2: Homestead Grays--
Speaker 1: --from Dock, you know, from Dock Ellis--
Speaker 2: Oh, Dock Ellis.
Speaker 1: --from Manny Sanguillen--
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: --all nine of the players on the Pittsburgh Pirates--
Speaker 2: that's right.
Speaker 1: --in the early '70s [1970s], you could fill an all-black team.
Speaker 2: That's it, that's it.
Speaker 1: And that's the only team in baseball that could do that--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --have an all-black team on the field.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: Dock Ellis, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you realize it, but the black fans of the Pirates were all over the nation, because of that.
Speaker 2: No, you know, we really didn't think of it that way--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  It was much later that we realized how much history.  It was like when Joe Gilliam [Joe Gilliam, Jr.] was named quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers, it was that same time.  And so, we felt--we could see--we could see change.  I don't see change now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mel Blount, Glen Edwards--
Speaker 2: Oh, Mel.
Speaker 1: --these are all--
Speaker 2: These are all the people.
Speaker 1: --from the black colleges, historical black colleges [HBCUs].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  And Willie Stargell, the late Willie Stargell, he dated my girlfriend.  And his first wife [Dee Stargell] was a member of my modeling group.  I used to fix food for him for breakfast.  And he would bring all of them out.  And then you had the Steelers, Dwight White.  Dwight White and I co-chaired a campaign for the NAACP for membership together.  Tim Stevens, who is still an advocate, got us to do it.  So, in those days, the Pittsburgh Pirates knew the black community, they were a part of it.  The Pittsburgh Steelers built a club in the black community.  But now, you don't see the Steelers in our community.  You have maybe Charlie Batch, who's really in the community.  But in those days, if you were black, and you were a Steeler or a Pirate, you were involved.  Today, we don't even know who the Pirates are.  And if you do, they don't come around us.  So, no.
Speaker 1: I think it's been like sort of, that's been the pattern in a lot of major cities.  The Cubs [Chicago Cubs] used to live on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, they live so far away--
Speaker 2: And they don't come, and they're not involved.  And just think what they could do if they were.  See, in those days, the Franco Harrises--his mother [Gina Harris] was Italian.  Willie Stargell--just, I mean these were the people who came.  And then you could get an [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks to come in.  You could get these people to come in.  Golf was big here.  You could get the golf pros to come here.  So, that this was a town that was alive.  And then Pittsburgh was big in the Democratic Party.  We were key in presidential elections, and black people were involved.  Plus, we had some of the greatest musicians and actors and actresses.  Lena Horne's father [Edwin Horne, Jr.] played music here, was here.  Sarah Vaughan used to come here.  Max Roach, all of these greats came here and sang and played, and performed.  So, you wanted it to be a city.  Because there were hotels we couldn't go to, and that is in my lifetime.  And it is back to that right now.  You go sit in some places here, and you wait to be waited on, much like I did when I went to Miami [Florida] for the first time.  And a lot of the Spanish speaking people refused to wait on you if you didn't speak Spanish.
Story_ID: 664555
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you have, you have a talk show.  And your talk show is on, what was your time slot?
Speaker 2: When I was in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] here?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: On WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: On WAMO, my talk show was in the day.  It was the day part, it was at twelve.  And then once a week, I did 'In the Public Eye' [ph.] which was a show that came on from eight until ten p.m.  That's the one that was hot.  I mean, they both were, I'll pat myself on the back.  But that was the one--
Speaker 1: Was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that made a difference.
Story_ID: 664556
Speaker 1: Was there ever a black mayoral candidate here--
Speaker 2: There were several.
Speaker 1: --that emerged, that--
Speaker 2: But never--
Speaker 1: --seemed likely to--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were several who ran.  But the mentality of African Americans in those days was that you can't have two blacks.  And it still exists today.  You can't have, especially in Ohio and places like that, you can't have two blacks running for office.  Because one black will take away from the other.  That's the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard.  But it is still a behavior for blacks in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in terms of the political landscape in Pittsburgh in those days, what was the, you know, what was the, I guess the hottest story in the black community in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: The same issues that are hot today--lack of opportunity, lack of decent housing, police brutality.  I mean, there were shootouts, the police would shoot us.  Nothing was ever done.  The case of Stanton Story--they accused him of something, chased him down; killed him on the streets.
Speaker 1: Stanton Story?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a rallying point for us here.  And the same thing happens now.  We have a young boy now, Miles he was attacked by white police who were undercover, and parked on a street in Homewood [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  He was leaving his house, his mom's house, to go to his grandmother's house.  His grandmother lived here, mother lived here.  Or, his mother lived here, grandmother lived here.  He was walking.  They saw him, he saw them.  The community had turned into a community where whites, which is typical, would come into the community to buy their drugs and then leave.  But then so would the peddlers of drugs.  And the drugs don't come from black folks.  White folks bring the drugs into the black community, and black folks sell it.  That's the way it's done, unless you are that guy that Denzel Washington played [Frank Lucas].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the only one that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the only really big guy.  But no. And so when he saw Jordan Miles--when Jordan saw the police--he turned to run, because he didn't know who they were.  And these three men who look like wrestlers, they beat this boy so badly.  This boy didn't even weigh 130 pounds.  And they pulled the dreadlocks out of his head, a whole section pulled out of his head.  And they beat him in the head.  He was getting ready to go to college, an A student, scholarships available.  Now, he has permanent brain damage.
Speaker 1: Sad.  So, this is a recent case?
Speaker 2: This is recent.
Story_ID: 664557
Speaker 1: So, you were with Sheridan [Sheridan Broadcasting Network] until (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Off and on, I've been with Sheridan since the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because Sheridan is now a company owned by the American Urban Radio Networks, they're all the same.
Speaker 1: I wasn't going to try to go that far with it.  But I want to get you to the point where you're director of consumer affairs for Allegheny County [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So, that's a full time job.  So, did you leave Sheridan?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  But I left Sheridan anyway, because I needed to make money because my daughter [Heather Williams] was in school, and I was going to leave.  I needed to make money.
Speaker 1: So, it just wasn't enough money?
Speaker 2: And it wasn't enough money.  So, I left the business, and went to Xerox Corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In much the same way that I went to Channel 11 [WIIC-TV; WPXI-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]; a white manager took a liking to me at an event, and offered me a job at Xerox Corporation.  And in those days, Xerox was the big company.  IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] was coming up behind Xerox.  And so, that's the company that Beyonce's father [Mathew Knowles] worked for, and I knew him in those days.  And so, I went to work for them.  But that was not my forte.  The one thing I did love--Xerox Corporation has one of the best management training schools in the country, and people come from all over the world to train--in Leesburg, Virginia, and they sent me there.  And I got a chance, I got a chance.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard others talk.  We've interviewed a couple of other people that joined Xerox, got the management training--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and went to another--
Speaker 2: That's exactly--.  They went to another copier company.  Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, yeah--
Speaker 2: And then getting up and meeting for a seven o'clock breakfast and I had a child.  So, if my baby had to be to school at eight o'clock, I couldn't be at a seven o'clock meeting.  But I wanted that training, and I learned a lot, effective listening skills, from Xerox that I use today.
Story_ID: 664558
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so, you went from Xerox to director of consumer affairs for the Allegheny County [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --County of Allegheny, in '77 [1977].  So--
Speaker 2: But, wait a minute.  I went to Xerox Corporation, and I left Xerox Corporation, and I became the general manager of a station called, a people station, called WYEP [WYEP Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: WYEP was a, if we were to compare it to something, it was like community radio.  It was community radio, okay.  And I, one of the city council people at the time, Mamie Lee, was on the board there.  And she offered me the job as, first as ascertainment director, to work on the licensing.  And then secondly, as general manager.  So, I left Xerox and went there.  While there, worst job I ever had.  I was used to the discipline of media.  But in community radio, anyone could come on, kind of like YouTube, and do whatever they wanted to do.  And there was no, you know, they could belch, which they did, into the microphone.  They could do almost anything.  And they did some of the grossest things.  And I was the general manager, I wasn't having any of that.  So, I was constantly at odds, and I wanted to leave.  But I called up my friends over at Sheridan Broadcasting [Sheridan Broadcasting Network].  And at that time, there was a wonderful, creative general manager by the name of Paul Yates.  And I needed copier machines, and I called him up and asked him did he have any copier machines that I could use?  And he said, "I heard you were the general manager.  Why don't I come and take you to lunch?  How do you like it?"  I said, "I hate it."  He said, "You do?"  And I said, "Yes."  He said, "Oh, okay."  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what.  I'm going to take you to lunch, and I'm going to give you the equipment."  He took me to lunch, and he offered me a job as news and public affairs director.  And I went back again to WAMO [WAMO Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I went back again.  And it was at WAMO that I got the offer from the politicians to become the consumer advocate.  And that was quite an experience, I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's how I became the consumer advocate.  Later, I was named energy coordinator, also.  I wore two hats to the State of Pennsylvania, to look at helping poor people who did not have money for gas and light, to disperse that--and to also look at the environmental issues that were cropping up.  I was big in the environmental issue.
Story_ID: 664559
Speaker 1: So, you're having an interesting--you're on the air?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you're off the air, working with the community on different projects?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And on the air again?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Really and truly, I never was out of media.  Because even when I wasn't working for it, as an advocate, marching and everything, I was always on the news.  So, it was like I never left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just didn't get the paycheck.
Speaker 1: So, in '79 [1979], now this is--now, what's happening--Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] around this time, are the steel mills closing down?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or, are they--this is--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was the beginning.  And that was one of the things that made my show so popular.  Because, I, when I went to work for the county [Allegheny County, Pennsylvania] as the director of consumer affairs, I was asked by KDKA Radio [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] to do a weekend show.  And so, I did a weekend show on the radio, the first black to have a talk show on KDKA.  And it was called, the Bev Smith show and it was called the 'Bev Smith Consumer Show' [ph.] because if you didn't treat people right in Pittsburgh, I was the one they called.  You know, "Get me Johnnie Cochran, get me [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith."  And that's what they did.  And so, while there, that's when I started talking about the steelworkers and the veterans.  They were my big thing on radio.  And I would do this thing for the steelworkers, and call them in.  And I would do this to raise money, because a lot of the steelworkers were losing their homes, losing their jobs, losing everything.  And so, while at KDKA, I began to get involved with that whole movement.  When I left KDKA--I didn't really leave KDKA.  When I left the consumer bureau, I became general manager of a religious station out of Braddock, Pennsylvania [WYCB Radio (ph.)].  And while there, the steelworkers, I would get the steelworkers to call me up and tell me what God had done for them that day.  And they would come to the station--white, black, old, young.  I would get to the station, and they would be lined up, telling me what they needed.  And I would have people available to help them with food and all kinds of stuff like that.
Story_ID: 664560
Speaker 1: Now, this is--I saw a documentary in the late '70s [1970s] called 'Men of Steel' [ph.] about the, black unions--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being organized
Speaker 2: Yes, steelworkers unions.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because the history of black workers in the steelworkers union is that they weren't allowed to get, they never got what they were due.  And when they finally got, cracked through the union barrier, the steel mills closed.
Speaker 2: The steelmaking died.  It's just like, by the time we were able to get into the restaurant, the restaurant closed.  That's exactly what happened in the steel mill.  And until, my father [John Sloan] worked there.  I used to see my father come home in shoes like yours, and they would be--because his job was to clean the furnace.  And they never shut the furnace down, so he walked along that.  And he would come home and my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] would take his boots off, and we'd pull his boots off, and his skin would come off, from the blisters.  I saw that firsthand.  And he did not make what the whites made at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's very, one of the saddest stories I've ever--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --heard.
Story_ID: 664561
Speaker 1: So, what was the name of the gospel station in Braddock [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: What was that?  WYCB [WYCB Radio (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a long time ago, so and they've changed hands.  It was WYCB.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, while you were working, while you were program director there, were you still working for the county, for the Allegheny County [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, I had left, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had left by that time.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, now, this is--you're on the verge now of moving to Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I left the consumer bureau because of Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy].
Speaker 1: Okay, what happened?
Speaker 2: He was running for president of the United States.  And I was a Democrat, and that was a Democrat appointment.  And I was the star, you know, the golden girl, and I was supposed to do what they told me to do.  And they told me to go with Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  I thought Jimmy Carter was a very nice man.  But I didn't want him as my president at the time, I wanted the Kennedy.  I like Jimmy Carter, I think he's absolutely brilliant.  But I had pledged my support, along with Shirley Chisholm, C. Delores Tucker, and all of them.  And I was, and I organized, and I had Ted Kennedy's workers sleeping on my floor in my home.  But I was not allowed to publicly appear at anything, or it would jeopardize my job.  So, I left the county.
Speaker 1: Now, this is when Ted Kennedy got in trouble for the Chappaquiddick--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --disaster, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And that ruined his--he was the favorite until that.
Speaker 2: He would have won, yeah, he would have won.  That was sad.  But I had to meet him out at the airport, and I had to meet him incognito, so to speak.  Because everything was political here.  This is a big Democratic town [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And I was a Democrat and he was a Democrat; I didn't see what the problem was.  But that didn't work that way.
Story_ID: 664562
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, leaving the county [Allegheny County, Pennsylvania], you're at the gospel station [WYCB Radio (ph.)].  And then in--so, you were at the gospel station from '78 [1978] to '80 [1980], was it?  So, what was the pay like?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: Bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was involved in a partnership with a black man who had a country club, I did speeches for colleges, I did self-esteem workshops for the Pittsburgh Board of Education [Pittsburgh Public Schools], and I taught Upward Bound students on Pitt university's campus [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  I did a lot of things--designed courses.  You name it, I did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] told us that we had talent.  And just because one of your talents were gone, God gave you more than one.  Use them. And that's what we did.
Story_ID: 664563
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, tell us about this move to Florida.  Well, now how did this take place?
Speaker 2: Oh, this was wild.  I was working at, I was the first black to have a talk show on KDKA [KDKA Radio].  And it was very, very popular.  And the news director at that time was a man by the name of Lee Fowler, at KDKA here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And he said to me, I used to say, "God bless you," which is what I say now.  And I'm never going to stop saying that.  So, he sent me a note, because a listener told him that I was preaching religion.  I don't know how, God bless you is a religion.  But anyway, I told him I wasn't going to stop.  And he said, "Well, I just want to let you know."  He said, "But one day, I'm going to be general manager of the station that I have complete control over, not just program director.  And when I do, I will offer you a job."  Well, here comes the ego again.  I thought, "Yeah, right, sure."  You know, "Sure you are."  So, I am at WYCB [WYCB Radio (ph.)], the little station I became general manager of.  And I'm on the air, and I'm doing the series called, 'Tell Me What God Has Done for You Today' [ph.], and I was teaching in the Pittsburgh Board of Education [Pittsburgh Public Schools].  I had no credentials, and I was teaching.  My class was extremely popular. I would get off at eleven o'clock, and my show started at twelve.  And I would get from here--because it was downtown here--I would get from here out to Braddock, Pennsylvania, which was at least maybe an hour and a half.  And I'd have to be there at twelve.  So, I would tell the late Gloria Briskey [Gloria Briskey Inez], who was a very well known gospel deejay all over America, to put a tape on for me.  And I would tape this part that says, "Tell me what God has done for you?  We're going to listen to, C.L. Franklin, talk about what God has done for you?"  And I would have rehearsed that, and done that before on tape.  And they'd play the tape.  And then I'd get there right before the tape ran out, with his preaching.  And then I was live, and people wouldn't know that I had just ran that.  I said--God, help me if there had been an accident or something.  So, it went, "Tell me what God has done for you?  Hi, this is [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith, tell me what God has done for you?"  "Well, God let me get in touch with you."  That voice sounds familiar.  I said, "Who is this?"  He said, "This is Lee Fowler."  I said, "Lee, I thought you were in Miami [Florida]."  He said, "I am."  He said, "Are you tired of cold weather?"  It was freezing in Pittsburgh.  It was like, it was about six inches of snow on the ground.  So, I'm telling you, I'm moving, I am moving trying to get there.  And it was about thirteen degrees above zero.  And I said, "Yes."  Because I lived in the suburbs, I could barely get my garage door open, it was frozen.  And he said, "Well, how would like to come to Miami?"  Now, this is on the radio.  By this time, you have everyone's attention.  I said, "Are you serious?" On the radio.  And he says, "Yes."  I says, "I'm getting ready to play a record, let me put you on hold, and we'll talk."  He said, "Can you come to Miami tomorrow?"  I said, "As in tomorrow, like, tomorrow, tomorrow?"  And he said, "Yes."  I said, "No, I can't."  He said, "Can you come the next day?"  I said, "No, I can't."  He said, "Can you come on the weekend?"  I said, "Yes, I can.  But I have to bring my daughter [Heather Williams], because the weekend is the time I spend with my daughter."  He said, "Well, don't bring her this time."  He said, "Get a babysitter, and I'll send you the babysitting money."  My parents [Isabelle Jones Sloan and John Sloan], I didn't need babysitting money--or her dad [Smith's ex-husband, Ronald Smith].  I said, "Good, Lee," you know, jokingly.  And I went to Florida, and he offered me more money than I had ever made in my life.  The station was located on Ives Dairy Road, in old North Miami Beach, in a new section that had been carved out.  They paid the first, second, and third month rent on a villa in a gated community.  I thought I was in heaven.  And a week later, my daughter came in.  And a week later, I rented a house.  And three weeks later, I moved.  And that's how I got to Florida.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.
Speaker 2: Boom, boom, boom.
Story_ID: 664564
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so, you're in heaven in Florida.  And (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did it stay heaven there, or--?
Speaker 2: No, I was shot at.  Yeah, again, I know.  You look like my daughter did.  And it was the Contras and the Sandinistas [Sandinista National Liberation Front].  And I always back the underdog, so I was for the Sandinistas.  And so, the Cubans were against--because the Contras were controlled by the old Batista [Fulgencio Batista] force that was in Cuba at the time.  And they did not like my political opinions.  And my daughter said to me, "Mommy, you and daddy [Ronald Smith] are separated" because we weren't divorced, we were separated, "and I only have one active parent.  Can you please get a job where there won't be any controversy?"  And I didn't realize what impact all of this was having on her.  I took her everywhere I went, so she was involved.  She passed out flyers, she'd always been beside me.  And I thought about it.  At that time, there was a news director at the station, WGBS [WGBS Radio; WAQI Radio], in Miami [Florida], and her name was Kay Starr.  And she said to me, "I'm leaving, and I'm going to Orlando, and I'm going to be the general manager of the station.  And they have no blacks, and Orlando has all kinds of problems.  I want you to come to Orlando."  Well, my daughter was in school, and once again I thought about moving her out.  But she offered me money than I was making there.  And they paid the first and the last month's rent and moved me, and I moved to Orlando, Florida.  And that was a marvelous time, a marvelous time.  Orlando was not like it is now.  Disney had taken it over, it was two towns.  Glenda [Glenda Evans Hood] was the mayor, and I can't think of what Glenda's last name is.  And I just talked about her the other day.  And I got to know them.  And I was the only black.  Most people thought that I was Jewish on the radio.  And they would call up and say--this is actually true what happened.  "We hear that you're, my wife says that you're black.  And I say you're a Jewish lesbian."  Don't ask me where that came from.  You know, and I said, "Well, first of all, you lose, because I'm not a lesbian."  I didn't say I wasn't Jewish.  I said, "I'm not a lesbian, I'm straight."  He said, "Yeah, but you're for them."  I said, "That doesn't mean I'm one of them.  I'm for clean air, but I'm not a scientist."  So, he and his wife battled back and forth.  "Well, are you white?"  "No, I'm not.  The soles of my feet, the palms of my hands, white of my eyes, white of my teeth, skeleton. So, maybe I am."  This was on the air.  And that was how I began being known in Orlando, where I marched against the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], where the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had to put the key in my door so we wouldn't be blown up, where my daughter's school, Winter Park High School [Winter Park, Florida], was threatened to be bombed.  And Heather [Heather Williams] did not get her wish for her mother to be very quiet.  Shortly after that, I, there was a lull, where we had the pool in the backyard, we went to--I did a show from Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida].  I thought we had settled down, but we hadn't.  And my grandmother [Katie Thomas] died, and I was a grandmother's child.  And my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] was an only child, and my mother and I are inseparable.  My father [John Sloan] used to call us the Bobbsey Twins.  And my mother said, "Don't you think you've been away long enough?"  I was the last to leave home, the oldest.  And so I, I left Orlando and came back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 664565
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1986, from what I gather here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You moved your talk show to WTAE [WTAE-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's it, and that's Hearst broadcasting [Hearst Corporation; Hearst Communications].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they wonderful.  But they had me working six days a week, on Saturday.  While I was there, there was a station in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]--WRC [WRC Radio], the radio station in D.C.  And they had been sports talk, and they were going all talk.  And while I was in Miami [Florida], the new program director, Ken's mother, had been in Florida, in Miami.  And she said to her son, "You need to hear this lady that's on radio in Miami."  Then they lost touch with me, then they found--they went on a vacation in Orlando [Florida], and he found out that I was in Orlando.  And, this is actually my life.  As I'm repeating it, it sounds very interesting.  It sounds like I couldn't keep a job, but I can.  And Ken Melgram is his name, M-E-L-G-R-A-M [sic. Ken Mellgren].  And he came to Pitts- well, how he got to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was his mother told him that, "If you're putting this station together, you need to find that lady that was in Florida that we listen to."  It just so happens that my brother's wife, Jean [ph.], worked for the FM station for WRC.  And she looked like Lena Horne.  And she and Ken used to joke around about her being Lena Horne all the time.  And they were joking around, and he said, "Look, there's this lady," he says, "I'm not going to ask you this like you knew every black person, but didn't you tell me that your husband's people were from Pittsburgh?"  And she said, "Yes."  He says, "Well, I'm trying to find this lady, this lady that lived in, that worked in Pittsburgh, from Pittsburgh, that was on the radio."  And she said to him, "You mean [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith."  And he said, "How do you know her?"  And she said, "She's my sister-in-law."  And three weeks later, I was working in D.C.  Now--
Speaker 1: So, this is-
Speaker 2: And Hearst broadcasting was very upset. But they didn't give me a contract.  Now, okay, let's weigh it.  Pittsburgh--D.C.  And WTAE is one of my favorite stations, the AM station, the ABC station here at Pittsburgh.  But they had a reputation as not being very kind to their black employees.  So, we went to one of their black employees that I knew very well.  And I said, "I've been offered this job in Washington, D.C."  He said, "What are you talking about?  It's the nation's capital.  Would you want me to pack some of the boxes for you?"  And that's what I did, that's how simple it was.  And I went, and I was hired instantly.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1987, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987], '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were there until '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was.  Yeah, no wait a minute.  Yeah, '87 [1987]--'87 [1987], '88 [1988], '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], '92 [1992], actually, 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '91 [1991], '92 [1992], yeah, because I didn't leave until '92 [1991].  But at that time I was also doing BET [Black Entertainment Television].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it's while you were at WRC that you started working for BET?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did both.  Yeah, I did both.  I did my show from twelve to three [o'clock], and then I left and I did BET's, 'Our Voices' at night.
Speaker 1: So, what was the name of your show for WRC?
Speaker 2: 'The Bev Smith Show.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then of course, from BET it was--
Speaker 2: 'Our Voices.'
Speaker 1: --'Our Voices,' yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And while at, while at BET, I also filled in for people at CNN.  I filled in for 'Crier and Company,' Catherine Crier at the time.  And I did news fill-ins, and all that kind of stuff.  Because it, it was the nation's capital, you could get work there.
Story_ID: 664566
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, in terms of BET [Black Entertainment Television], most people in the U.S., I think it would be safe to say, know you from BET, from 'Our Voices'?
Speaker 2: Um hm, and CNN, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you were so visible, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --BET was so popular--
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: --in those days, yeah.  So, were approached by--did they recruit you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did [HistoryMaker] Jefferi Lee recruit you?
Speaker 2: It wasn't Jeff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although Jeff was a friend of the family--my daughter [Heather Williams] was his trainer.  Yeah, this is a crazy world, isn't it?  It's just a crazy world.  Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] used to listen to me.  Bob Johnson's program director, Deborah Tang, is no longer alive.  He used to listen to me.  And one of the producers, Stuart Perkins, at BET was told to contact me.  But how it happened was, I did--when I did my TV show, I don't whether I told you I had a TV show on KDKA [KDKA Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] called 'Vibrations,' it was very popular.  And the producer for the show was a guy named Waymer Johnson.  And Waymer had called me to fill in for the guy that was missing for 'Vibrations,' while I was director of consumer affairs.  And I started doing that show.  And he left and went to BET.  And they were putting on a series of new programs.  And they had tried Patti LaBelle as the host of the show, and it didn't work.  And he called me up on the phone, and he said, "I don't know what your contract is at NBC ."  He said, "But could you work for television?"  I said, "Yes, absolutely."  He said, "How about BET?"  Well, in those days, nobody paid any attention to BET.  White management in particular thought it was a novice, it would be gone.  So, they said, "Yeah, it's not conflicting, it's not at your time, go ahead."  And so, I did.  And the rest is history.
Speaker 1: So, what was your schedule?  Were you on in the morning on WRC [WRC Radio, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I was on from twelve to three [o'clock].  And luckily, for me, my daughter had graduated, and was in college at American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  They're--
Speaker 2: Yeah, see, so it all worked out.
Speaker 1: And then 'Our Voices' was on--
Speaker 2: And 'Our Voices' came on at seven o'clock at night.
Speaker 1: And that was live?
Speaker 2: That was definitely live.  So, everything I did at that time was live.  And I was very well known for my talk show.  I mean, we did a show with Emmett Till's mother [Mamie Till Mobley] and the head of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK].  We flew in kids and we did a show called, 'Kids Killing Kids Over Drugs' [ph.], and Nancy Reagan showed up.  I mean, I had a very popular show.  Truck drivers would beep the horn.  I got threatened there, too-- all kinds of stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So this is the, this time period, '87 [1987] to '92 [1992]. And then, you know, further at BET.  You were at BET from--
Speaker 2: Until 2001.
Speaker 1: Until 2001, yeah.  This is a period of time when--there were a couple of shows about the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], which was really--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was huge.  It was a--I used to do this thing on my radio show where every time there was a black person killed--and at that time, it was like unbelievable.  It was like four hundred people dying in a year, or something like that.  We would hit the gong for every time a person--every day--and it was almost every day.  It was horrible.
Story_ID: 664567
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was so bad.  I happened to spend a week right after the Super Bowl in 1988 [Super Bowl XXII].  And it was during that week--every news broadcast escalated.  I mean, there was someone else killed.
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was calling for the National Guard to come to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: It was--people were crying--and the television stories--
Speaker 2: It was horrible.
Speaker 1: --and there was--
Speaker 2: And I did the gong thing.  And then that's when I had the town hall meeting at the Martin Luther King Library [Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, Washington, D.C.].  And Nancy Reagan had her campaign, Just Say Yes.
Speaker 1: Just Say No, yeah.
Speaker 2: Just Say No.  Dumb.  But she showed up, which gave us a lot of credibility with our town hall meeting--her showing up, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you think about it, I think the outcome of all that was this war on drugs, right?
Speaker 2: But there was never a war on drugs.  The whole war on drugs was Harry Anslinger.  Do you want to know the story about Harry Anslinger?  Harry Anslinger was the head of a department in government, like, inspected furniture.  And at that time, drugs, the mafia and all of that. And so, what they did--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Anyway, this is some kind of story, too. Harry Anslinger wanted to keep his job in government.  Because they took him from the furniture division in government, and created this drug program [Federal Bureau of Narcotics].  Well, nothing was happening, drugs wasn't a big thing.  Hemp was one of the popular things used, because hemp makes fabrics.  But he was being lobbied by the cotton and textile industry.  Because if hemp came in, there would be no polyester.  It lasts for a long time.  The paper that the Bible, the Dead Sea Scrolls, hemp--clothing, rope, everything, and smoke.  The tobacco industry started petitioning, so Harry Anslinger put out a statement that marijuana was the most dangerous drug in America.  And the reason why it is dangerous--I can't make this up, okay--is because it makes black men go after white women--this was all a matter of record--and white women go crazy over black men.  I said, "If I was a white woman, I'd walk up and smack him."  And that's how we got the war on drugs.  There's never been a war on drugs.
Speaker 1: So, this is something--Harry Anslinger--this is back in--
Speaker 2: This is a part of history, in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: This is back in the 1930s.
Speaker 2: In the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: I just wanted to clear that up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It wasn't part of the--
Speaker 2: But the--it has persisted. 'Reefer Madness' came out, that showed the black man going crazy and stealing the white woman.  All of that was because of Harry.  No science, no nothing, okay.  We would have had legalized marijuana a long time ago, because Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.] had a deal with Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  And the Eve cigarettes, that thing, that was marijuana up the side of the Eve cigarette.  And he had signed where he was going to legalize it.  The tobacco industry and everybody came and they said, "Oh, oh, oh, oh."  Pfizer, oh, they came in there and said no.  Because, I mean, we now know. Now, isn't it crazy that they applied to the Food and Drug Administration to have the patent for the first artificial pills made of marijuana?  Now, if marijuana was bad for you, why would you want artificial pills?  But that's because the doctors determined that the elements of marijuana had medicinal purposes.  For one thing, glaucoma; it helps glaucoma in your eyes.  We now know what it does with chemotherapy.  So--
Speaker 1: So, they had synthesized the ingredients of marijuana for pill form?
Speaker 2: They were going to make pills of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And Pfizer had to deal with the government, and here we are today.
Speaker 1: But, I know in--
Speaker 2: But it was on racism that the whole scare was created.  And you can go to any book, just 'Reefer Madness,' whatever--just google the name, Anslinger.  And there's a wonderful book out about Scott, Dr. Scott Whitaker that came out.  It's called 'Medisin,' M-E-D-I-S-I-N, and it gives you the whole history.  Have you heard of it Scott [Scott Sterns]?
Speaker 1: (Scott Sterns):  No.
Speaker 2: It's a powerful book.  It's a powerful book, and it tells the whole story.
Story_ID: 664568
Speaker 1: You're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] during the time that [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, himself--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was caught experimenting with crack [crack cocaine] and the whole controver- (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Not experimenting, he used it.  Everybody knew it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he performed, you see, Marion Barry was never arrested for malfeasance in office, misappropriation of funds.  You know, he's brilliant.  He has two degrees, one in engineering and one in chemistry.  He's brilliant, absolutely brilliant.  So, but, and, he also put people to work in the inner city, for the first time.  So, there was a different kind of relationship between Marion Barry and the folks, the white fathers of the city, who wanted to run the city.  I mean, the truth is the truth.  And so, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I know him well.  And I can tell you--that was all--they set him up.  But he was so far gone.  And the woman that gave him up, they went to California to get her on traffic tickets.  They found out he was communicating with her, and had been seeing her.  He would go out there and see her, and fool around on his wife [Effi Slaughter Barry].  And everybody knew Marion Barry.  But something--but Marion was really drugged out, because every member of his staff, his security staff, was gone.  The driver was a new driver.  And to tell you how our government worked, they hired doctors to be there, because they gave him pure cocaine, pure crack, that's what they gave him.  So, there you go.
Story_ID: 664569
Speaker 1: So these are some of the, the topics that were hot in those, in those days, when you were hosting the radio show [on WRC Radio, Washington, D.C.] and the TV show ['Our Voices'] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh see, this, this was, this was the time.  See, I've been really blessed and fortunate with my career, that it always seemed to peek, it all seemed to be good when the world was troubled, so that I could use my voice, and my voice could be an avenue, and my show could be an avenue for people who wanted change.  Like, I've gotten houses for people with Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] clothing, and was helping to save slave quarters in Nassau [Bahamas] that are authentic that builders wanted to destroy.  So, I've been very blessed that I've been able to be able to lift my voice at a time when there was all this drama.
Speaker 1: You know, there's a, the--related to the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic was children killing children over drugs.  That was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the name of one of the--
Speaker 2: That was one of my town hall meetings, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I find that the town hall meeting is the best way to merge my need for advocacy, and my need to be a talk show host.  And that way, I can actually get people involved in the community issues of their concern.  A town hall meeting does that.  Because people who would not normally listen, or may listen intermittently, these are the people who come to a town hall meeting.  These are the people who come out, and who want to voice their opinion.  And I like that.  I like to be right up front, in fact, with the people, always.  I like live.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in living color.
Story_ID: 664570
Speaker 1: So, from '91 [1991] to 2001, I guess through, through the end of the BET [Black Entertainment Television] run, you were also occasionally on CNN, as you alluded to earlier (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And MSNBC.
Speaker 1: And MSNBC.
Speaker 2: And FOX, which was real interesting.  And I filled in for Larry King when he was on the Mutual Radio Network [Mutual Broadcasting System], which is not around anymore.  I did his show ['Larry King Live'].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Larry King at the time was the most popular radio host, I think, in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Well, I took his job and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I took his job.  It was his slot that I filled in for in Florida, and he went to CNN.  And his producer was my producer at KDKA [KDKA Radio] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now, was there any, I guess, association of black radio show hosts or talk show hosts--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: We all belonged to the, black journalism, but no.
Speaker 1: The NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]?
Speaker 2: Black talk show hosts were kind of new then.  Now, they weren't new on black or ethnic stations, because we always had somebody doing talk on a black radio station.  But they were new in major markets, mainstream media.  They, we were new.  We were a new kind of thing, and we were taking off.  And I just happened to be at the forefront of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like there was a lot of attention in the late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s] on that.  The election of Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois] is--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --traced to the--
Speaker 2: Talk shows.
Speaker 1: --radio show of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And talk show hosts have always, well, radio personalities who were black have always been involved in making changes in the community.  They were our griots, they told the story.  They were our Paul Reveres, going through the town, shouting out, "This is happening, this is happening, this is happening."  And so, they've always been a vital part of our community, until now.
Speaker 1: Well, what is the difference today?  What is--?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we're losing all of our black media stations.  We don't have as many black stations as we had before.  We have stations that are doing quote (air quotes) urban programming, but not devoting their attention.  And then the easy way--the quick and fast and dirty make your money way--is to play hip hop.  Bang her in the trees, bang her on the door.  Be this, be that.  And that's the easy way out.  And so, people like me, we have an interesting time now, maneuvering through the maze of programming to get the information out.
Story_ID: 664571
Speaker 1: Now, well, let me just ask you about the demise of BET [Black Entertainment Television].  I mean, well, the change with BET (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can call it the demise.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's what I thought of initially, and I--
Speaker 2: I like your words.
Speaker 1: I was trying to be--you know, I thought--I re-thought it, and I said well, maybe I shouldn't say that.  But demise, yeah.
Speaker 2: I feel that BET is no longer a station that we can look at as a station that truly echoes all voices in the community.  It is not our voice.  It is the voice of advertisers.  I mean, they're a business, okay.  And as Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] used to say, "I'm in the entertainment business."  But we expected more out of him.  And when he and his wife were together as a team, we got more.  It was Sheila who put the children's programs on, on Saturday.  Think, just think, Larry [Larry Crowe].  Right now, if I asked you to tell me a station that shows cartoons aimed at black kids, black educational programs, with the exception of PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. There are a few stations that Disney [The Walt Disney Company,] has that has personalities that are black, but they're not aimed at.  Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson], Bob's wife and partner, had programs, there were programs.  You saw a cornucopia of ages, because we had seasoned news, we had news.  There was Ed Gordon [HistoryMaker Ed Gordon, III], [HistoryMaker] George Curry, who is now with NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], and who had Emerge magazine.  There were voices that were programs for black men.  I did, how many specials did I do in those days?  So, demise is a very good word. But I think, across the board, whether the program is owned by a black or owned by a white, I think programming that is good--with the exception of a Discovery Channel or a History Channel [The History Channel; History], or a military channel--because I watch all of it. I even watch the sports channels, because I don't think that mainstream media and cable television is doing anything.  Just think, every show that's come on new is about a vampire.  You suck the blood, you suck the life; you beat them up.  We live in an era where we have sexually transmitted diseases where there's no medicine for.  And what's the first thing you see?  And it's a joke--a reality show?  Come on, reality is to take--I call him (pronunciation) Boehner, but his name is Boehner [John Boehner].  (Laughter) The Democrats call him (pronunciation) Boehner.  Take Boehner, and put him in the projects and let him live on the salaries that he wants to vote for other people.  That's a reality show.  But what we see--Atlanta housewives ['The Real Housewives of Atlanta'], all that is scripted.  And the more noise they make, the bigger their paycheck.  That is not real.  That does not show who we are as a people.  That does not educate the world.  If there was a balance, I wouldn't mind 'Housewives of Atlanta.'  If there was a balance, I wouldn't mind 'Hip Hop Atlanta' ['Love and Hip Hop: Atlanta'], but there's no balance, because that's what you see of my people.  And you don't know that the light here, my people, you don't know that.  And I'm upset about that.  So, the demise is a very good thing to say.
Story_ID: 664572
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a story that I think [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley tells, about him going in to see--
Speaker 2: Bob?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson], about programming at BET [Black Entertainment Television], and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being fired as a result of making the suggestions.
Speaker 2: Well, that was part of the reason, but money was a problem, too.  But I can truthfully say that I believe that because I was against the programming.  And I'd just completed a documentary called, 'Looking for the Roots of Africa in Israel' [ph.], and it had been nominated for a Peabody [George Foster Peabody Award].  It was one of those occasions like I'm fifty famous women in America and then you come back. And Bob had bought a book company [Arabesque Books]--black books, black love stories, black romance books.  And he wanted me to kind of be the Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] for the book company.  But I wasn't having any romance.  So, romance without finance is a nuisance, and that wasn't what I was.  That wasn't what I was about.  And so, we were negotiating a contract for me to continue doing what I was doing, even more, really even more.  I wanted to do a series of specials.  I wanted to do a series of things on the real black person, a real reality show.  And Bob wanted me to sell.  I had appeal, and I could have sold his books.  That's not what I wanted to do.  That might have been good for someone else, it would have been great.  But that was not good for me, not good for me at all.  And so, we parted company amicably.  I will always be grateful for he and his wife [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson], because they took me to national attention in a way I could never be--that was never done before--and I appreciate that.  And then for the thirteen years that I did the show ['Our Voices']--and I did the show for thirteen years--I did it my way.  And so, I'm very grateful for him for that.
Speaker 1: So, you were allowed to have creative control?
Speaker 2: I had creative control, yes.  And that's large, in part, to the late Deborah Tang.  And I had great producers whom I'm very close to now.  One of my producers is one of my closest friends, Felicia Watkins.  They had bright, young people.  It was a place where careers were born.  You had folks who became very famous, and should have been.  My opinion was I thought that BET could have been a place where presidents were appointed.  I thought we never did use the power.  But it was a company driven by money.  I'm not mad at Bob, but I think he could have did better.
Speaker 1: I think he said as much himself, about what his--
Speaker 2: He's made mistakes, yeah, he's made mistakes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I think that if Bob would have just--he could have been even bigger than he is now.  And now, you don't even hear about him.  And everything that he's tried to do, (background noise) has not worked.
Story_ID: 664573
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so, you had started with American Urban Radio Network [American Urban Radio Networks] before you left BET [Black Entertainment Television]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was doing--I was the person that took over when Carl left, Carl Rowan.  Carl Rowan used to do a series of commentaries around the country on radio.  And those commentaries were distributed by the American Urban Radio Network.  When Carl Rowan left, the vice president of programming there, Jerry Lopes, called me up and said, "How would you like to do commentaries?"  I was on BET, I was doing radio, and it was money--and I had a kid [Smith's daughter, Heather Williams] in college.  "Thank you very much, I'd love to."  And I started sharing my opinion on everything.  And I did that until 2003--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --while doing a talk show for the company.  So, I was doing that, and doing a bunch of other things, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, in 2001 you leave BET, and, now what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I come to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 664574
Speaker 1: I guess I should ask a question about production--how you approach a, a radio show, I mean in terms of, you know--
Speaker 2: Topics, subjects?
Speaker 1: Yeah, topics, subjects, what kind of help you have doing it, and how, how you approach it, you know?
Speaker 2: If you're talking about the show that I do now ['The Bev Smith Show'], I have always been very blessed.  I'm interested in anything.  If we saw two ants moving, I'd really want to know what they said.  And I would say to this guy, "Can you put that microphone down and see if they're talking to each other?"  Because I watch the Discovery Channel, and I know they do communicate.  And then, I'd want to know what relationship the ant has to me.  So, anything interests me.  But if it's about the underdog, if it's about senior citizens, if it's about handicapped people, if it's about children who can't read, if it's about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] patients who I took care of in my home, and babies that I rocked, and money that I raised for border babies whose parents left them because they either had HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] AIDS or were crack addicted, then that's, that's what I did.  And I've always been fortunate enough to be able to translate those interests of mine, those advocacies, into programming.  And so, if I read a book, like I'm reading the book with Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] about starting Essence magazine ['The Man from Essence: Creating a Magazine for Black Women,' Edward Lewis with Audrey Edwards]; he'll be a guest.  If I see a newspaper clipping, I'm very much interested now in the story of the two Arkansas women.  One is black, is it Arkansas or Arizona?  I think it's Arizona, where the mother left the kid in the car.  Okay, the black woman left her kid in the car, and she went for a job interview.  Someone saw the children in the car, two of them, called the police.  She lost her children, and the judge gave her eight years in jail.  Never been a problem, was looking for a job.  And surely rather than do that, someone could have helped better.  Surely they could have, but they didn't, they didn't help her.  They didn't do anything to help her.  And so, that show is a show that I'm going to do.  Because the white woman was on crack cocaine, had been arrested several times for drugs, left her child in the car to go get drugs, and was busted.  Guess what she got?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  No house arrest.
Speaker 1: But she's the mother, right?  They probably said, they probably even said that on, these are--
Speaker 2: What's the difference?
Speaker 1: These are the contradictions of--
Speaker 2: You leave a child in the car.  You leave a child to go get drugs, you leave a child to go get--some--I mean, I was a mother.  I was a mother who was alone in Florida.  But thank god, my child was fourteen or fifteen years old.  But I was a mother, a single mother.  My husband [Ronald Smith] and I separated when my daughter [Heather Williams] was six months old.  I was an abused woman, and so I left my husband.  And I, I have left my daughter in the car while she was asleep.  And I locked the doors and everything, and ran into a store and ran out.  What if they would have stopped me?  But those were different days, too.  Those were different times, too.  And I didn't do it that often, but I could have been, I could have been that mother.  So, you have a woman who leaves her children in the car because she has nowhere to put them.  And they're living in the car and doing everything.  She wants a job, so she has to leave her children.  Can you imagine?  No one knows what's that's like.  And then you have another woman that's on drugs.  What, please tell me, judge--why did you give one who went for the job eight years, and the other one who was on drugs and had been arrested and had a record, no time at all, on her own recognizance?  Why?
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So, that's a show that I would do.  I found out that there were people, blacks, living in Jackson, Mississippi as slaves on a plantation, in the same kind of housing that slaves lived in.  This wasn't twenty years ago, this was a couple of years ago.  I just did a show on it last week to update people.  They didn't have housing.  They had black people who had been appointed to political appointment; they didn't do a doggone thing for those people.  So, we told the story.  And we interviewed a woman who had moved back to be with her family in Jackson, Mississippi, from California.  She was in a house where she could look through, like the slaves, look through to the ground for water.  She had to go get a hose, take the hose and fill up an ice bucket and a cooler with water.  And that's how they got their water.  There was no electricity, so she couldn't iron her clothes.  And she drove a school bus, and the kids teased her.  I got her a house.  So, that, that's what I'm interested in doing.  That's the difference, and the kind of talk show host that I am.
Story_ID: 664575
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, you sort of, you've developed sort of a network of people around the country--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, there are two of us--
Speaker 1: --will take action--
Speaker 2: --for this show ['The Bev Smith Show'].
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: It's my producer, my executive producer.  He's a young man that came to work for me.  He's a schoolteacher, came to work for me.  I trained him what to do, and now we're like, we're in sync.  Maybe it's because his mother's name is Beverly [ph.], and I claim him.  I didn't have to have him, he's too tall.  But I have a daughter [Heather Williams], now, I have a son, and we work together.  And then I can pick up a telephone, and I can call Ralph Nader.  I can pick up a telephone, and I can call a legislator.  I can pick up a telephone, and I can say to a mayor of a city, "This is [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith.  You've got such and such, and so and so and so."  It's not about me, it's about using that person and using my contacts to get something done.  So, that's what I do.  It's not just a talk show, yet it is a talk show.
Speaker 1: Do you have favorite experts that you bring on your show?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned Nader again, Ralph Nader again, but--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dick Gregory is a personal friend.  And used to come, and comes on all the time, anytime I want him on.  I love him dearly, and he loves me.  Yes, I have people that I can call--[HistoryMaker] Hilary Shelton, who is the head of, chief lobbyist for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; Bill Spriggs [William Spriggs], who is the economist for UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers]; Andy Gause, white economist, talks about money.  Yes, colonels, retired people, doctors, yes.  And in the almost forty-five years that I've been in this business. Well, forty-five, my daughter is forty-five.  So, in the almost forty-six years that I've been in this business, yeah, I have a cadre of people that I can call.  And if I don't know, I call somebody to see if they know.  So, it, it expands.
Story_ID: 664576
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you've been called the Queen of Late Night Talk?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's, now, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, there's an argument over who named me that.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Reverend Jackson, says he gave me that name.  And Dr. Ron Daniels of the Haiti Project [Haiti Support Project] says, "No, he didn't.  Miss Bev [HistoryMaker Bev Smith], you know I gave you that name."  Because he used to always call me, my queen.  I am humbled by it, I'm really quite humbled by it.  I have a love affair with my listeners, white, black, orange, green, glowing in the dark.  And I'm humbled by that title, queen yeah.  Because there are days when mama don't feel like no queen, if you feel me (laughter).
Story_ID: 664577
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it was, it was after, basically, a health crisis that your contract was, was ended by American Urban Radio [American Urban Radio Networks].
Speaker 2: Well, they like to say that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did that happen?
Speaker 2: --because of breast cancer.  But that's not true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had breast cancer, and went back to work.  I went back to work three days after I had my operation.  The truth of the matter is, I was too controversial.  And I did not un-invite [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan from my town hall meeting.  So, I think it was a combination of all of that.  And like anything, you fall out of love.  And they fell out of love with me, and I definitely fell out of love with them. I respect them, the American Urban Radio Network.  I certainly have had forty-five years of in and out, as a career with them, because I've always gone back to do stuff with them.  So, I have a great deal of love for the people there.  I think they have the capabilities of really being an unbelievable network.  But they were afraid to do the kinds of things. And I don't blame them, I have no problems.  But that is not true, although that was the rumor that was spread.  And I was not fired at that time.  They don't like me to say fired they say change of programming.  But when I'm number one--and when I'm one of the top twenty-five talk show hosts bar none, in the country, by Talkers magazine--when I'm one of the top fifty, top 100, and you let me go, why?
Speaker 1: Now, the excuse that I've read is that it has to do with--
Speaker 2: Breast cancer.
Speaker 1: Well, no, not that so much, but demographics of trying to cultivate a younger audience.  And I just wonder if that's, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I don't think that's true at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do believe that a lot of networks, black, white, orange, green, glowing in the dark, cop out.  They take the easy way to the dollar.  So, part of that is true.  But there were problems with American Urban Radio Network and their affiliates.  There would be times when we would be on the air, and we would say, "We haven't received a phone call."  Because that station was no longer carrying the programs of American Urban Radio Network.  Not because of a [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith, but because of a problem between the contractual agreements.  How did I find that out to be true?  Many ways.  First of all, I was privy to information that our show ['The Bev Smith Show'] was one of the top billers.  Did we make the money?  No.  I gave up vacation money so I could help, get help, and pay people's salaries.  So, no, I don't believe that for one moment.  I believe that it was a combination of things--they're wanting a younger audience.  But they gave up music, they gave up the younger audience, and they sold the station that was bringing them--a station that had a history in this business.  They gave that up.  My show brought them attention, the kind of attention that they couldn't have gotten any other way.  And I don't care whether it was--and I love all of the jocks that were on in the morning, but I wasn't a jock, although I can play music.  But I wasn't a jock--and I do--but I wasn't a jock.  So, I think that I was controversial.  I was told by management that I was uncontrollable.  What, I mean, what does that mean?  I don't understand what that means.  And if you can have a national talk show deejay who is male, do programming from his home--and I'm well known as a successful talk show host--so why do you tell me no?  Inquiring minds want to know.  So, it was much like my marriage, a parting of the ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, looking back--I mean looking forward now from where you are,  You've been able to recoup your radio audience in your own home, actually broadcasting out of your own home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, at great expense, please.  Ask me if I would do it again, I don't know, because I used every penny that I had.  But I have almost every station back.  And we went to them, and we talked to them, and we serviced them.  There were times when I couldn't tell you what station I was on, when I was at American Urban Radio Network.  Not complaining, had a great relationship with them, but they did not treat me right, and I will not allow them to lie about the reasons.  Because cancer is no joke, and I was healed, and I overcame.  I have challenges now, and I'm being watched now.  But I overcame, and I went back to work in three days, okay.  Yeah, so, no, I'm not going to allow that to be the reason, because it isn't.  It's not true.
Story_ID: 664578
Speaker 1: So, how tough was it to, to get your audience back after leaving the--
Speaker 2: How tough is it?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: Not as tough as I thought, but tough.  Because you have to--first of all, I had to convince the affiliates that I was not associated with the managing and marketing of American Urban Radio Network programming [American Urban Radio Networks].  That wasn't my responsibility, I was a paid employee.  So, that was hard.  But we went to them.  I'll give you a good example. Two weeks ago, I was in Atlanta [Georgia].  I prayed to God to get Atlanta back.  And the people from Atlanta used to write to me, and listen to me through the Internet, like you did, so that they could hear me.  I prayed, "Dear Father, please, dear Father, please." Like I'm praying for New York [New York] now, to get back into the New York market.  The people in Atlanta never forgot me, never forgot my radio show ['The Bev Smith Show'], and they wanted me back.  And they hounded the station that I was on [WAOK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia].  The program director now, the operations director, I just, I just love her.  I pray for her every day, Jean Ross is her name.  She wanted me.  So, we were able to work a deal through the syndicator that I have now, who is young, who started the company just like I did.  He took his savings, and his wife became the principal breadwinner, and he started syndicating programs.  And I'm the first real person that he's syndicated.  Now, he has other talents.  But I went there, and I must tell you that it was exactly what the doctor ordered.  Because when I went there, I was truly treated like a queen.  I thought maybe they thought Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was coming, because of the way they came out, talked, remembered my programming.  And some people reached in their pocket and took out money, and put it on my desk that we were sitting on, broadcasting from the remote, and said, "Use this for your show."  And it was like a blessing.  We were able to buy cartridges and, you know what it takes to run. So, it's been quite an experience, and I've been able to work out an agreement.  Now, we have to sell ourselves in the market.  But what I'd like to be able to do is to raise enough money so that I don't have to listen to advertisers.  Because if I think your company stinks, I don't want you telling me that I can't say that, because that's not who I am.  So, it's best to get independent money to do that, and that's what we're trying to do now.
Story_ID: 664579
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think there's, in the future there might even be some sort of a urban--you know, black talk radio--
Speaker 2: All talk radio network?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  There's so many talents, like, people like Bob Law, Farage (Unclear) [ph.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Bob Law is at the same--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Kojo Nnamdi, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all these different people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you, yourself.
Speaker 2: You mean all over the country--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know--
Speaker 2: --there are personalities, yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, you know, have the--like the, I guess the FOX, or, you know, the Rush Limbaughs and the Glenn Becks and all that.
Speaker 2: That's what--
Speaker 1: They may have a barrage of right wingers.  They--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they just pick, okay.  And then because of the money they offer, they get what they get.  Do I think it will happen soon?  No.  Do I think that there's a need for it?  Yes.  Do I think entrepreneurs who are African American investors--do you know what would happen if a couple of those basketball players--who will be playing a game tomorrow night.  Do you know what would happen if they were to put their money together, and they were to take that money and build a network?  Do you know what would happen?  A network where we could do the kinds of things that need to be done--where we have children's programming and programs for the elderly and women's programming and men's programming and movies and all of that?  Well, you might call that TV One, because they're doing it with some of their programming.  You might call that BET [Black Entertainment Television], because they're doing it.  Do I see that in the future?  No, because we are a people in America who worship the golden calf, and all we think about is money.  And if you know the story of Moses, they melted down all of their gold, because the message wasn't told to them the right way anymore, and they sold out their souls for gold.  That's what America is doing.  Do I think black people are doing it?  Yes.  Do I think we have enough black people who care?  No.  Do I think we have enough black people committed?  No.  But then I don't think we have enough white folks committed, either. So, there you are.  So, the answer is not anytime soon, and I'm not happy with that.  Because there should have been a place for a [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith.  There should have been a place for a news director.  There should have been a place for young people who are coming out of college, and they want jobs.  Come on, now.  You can't get a job at MSNBC, but you should be able to get a job at BET.  This should be the pop off, the jump off part, the building of careers.  No, everybody's interested in (singing), "What have you done for me lately," ['What Have You Done for Me Lately'].  That's exactly what it's all about.  And it's frightening, because I'm a biblical student.  I'm a student of all of it.  I particularly like Gibran [Kahlil Gibran].  But I think that we're seeing mankind in his most destructive form, because of greed.  Everything is about money.  I mean, there's a man in jail right now whose son committed suicide--who took his sister's money off Wall Street for investments.  It's all about money.  And some folks will kill their mama's mama, and go get their daddy's mama out of the grave, and kill her all over again for money.  That's where we are in the black community, that's where we are in America; that's where we are in the world.  So, I don't know if I'll ever see it, or you will ever see it.
Story_ID: 664580
Speaker 1: After hosting a radio show ['The Bev Smith Show'] that's dealing with issues in our community for so long, what are some of your primary hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: You don't have time for all of the hopes.  My one thing is unity, U-N-I-T-Y, like Latifah [Queen Latifah] sings.  I want us to come together.  We, if we knew who we were like I know who we are. If we knew what we were able to do when the whip was on us, when we weren't allowed to stand two people on the street, when we had to step off the sidewalk if a white person came toward us, when a young boy named Emmett Till was killed for joking with a white woman [Carolyn Bryant], taken out of the bed, dropped in the ocean [sic.].  So, the only way his mother [Mamie Till Mobley] could identify him was by his feet, okay.  If we knew who we were, if we knew that this cooling unit that is my air conditioning unit--a black man [Frederick McKinley Jones] has a patent for that.  If we knew that the cooling unit in the refrigerator, a black man.  The engine, a black man, not Ford [Henry Ford].  Go look up the patents.  The filament in the lights. Yes, Edison [Thomas Edison] was involved, but without the filament, you have no light, lights off, for the rest of the world.  If you knew what we did, if you knew what we worked on, if you knew how we struggled, if you knew how people died so you can read.  How dare you not be able to read?  How dare illiteracy be so high in the black community?  What do I want?  Wake up, black people.  Wake up, coloreds, C-U-L-L-U-D-S, devoid of ethnicity, devoid of pride, devoid, devoid, devoid.  Get committed, wealthy black people.  Start teaching your children manners, black women.  Stop wearing all that junk you wear--you're not competing with your daughters.  Give us, now, this could be the rule for anyone living in America.  But you asked me about my people, and my talk show.  I started in this business doing mainstream media, not black.  I started in this doing mainstream media, a consumer advocate, who looks at not the color, but the crime--the sin against the consumer.  What do I want for my people?  I want them to care again, I want them to care again, I want them to care again.  If that could happen, and if I could be a part of that, that's what I want.
Story_ID: 664581
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, sometimes the ego gets in the way.  They don't treat me like they treat everybody else, so I'm not going to the party.  I should have put my best stuff on, and went to the party.  They offered me a job, and I didn't think it was going to be the right thing.  I should have took that job.  Yes, yes, there are some things that I would do differently, both in my business life and in my personal life.  But am I sorry?  No, because life is the classroom, I never failed.  I made mistakes along the way, but I never failed.  I'm still standing.  I'm the phoenix (gesture), and still I rise.  So--
Story_ID: 664582
Speaker 1: In that vein, when you look back on everything again, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  Integrity.  Black people trust me, because I can be trusted.  Black people care for me, because they know I care.  Women care for me, because they know I care.  The elderly care for me, because they know I care.  Integrity, that's what I have.  That's what my father [John Sloan] gave me, that's what my mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan] gave me, and continues to give me.  You are what you say you are.  And that's what I am.  Am I rich?  No, but am I wealthy?  Yes, yes, I've had a life full of wealth.  I've been carried on the shoulders of Moroccans at the Arab women's function in Washington, D.C., where I was carried in and saluted for the work that I've tried to do to get better understanding between people who call themselves Arab, and people who look at all Arabs with preconceived notions that end up as stereotypes.  Yeah, these are some of the things that I'm involved in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Did that answer you?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think. And I noticed coming here today you have quite an extended family.
Story_ID: 664583
Speaker 1: As a--so, well, you mentioned your daughter [Heather Williams] and your mother [Isabelle Jones Sloan].  Tell us a little bit about your family today, as we--
Speaker 2: I was raised that if my sister gets cut, I bleed.  And to this day, we are that way.  My mother is the queen.  And when my father [John Sloan] was on his deathbed, he wanted us to be with my mother.  I have a very close family, and I'm very, very blessed to have some caring friends who care enough about me to be worried when they can't reach me on the phone.  I have a devoted executive producer, who I'm giving a portion of my ownership of my show ['The Bev Smith Show'] to.  Because when I was sick, he was at the hospital.  When I needed a ride home and it was no one to take me home, because my daughter was on her way, he took me home.  I'm blessed to have these kinds of people.  You met my two partners, the McAbee sisters [Charlene McAbee and Cheryl McAbee].  I can't even begin to tell you what those angels have been to my life.  I have my best friend, Doris [ph.], and my best friend, Mary [ph.].  And I have my god-brother, Mary is his wife.  I have my god-brother, Richard Thomas [ph.], who is also my accountant, and keeps reminding me, "You're poor." (Laughter) And he would be here yelling, "She's got to make some money."  You know, but yeah.  Yeah, I would think--I don't think I would do it any differently.  You didn't ask that, but I just thought about that.  I don't think I would do it any differently.  There are some personal things I would have done.  I would have taken some time to have some fun.  I don't know what it's like to have fun, I really don't.  I have to make myself take a day--I'm not the kind of person that can watch television and not see a talk show.  Or, can watch something and say, "Did she just say that?"  And worry the heck out of my executive producer to find out who she was.  I want to be able to relax a little bit more, but I'll be doing this until God calls me home.  I know it, I'm comfortable with it.
Story_ID: 664584
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we have not raised that we need to talk about before we ask our last--?
Speaker 2: You can ask me what it's like to be threatened, have your life threatened, and have your daughter [Heather Williams] scared.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, we discussed it.  But, go ahead and talk about it.
Speaker 2: I was never really afraid of being shot at and the bullets went past my head.  I was never really afraid of being threatened, as I was when I invited Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] to be a part of the town hall meeting on black men and their role. Who better?  I wasn't afraid, because I had the Pittsburgh police department [Pittsburgh Bureau of Police], the former police chief.  I had protection.  And I had the Muslims, and I had God.  But when my daughter's school was threatened in Orlando [Winter Park High School, Winter Park, Florida], and when the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had to take us home. When I had to rock my teenage daughter to sleep. That was the time I wish I could have been someone else.  And I was told, if you would do this, you could make money.  If you would do this, that was the only time that I had any regret.  But that was a fearful time, because my daughter did not ask for this, and they threatened my baby.  And so, I took my baby to the gun range with an FBI agent and his wife, who taught us how to shoot, and I bought a gun.  And I kept that gun.  And if they came, I was--and I don't believe in that, I believe in God.  But if someone would have threatened my child, I would have rendered unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, without a doubt.  So, that was the only time that I had to wrestle with the person that I am spiritually, and the person that I am as an advocate.  Yeah, that was a frightening time for me.  But that's the only time.
Story_ID: 664585
Speaker 1: Well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As the queen of nighttime talk, a person who loved her people.  I do not apologize for loving my people, because my people have been devoid of love.  They've been liked occasionally, but they don't even love each other now.  And I don't apologize for being proud of who I am ethnically.  After all, it was a white anthropologist and genealogist who said that the first woman created by God was a woman named Eve, found in Africa.  She was an African woman.  I do not apologize, and I accept everything that my love of my people bring to me.  But I love all people.  So that, when someone calls me who is white and needs help, I do that.  So, that's, that would be about it, no apology, no apology.  And I can shoot a gun.  I have a small hand, but it can hold a .357 Mag [.357 Magnum].  But I'm not going to use it--and I don't have a gun now.  Or maybe I shouldn't have said that.  (Laughter) Maybe I shouldn't have said that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: That's good.  I hope I gave you everything you wanted.
Story_ID: 664586
Speaker 1: All right, we want to revisit something I did not ask about, and that's your books.  I caught myself, as we were closing down.  So, tell us about your books.  You've, you've you're in the process of writing two right now?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: One is called, 'A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Success' because through my life, I used to view success, as everyone does, by what you have in your checking account.  But I found success in many different ways.  Success is when you're invited to a palace with a king.  Success is when Rosa Parks sits in your home.  Success is when a woman comes up to you that you have not seen before, you think.  And she is a person who was in one of your fashion shows, won a contest, got money, used it for her college tuition, and had come to where you were to thank you for helping her go to college.  So, I wanted to write about success.  So, I started writing about success.  [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams, a well known Republican conservative, had a friend who published books, and got me into contact with him.  And we made a deal, and we were set to go.  And I made the catalog, and the book was coming out.  And the publishing company in Florida caught on fire, they do spiritual books, and the man had a heart attack.  So, I put everything away for a while.  And then I got angry.  And so, I started writing, like, diaries.  I started writing 'Talking While Black' because I have had a lot of things happen to me, talking while black.  And so, I started that.  One night I was looking out the window. You're going to think that I'm absolutely crazy.  And you know I'm hungry, so it may be depriving my brain, okay.  But this happened.  I was looking out of a window.  And I looked out, and I was looking up at the heavens, and the voice said, "Interview with Jesus."  And I thought, okay, interview with Jesus?  And so, I went to sit down at the computer again to start--I had taken a break and was looking out the window--to start the book, 'Talking While Black' which I've almost completed.  And I started writing what I call spiritual mystery ['Interview with Jesus']. Very proud of it, I just finished book one.  And it is about a black talk show host who is chosen by God to interview Jesus on his return back to the world, and what happens to her and those around her, as she tries to get to Jesus.  I am thrilled about this booklet, and everyone says, "No, no, no, no, don't do that one.  Do 'Talking While Black.'  That's salacious, that'll do it."  But I'm going to do this one first, and we'll see what happens.  The woman who did 'Romancing the Stone,' Catherine Lanigan, I told her about the book.  She thinks I have something.  The woman who is one of the top editors, Diane Nine, she thinks I have a good book.  So, I'm fine tuning it.  I didn't know how to write a book, I just sat and told the story.  But book one is done.  So now, we have to go back, put it in form, do all of that.  And I'm hoping to have that book out by fall.  I'm going to have that book out by fall, if I have to sell it on the corners myself, because I believe in this book more than anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you have like three pending books that you've written?  And--
Speaker 2: With interest in all of them.  It's just that you, when you're the chief cook and bottle washer, you don't always have time to do it.  And so, I'm finishing it up.  It's done, it just has to be edited.
