Story_ID: 653758
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Debra Adams Simmons [HistoryMaker Debra Simmons], D-E-B-R-A, A-D-A-M-S, S-I-M-M-O-N-S.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 11/4/64 [November 4, 1964], at Saint Francis Hospital [Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center] in Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My title is editor, The Plain Dealer, and I am the senior editor at The Plain Dealer in Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a trick question. Today's date is February 11th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in The Plain Dealer board room at 1801 Superior Avenue in Cleveland.
Story_ID: 653759
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's kind of a trick question; yes, I have a favorite food, macaroni and cheese made by my mother [Annie Lester Adams] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite color, and not surprisingly, it's red (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, I was gonna say if it's not red, we're (laughter)--. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I, I think November, December are among my favorite times of year--the holidays; I was born in November, but since I've always found myself to be in cold climates, you know, I kind of like the summertime as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like to travel all over the world, so I wouldn't zero in on one destination specifically, though I certainly enjoy traveling to Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, as the mother of teenagers (laughter), as well as, you know, having many things going on in my own life, you know, career wise, I have many, many sayings. One of the sayings that I have on, on a wall in my office is, "Well behaved women rarely make history."
Story_ID: 653760
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Rudolph Adams] side--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but, but separately; and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: So my mother's name is Annie, her maiden name was Annie Ruth Lester [Annie Lester Adams].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And then it became Adams.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: A-N-N-I-E, then Ruth, R-U-T-H, and then Lester, L-E-S-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Four, six, forty-three [April 6, 1943], in Carrollton, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and are they from some other place other than Carrollton, or--
Speaker 2: Well, her, her mother was from Carrollton, her father was from Mississippi. Carrollton is in Pickens County [Alabama], which is about thirty-five or forty miles from the Mississippi border, so I can--I can probably go back to her grandmother, and that's as far back as I can go--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause she was kind of her grandmother's favorite granddaughter, so she had a relationship with her grandmother, who had passed away by the time I was born, so I didn't have a relationship with my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so her grandmother's name was?
Speaker 2: Ruth [Ruth Lester (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Ruth, okay; was this Lester, as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about her that are passed down? What she did for a living, or if she had any special talents or--
Speaker 2: So she, you know, not unlike a lot of people in the South, was a domestic worker, and I guess we're talking about the late 1800s, early 1900s, but I don't know that she--I guess, in addition to--I don't know how full time was defined then, but she also had several children, maybe fourteen children, and so I mean she spent a lot of time sort of raising the family. So she was a great cook; my mother was her little protege, so my mother is now the sort of fam- the cook matriarch in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So your mother's mother was probably born in the '20s [1920s], I guess, right? Or thereabouts unless your grandmother was born earlier, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but I, I can check that specifically. She might have been born in the late teens [1910s]; like I wanna say 1918 or something like that.
Speaker 1: All right. So was the family history always in Carrollton, as far as you know?
Speaker 2: Yes; well, from the Mississippi border to--from Columbus, Mississippi to Tuscaloosa [Alabama], which is not--that was just sort of a fifty mile radius.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And are there any stories that have passed down about the--about emancipation, or slavery, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of. I'm sure there are stories because my mother's father was a few years older than my mother's mother and he, I think, was born in like 1898, so I mean he would have been, you know, just beyond that generation, and I guess there were some stories about them picking cot- my grandfather picking cotton. You know, obviously slavery had ended, but there was still a whole lot of cotton that needed to be picked, and so, you know, that was part of, you know, my grandfather's experience. And even my mother and her siblings--there were six girls and two boys; they picked cotton. Apparently, some of the girls weren't as good at it, which is how I think my mother ended up being a protege of her grandmother, but, so--I mean a very sort of traditional southern l- black life experience.
Story_ID: 653761
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Annie Lester Adams]--now did she have a chance to finish high school and go to college, or?
Speaker 2: So my mother went to Carrollton High School [Carrollton, Alabama], she--it was an integrated high school; she was the salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this would have been in the 1950s--
Speaker 2: I think she graduated in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], right, right. So an integrated high school in Alabama at that time--
Speaker 2: I, I--you know, maybe it's 'cause, the town was so small, it wasn't, you know, it was difficult to come up with two--I don't know the--I'd have to find out the variables.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this like predates Governor Wallace [George Wallace] standing in the doorway of the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]. You know, he didn't do that until '64 [sic. 1963]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you'd think--hm, that's interesting. So there has to be a story about this.
Speaker 2: There is. In fact, if I had thought that we were gonna talk about this, I would have said, "Tell me that story again." But my mother was the salutatorian; she should have been the valedictorian. She had better grades than the person who was the valedictorian, but that person was connected; I'm not sure who she was connected to, but--so, you know, my mother was very sort of studious and very conscientious and very shy. But her sister, who was about seven years older, graduated from high school and moved to Hartford [Connecticut], and so my mother--when she graduated from high school, she moved to Hartford, really following her sister.
Speaker 1: Now what was the Hartford connection?
Speaker 2: I think that there was a time when--I don't know if--I mean there was a belief that there were opportunities in Hartford, so there had been an earlier wave, perhaps ten years beforehand, and then for some reason, that became a pipeline. And it wasn't like they were moving to Hartford to be domestic workers necessarily because they--this group of women primarily, moved to Hartford and went to business school and got these jobs as corporate secretaries, and my, my mother did the same.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) secretarial jobs, okay.
Story_ID: 653762
Speaker 1: So here's a bit of a zig--my mother's high school sweetheart, who graduated the year before her, went off to the [U.S.] military. When was the Korean War? Kind of around that time.
Speaker 2: Fif- no well, no Korean War would have been in the fif- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fif--
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948], '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so he went off to the military; I guess not war per se, but he went into the military, she moved to Connecticut, they weren't in the same, you know, there wasn't all the sort of digital communication that we have now, so they lost contact. But in 2005, their high school [Carrollton High School, Carrollton, Alabama] had an all class reunion and they reconnected, they got married, and they're living happily ever after in San Antonio, Texas. So after not communicating for forty-five years, my mother [Annie Lester Adams] reconnected with her high school sweetheart from Carrollton, Alabama. So the girls tended to, you know, move north, you know; there was also a huge contingent that went to Chicago [Illinois]. I'm like, "How did you end up in Hartford [Connecticut]? You could've ended up in Chicago." The girls sort of left for these clerical jobs; a lot of the boys went into the military, and for--you know, for a huge percentage of that population, that was their sort of springboard out of the Deep South.
Speaker 2: That's a remarkable story, the high school sweetheart story, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It is; in fact, I sent Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] an email but--right around the time they got married in 2007, but it didn't work with the calendar that was happening, and so their story never got told.
Speaker 2: That is something.
Speaker 1: And both their spouses had--actually, my, my father [Rudolph Adams] passed away when I was twelve; we'll get to that part of the story. So my mother had been a widow for a number of years at this point. He and his wife had sort of separated perhaps twenty years beforehand, and he had never gotten remarried, so it was a sort of ideal match for them. It's just fascinating that after forty-five years, they still liked each other and could make that work (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's quite a story.
Speaker 1: And he stayed in the military for--I mean he was a career [U.S.] Army--so I think twenty-seven or twenty--almost thirty years--
Speaker 2: Now, now is there a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which is why they were in San Antonio.
Story_ID: 653763
Speaker 1: Is there a natural route to Connecticut from Alabama, on a train or something? 'Cause I--you know, Ohio is heavily populated with Al- Alabama people and so is Detroit [Michigan]; that's predominately the population in these states and because of the railroad line. So, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. I presume that that railroad line went to New York City [New York, New York], but New York was probably very saturated and so, you know, that New York, Connecticut border is--you can--it, it's right there together, so I think that--'cause you think about suburban sprawl, Connecticut was the sprawl and, you know, by the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], I just think it became a natural extension of that train into New York City.
Speaker 1: It's something else, too. I think like Tuscaloosa [Stillman College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] is a school that's run by the American Missionary Society [sic.] I believe--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which has, you know, roots on the East Coast, perhaps; I don't--I'm not sure, but somewhere in New England.
Speaker 2: Right, but I do--I think that the generation before them, the women who ended up in Connecticut, did go for domestic jobs; but for that sort of late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] group, it was all about these sort of office jobs, you know; that was, you know, for them, a sort of--the step up in evolution so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so where did your mother [Annie Lester Adams] work when she got her--
Speaker 2: So my mother moved to Connecticut, she went to business school, and she worked for the State of Connecticut; that was her--I think she worked in some corporate office for some--a law firm or something, but I think that was short lived and she shifted to the State of Connecticut, you know, where they had great benefits obviously. But here's another zig. I told you the story of my mother's current husband. I mentioned that my mother moved to Connecticut following her sister; well, her sister moved to Connecticut and got married to a Guyanese man, and when my mother got to Connecticut, the Guyanese man's brother fell in love with my mother, so ultimately two sisters married two brothers (laughter). So you have these two, you have these two sisters in Connecticut by way of Carrollton, Alabama marry two Guyanese men.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the mo- your mother married the brother--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and that's your father [Rudolph Adams], is that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well let's go to him. And, can you--
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Now his story, I can't fill in as many blanks.
Story_ID: 653764
Speaker 1: Well can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Rudolph, R-U-D-O-L-P-H, Nathaniel Adams [Rudolph Adams].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew you were gonna ask that. February 5th, 1929 I think? February 5th, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother [Annie Lester Adams] was kind of his child bride (laughter). There's a bit of a gap there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a little bit of a gap. So--okay, so--well, fourteen years is not that bad.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But--so, and your father was born in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Georgetown, Guyana--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he was the second youngest of maybe nine children, he was a carpenter.
Speaker 1: And what brought him to--well, his brother preceded him to the United States, but what started that, that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, that--even though--that brother was younger, but he--actually, his trip to United States I really think was precipitated by a sister of his who, you know, became a nurse in Guyana, and then she moved to England, and then she left England and--and I'm not sure what the circumstances were, and moved to New York City [New York, New York], moved to Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so after she had been in Brooklyn for a few years, she sent for my father, who was her favorite brother, and the other brother who I referenced, who was--so essentially, she sent for her two younger brothers. You know, they both left Guyana, moved to--they came to Brooklyn, but for whatever reason, the work--the, the sort of carpentry work that they were interested in was available in Connecticut, so that's how they got to Connecticut, you know, coming over to be in Brooklyn and then branching out to Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Now did your father have a chance to finish high school in the--Guyana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did; he--you know, 'cause his family was considered middle class in Guyana, they lived in the heart of the city in a fairly--what would be considered elaborate sort of New Orleans-esque mansion. And I think the school that he attended was called Cambridge Academy [Georgetown, Guyana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think the allure of following his sister to the United States was, you know, was attractive and so I think he jumped at that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She, interestingly enough, turned ninety-five that week between Christmas and New Year's and is still living in Brooklyn (laughter). So--though her version of these stories is getting a little more fuzzy each passing year.
Speaker 1: Now what's her name?
Speaker 2: Stephanie Carrington.
Speaker 1: Steph- Stephanie or?
Speaker 2: Stephanie, I-E, and then Carrington, C-A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay, all right. Ninety-five years old, okay.
Story_ID: 653765
Speaker 1: Are there any stories? Now the--you said their family is well off; are there any stories about how they came from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I said they were middle class. I, I think that his father was a carpenter; I mean I think that was sort of, you know, passed through the family, and I guess, you know, building things was at least, you know, paying employment. And then--I don't know what his mother did, but I know she did some--I know that she worked; I wanna say she did hair because some of the other siblings sort of followed her doing hair, but I don't know if she did that exclusively or she did that in addition to having some other skills.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now--any writers on either side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of (laughter), but there're certainly people who have lots of questions (laughter), so I think there's some, there's some journalism skills, if not, you know, the writing capacity, in the mix.
Speaker 1: Now is there a more--
Speaker 2: My father's father was also active in politics--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so he wasn't ever elected to anything--that I'm aware of, but I think he was often involved in political teams that were, you know, being developed to try to sort of make change, or what have you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Kojo Nnamdi in Washington, D.C.; he's from Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --born in Georgetown [Guyana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Talked about politics being discussed quite a bit in, you know, in Georgetown when he was coming up--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with Walter Rodney and others.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: But--so it's a small place but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, lot of political activity going on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 653766
Speaker 1: Is there a more personal story about how your parents met, other than the introduction one? Or is it, is that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, it's pretty much, you know--my, my, my [maternal] aunt and my [paternal] uncle were a couple; and then my aunt's little sister [Simmons' mother, Annie Lester Adams] showed up and, you know, my father [Rudolph Adams] who was recently divorced was like, "Oh, she's kind of cute." And (laughter), you know, I think the rest is history. So I really think it was a family gathering and not necessarily anything more dramatic than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their views, their talents, how they walk, how they look, you know, how they talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, so my father passed away when I was twelve years old; actually, it was the day after my twelfth birthday, so I don't necessarily have fifty years of hindsight, but I would definitely say I'm my father's child. My mother is very mild mannered and sweet, even now. You know, oftentimes, people ask her if she's a nurse or has ever been a nurse 'cause she's very caring and very nurturing and really very southern. You know, my father was like highly opinionated and outspoken and, you know, had a strong personality and, you know, probably wasn't necessarily well behaved, so when I talk about that, that sort of sticker in my office that says, "Well behaved women rarely make history," that's definitely more linked to my father. And I talked about this ninety-five year old aunt, his sister [Stephanie Carrington], you know, many people are like, "Oh my goodness, you could be her daughter because you're just like her." So--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm not sure what that means (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I mean that's, it's a--consider it a compliment.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Story_ID: 653767
Speaker 1: Now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: So I--so my father [Rudolph Adams], who I mentioned, was--you know, my mother [Annie Lester Adams] was his second wife; he had several daughters before I showed up, so I have four half-sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them?
Speaker 2: Donna [ph.], Denise [ph.], Stephanie [ph.], and Charlotte [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did they stay in Guyana [British Guiana; Guyana], or did they come--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, these were in Hartford [Connecticut]; these were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so he had another wife in Hartford?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think of her name. It's--I'm drawing a blank, but it may come to me. I wanna say it starts with a D.
Speaker 1: Well, at any rate, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So anyway, he had those daughters, and then my parents had two children--myself and a brother who's younger than me, and he passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So growing up it was--in the household, it was just--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you and your brother and your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 653768
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, so when I was in kindergarten, we lived in a suburb, which was called East Hartford [Connecticut], and I was the only black girl in--maybe in the school, but certainly in kindergarten.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Hm.
Speaker 2: So, by the time I was in the second grade, we moved back into the city. Based on where we lived--I, I went to a public elementary school. Based on where we lived, I, I was assigned to a school that was about a mile away; maybe even a mile and a half away, and I had to walk to school. So in the--in recent days, when school's been canceled because it was cold, I'm like, "Back in my day" (laughter). And, you know, we think of older people saying that. I was like, "I never got a day off because it was cold, are you kidding me? I had to walk a mile and a half to school." So my memories are really walking to school with the people in my neighborhood. I talked about my mother [Annie Lester Adams] being, you know, kind of, you know, sweet and studious; I guess I do get some of that studiousness from her 'cause I was one of the smart girls in school back then, you know. So another memory is, you know, being really focused on school, getting my homework done, you know; working on projects. I probably was accused of being the teacher's pet on occasion, certainly in sixth grade, which my elementary school was a K-6 [kindergarten to sixth grade]. My sixth grade teacher was the teacher nobody wanted to get--Mrs. Claytor [ph.]; she was evil (laugher). You know, particularly the--you know, on the last day of school in the fifth grade, you find out who your teacher was gonna be for the next year, and everyone would pull out their piece of paper and hope it wasn't Ms. Claytor. Well, sure enough, Ms. Claytor was the teacher who I ended up with, and she loved me. So the teacher who everybody hated really loved me and I had a great relationship with her, so--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school--the first school at East Hartford--what was that one?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--the kindergarten school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know; I can try to find out.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well what about the second one?
Speaker 2: The second one was called Annie Fisher Elementary School [Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School].
Speaker 1: Annie Fisher. And that's in Hartford [Connecticut] proper?
Speaker 2: Yes, on Plainfield Street. And so--I don't remember my second grade teacher, but my third grade teacher was Ms. Payalillo [ph.], and she--I had a good relationship with her; that was at a time when there were lots of testing to see what your specific academic ability was, and when I was in the beginning of third grade, I--we took some tests, and I was reading on a seventh grade level, so--and this is a school that's a predominantly black school, you know with, you know, children from all kinds of behavioral challenges, and then you had the sort of quiet girl with the seventh grade reading capacity, so I had a good relationship with her as well.
Speaker 1: Did you know how to read before you started school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: All right. So was this due to your father [Rudolph Adams] or mother, or--
Speaker 2: I would probably say both parents. You know, I mentioned my mother had been the salutatorian [at Carrollton High School, Carrollton, Alabama] and I, I think that--you know, I can remember being a toddler and getting books as, you know, birthday gifts and Christmas gifts, in addition to toys and other things, so I think that probably was a variable.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of reading material around the house?
Speaker 2: There was. And I had mentioned having a brother, but my brother and I were eight years apart, so I was an only child for eight years, so, you know, I'm sure books were a way to keep me entertained.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, eight years is a long time, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you were--he's born when you were in third grade, but by the time you were in--he gets to be your age, you're in college or something like that, so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay, now--Hartford and, you know, being in the history, you know, I've been to Hartford; I went by the Twain House [Mark Twain House and Museum]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it's next door to the Harriet Beecher Stowe house [Harriet Beecher Stowe Center].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 653769
Speaker 1: I had mentioned the Mark Twain--the Mark Twain House [Mark Twain House and Museum, Hartford, Connecticut] and the Harriet Beecher Stowe house [Harriet Beecher Stowe Center, Hartford, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being, you know, two writers that changed the United States, that you have to read about in your history books; they all have a--they both have a connection to black people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in their stories. So did, did--were they--were those--the presence of those two figures in town--I mean their homes at least, and those museums (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, the two field trips your elementary schools would take every year were to the Mark Twain and Harriet Beecher Stowe houses, you know, beginning in second grade and going through 'til about eighth grade but, you know, at the time, you know, particularly if you were in, you know, six, seventh or eighth grade, you tend to roll your eyes because it's like, "Okay, we're going back to the Mark Twain House." Interestingly enough, when I was in third grade I think, I was in the play 'The King and I' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], you know, which has lines, you know, about Harriet Beecher Stowe, and so I, I would say it's definitely part of the culture and psyche of the city, you know, particularly from an academic perspective. I don't know--I, I didn't spend enough time in Hartford [Connecticut] as an adult to really have a sense of how it plays out in that way other than being on the list of sort of tour spots if you're there but, you know, both visiting as well as reading their work, you know, in English and language arts classes, as well as talking about them and their role in history classes, there's definitely a presence.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so through grade school [Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], your mentor was the sixth grade teacher--the mean teacher, Miss Claytor [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), yes, yes. Probably Miss Payalillo [ph.] from, you know--for those intermediate years; and then by the time I got to sixth grade, it was definitely Miss Claytor.
Story_ID: 653770
Speaker 1: So you're growing up in the, in the '60s [1960s], right? I mean you're in grade school in the '60s [1960s] through seven- through '71 [1971] or so?
Speaker 2: Right. So I was born in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Oh, '64 [1964] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so I was in kindergarten in '69 [1969] and first grade in '70 [1970], so really we're talking about the '70s [1970s], right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then in sixth grade [at Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], I was the, the sixth grade equivalent of the valedictorian; they didn't call it that, though.
Speaker 1: So your school is mostly black at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty much--99 percent, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is Hartford [Connecticut] pretty much segregated along a--I mean a certain side of town is black, or--
Speaker 2: Hartford's a pretty black city--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, most of the--you know, at that time, the, the more west--this is probably pretty common everywhere; the more west you lived, the more diverse it was, the more white it was, the more Jewish it was, 'cause not unlike New York City [New York, New York], there were a lot of--or even Cleveland [Ohio], lots of Jews in Hartford. And so by the time I got to sort of sixth grade and middle school, you know, white flight was pretty dramatic, so most whites were moving out at that time into West Hartford [Connecticut] proper, or East Hartford [Connecticut], or somewhere other than the, the city proper. And so if you look at the city now, I don't know what the demographics are, but if it's more than 20 percent white, I'd be shocked. So it's basically a black and Puerto Rican city.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Which is interesting because when I meet people, particularly in the Midwest, and they way, "Oh, you're from Connecticut; are there any black people there?" I'm like, "Yeah, quite a few, actually," so--
Speaker 1: Well can you describe the neighborhood you lived in and did it have a special name? I mean like does it have a--
Speaker 2: So--yeah, I can describe it. So the street that I grew up on was Adams Street, so I was Debra Adams [HistoryMaker Debra Simmons] and I grew up on Adams Street, so that was easy to remember. And Adams Street was at the intersection of--it intersected with Albany Avenue, and it was one block over from Blue Hills Avenue. And so it was really on the corner of this Blue Hills Avenue district, which was kind of a black working class neighborhood. A lot of the people in the Blue Hills Avenue district had jobs at Pratt and Whitney aircraft [East Hartford, Connecticut], you know, which were, you know, considered good sort of union jobs at the time, and--but Albany Avenue, you know, particularly going towards downtown, was much more edgy, and so Blue Hills was all--during the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], it was like always on the cusp of the neighborhood taking a turn for the worst. And I can say, in the millennium that has been the case (laughter), so. But, you know, at the time, it was this, you know, very solid working class and lower middle class, you know, African American neighborhood, stable neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Was there a main--what was the main street?
Speaker 2: That would be the Albany Avenue and the Blue Hills Avenue were the two main (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Now--
Speaker 2: --intersections.
Speaker 1: Were there a number of black businesses in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: All black businesses except where there were lots of Jewish businesses. So the pharmacy was Jewish, and the dry cleaners was Jewish, but all the other little shops were black owned and Caribbean owned.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have a--so I would guess there'd be a sizable population of people from the Caribbean there.
Speaker 2: Very much so, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were up there a few years ago doing interviews, and a lot of pe- people from Barbados--
Speaker 2: Yes; Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago], Jamaica. Probably--Jamaicans are probably the dominant West Indian--Caribbean population there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Let's see th- was there a black (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Particularly on that Albany Avenue corridor. Blue Hills was more, you know, black southerners who've made their way.
Story_ID: 653771
Speaker 1: Was there a black newspaper in town?
Speaker 2: There was. So there was one--there were actually two; one, I can't think of the name of, the other one was called the Northend Agent [sic. Northend Agent's], and that side of town that I was describing was considered the North End [Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay. Northend Agent; that really sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Northend Agent. And then there was a second one that actually had more content, but I can't think of the name of it. Clearly, the Northend Agent stood out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now were you aware--I mean were you keenly aware of newspapers when you were growing up? I mean--or did you just--was it--did you have a desire to write at all for newspapers?
Speaker 2: So I was aware of--one thing--so I talked about my neighborhood really being a predominantly black neighborhood, but there were two white families on my street--the Beaudoins, B-E-A-U-D-O-I-N, and they were--there were two girls; April [April Beaudoin (ph.)] and Christa [Christa Beaudoin (ph.)] were the newspaper delivery people for the neighborhood, and we were subscribers, and so I did read the--I wouldn't say that I necessarily read it, you know, religiously but, you know, I looked at the newspaper every day; I sort of skimmed it, I had a relationship with the girls who delivered the paper, and so there was a newspaper presence in my life.
Speaker 1: So was this the Hartford Courant?
Speaker 2: It was, yes--though I was really shy when I was in, in elementary school [Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], and in middle and high school [South Catholic High School, Hartford, Connecticut], too, to a certain extent, but I majored in broadcast journalism, so even though I, you know, had solid writing grades and I could write, I was like, okay, I think I wanna--I'm gonna be a broadcast journalist.
Speaker 1: This is in college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right; well it was even when I was sort of--you know when you're thinking about where you wanna go to school, so when I was in middle and high school, I decided I was gonna be a broadcast journalist. Gayle King was the anchorwoman in my--in Hartford [Connecticut] when I was growing up. First it was [HistoryMaker] Randall Pinkston, who you may see now on CBS at times, and then from Randall Pinkston, it was Gayle King before she knew Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]--before she became Oprah's best friend. And so, you know, I picked Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] because it had this fantastic broadcast journalism program.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: But there were schools in Connecticut that were interested in me--UCONN [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. You know, in hindsight, I probably should have gone to Yale or an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], but at the time, I was like, "This--there's this great journalism program; I'm gonna be a journalist."  And my family members were like, "That's excellent 'cause you ask a whole lot of questions" (laughter).
Story_ID: 653772
Speaker 1: Here's a question we always ask and--about where you grew up, the neighborhood and the town.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: That's interesting. So, so one of the sights would be the--this church at the corner of Albany Avenue and Vine Street called the Horace Bushnell Church, and it was the Horace Bushnell Congregational Church [Liberty Christian Center International, Hartford, Connecticut], which was a white church in the middle of the hood, but it was this stately, you know, fabulous facility.
Speaker 1: So it had been there a long time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And then another, you know--while we're on churches, another church was a church called the Faith Congregational Church [Hartford, Connecticut], which had been, you know, on the Underground Railroad. And Faith Congregational Church is the church that my mother [Annie Lester Adams] and her sister attended.
Speaker 1: Now this is a predominantly white church?
Speaker 2: No, Faith is a black church.
Speaker 1: Black church, okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I think it was like the--you know, the first black church--the first sort of recognized black church in Connecticut; and one of the first in New England. I think there was one in Boston [Massachusetts] that may have, you know, incorporated beforehand.
Speaker 1: Is this the church that J.W.C. Pennington [James W.C. Pennington] was the pastor of?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So it was like an old black church with old traditions, so that was part of my growing up experience.
Speaker 1: All right, some of these--these names are paying off now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: J.W.C. Pennington, right. Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was that--you know, when we--I mean it was very urban, you know, even though we're talking about Connecticut, and so we sort of played outside until the street lights came on, and then your parents would, you know, call your name and you'd have to go in the house. But it was--you know, even though it was very urban, it was, you know, very much a neighborhood where you could play outside. So if you made it onto Albany Avenue or Blue Hills Avenue, you had really sort of branched out. And then once you got on Albany Avenue, there were all kinds of shops; kind of, kind of like a mini New York City [New York, New York], where there are like vendors and, you know, boutiques, and, you know, what we call convenience stores now, you know. Downtown--going downtown; getting on the bus to go downtown was a big deal; there were two major department stores, G. Fox [G. Fox and Company, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] and Sage-Allen [Sage-Allen and Company, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut]. So I would say my experience was pretty working class. My, my aunt, my mother's sister who I referenced a while ago, who was married to my father's brother, they got a divorce and he moved back to New York, so my aunt and her children lived in the projects. I was in this kind of staid, working class neighborhood that--and I was--it was just me 'cause I didn't have a sibling yet, which wasn't nearly as much fun, so I usually always wanted to go and hang out with them 'cause, you know, where they lived, there were lots of people, you know, lots of kids, lots of entertainment, and so really I was always trying to sort of be where my cousins were. There were five of them, and one of me; there were four girls and one boy, so I identified a lot with their experience, and so when you talk about the sights and sounds, their neighborhood was a lot more edgy, the people were more colorful. Having said that, two of those five ended up in a program called Project Concern, where they were bused out to affluent suburban schools 'cause, you know, they lived in a neighborhood where the schools were horrible.
Story_ID: 653773
Speaker 1: Part of my growing up experience included double dutch, which was sort of big in black urban communities. Around the time I was growing up, it had become organized as a sport, so I was a--little known fact about me, I was a double dutch champion. You know, competed at Lincoln Center in New York City [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] as like an eighth grade--seventh and eighth grader--six, seventh and eighth grader.
Speaker 2: This takes a lot of timing and skill, and double dutch is not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It does, it does.
Speaker 2: We see the little girls jumping up and down, and it looks like it's--they're just doing it automatic, but it takes a lot of practice.
Speaker 1: Exactly. So there were three competitions; there was a speed competition and then there was a compulsory competition, and then freestyle. And so I don't remember the year, but this--you know, somebody can look this up. Two New York City police officers [David A. Walker and Ulysses Williams] made this push, really in the late '70s [1970s], to formalize double dutch as a sport, and so there were these double dutch teams, really in these urban communities all over the country, that would sort of compete locally, and then sort of statewide and then regionally, and if you did really well, you could compete in the world--double dutch world championships in Manhattan [New York], and so I spent a lot of time doing that. During the summers, we, you know, went to--so at some point, the federal government created the National Youth Sports Program, so during several summers, I went to Trinity College [Hartford, Connecticut] as part of that program and ran track and jumped double dutch. And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what event did you run in track?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The 50 [50 meters] and the 100 [100 meters], and the relay--the 4x100 relay.
Story_ID: 653774
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, I mentioned being shy; I don't know how I went from double dutch--'cause double dutch is really not a shy sport. But by the time I got to high school, I--my mother [Annie Lester Adams] worked at--so I, I--there's some variables that are missing here. My mother left the State of Connecticut at some point, maybe around 1972, and when she--she took a couple of years off; when she went back to work around '75 [1975], '76 [1976], she went to a high school called Weaver High School, and it was the ill behaved black high school in Hartford [Connecticut]. So you had the black high school, you had the Hartford High [Hartford Public High School, Hartford, Connecticut], which is sort of this central city, fairly diverse--people from all kinds of backgrounds, and then there was--the third high school was Bulkeley High [Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut], and that was sort of the white high school. When it's time for me to go to high school, you know, still studious--high test scores; it's like, are you gonna go to Weaver and see your mother every day (laughter), are you gonna go out to Avon Simsbury [ph.], which is sort of very prestigious but expensive and requires a long bus route and the whole bit, or are you gonna go to Catholic school? And there were two, you know, fairly high profile Catholic schools; one called Northwest Catholic [Northwest Catholic High School], which was in West Hartford [Connecticut], and one called South Catholic, which was in Hartford but sheer across town, so I went to South Catholic High School, which was a forty-five minute, two bus change ride away from my house, and I think there were--there were not ten black people in my graduating class. And so, not being particularly outgoing, I sort of avoided sports and really a lot of school activities, at least for the first couple years, but I did--I was on the math team, 'cause one of the nuns thought I was a good math student, and I, you know, worked on the school newspaper. So when you ask about the sort of, you know, evolution of the journalism interest, you know--when I was in sixth grade, I said, "I'm gonna major in broadcast journalism," but when I was in high school, I actually, you know, was working on the paper, and my elementary school [Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut] did have a little paper that I worked on as well.
Speaker 2: Did you do any broadcast at all in high school?
Speaker 1: I did not.
Speaker 2: Did they have a--like a radio--announcements in the morning (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We didn't, we didn't. We did--at my, my mother's school, the sort of ill behaved school, had a radio station and the whole bit; but my Catholic school did not.
Story_ID: 653775
Speaker 1: You graduated in '82 [1982]? Is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, from high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were there from '78 [1978] to '82 [1982] I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was going on in the world when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, my freshman year, the pope [Paul VI] died, and then so--and then John Paul came along and then he died shortly thereafter. I don't know if you remember those two popes dying in succession. Well, I'm not Catholic, but I was going to this Catholic school [South Catholic High School, Hartford, Connecticut], and so when the pope died, it's like, "Oh, my god, the pope died." So then when John Paul, the first John Paul [John Paul I], came along and he died--how--I mean how long did he last? It was a very short time; and then the whole sort of ritual was selecting a second pope within a very short window occurred. So that was my sort of dramatic introduction to the Catholic experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: So does the selection of a new pope, does that like sort of stop the Catholic school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, at that time, the--not so much the selection but the death of the existing pope sort of, you know, sort of parts of days were rerouted to go and have a Mass to pray for the deceased pope, and--and then Catholic schools have religion classes, so clearly that became the dominant discussion point during those classes. So, you know, I'm like, okay, this is a little different than the Faith Congregational [Faith Congregational Church, Hartford, Connecticut], Pennington [James W.C. Pennington] experience. But I had a--again, had a really good relation- and at that time, there were still lots of nuns in Catholic schools; I don't know if it's that way as much anymore. But, you know, all the nuns sort of liked me 'cause I was nice and sweet, I was the sort of shy black girl, and even Catholic schools at that time had people sort of separated by ability, so if there were ten black people in my class, there were only three in my individual classes. And, interestingly enough, the three of us had all gone to the same elementary and middle school [Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut]; so it was like, "Okay, it's us against the world here; we've gotta figure out how to navigate this experience." So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you three ride out there togeth- I guess you couldn't ride (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did, we did. Now, we didn't all get on the bus at the same spot, but we essentially--and there were actually about five from my elementary school, but only three of us were in the sort of advanced classes, and then the other two were in the sort of midrange. So yeah, there was a whole little contingent that was riding across town. And so we certainly were a sort of a support network for each other. But then when I got to be a junior, the nuns were like, "Oh, no, you're gonna take calculus," and that's when I was on my own; my friends were like, "We like you" (laughter), "but you're on your own. We're not--," actually, when it got to trigonometry they were like, "Unh-uh, you go ahead." So when I, you know, took trigonometry and calculus I--you know, I was--I was the representative of diversity in those classes.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever consider, you know, the hard sciences?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah; my--this, this nun who I was the mentee of, she was convinced that I was gonna be a doctor. In fact, I--there is this--this sort of doctor for a day program down at Summa Hospital in Akron [Summa Akron City Hospital, Akron, Ohio], and I was paired with a doctor who was my partner, and he started by saying, "If I wasn't a--hadn't become a doctor, I would have become a journalist," and I said, "If I hadn't become a journalist, I would have become a doctor" (laughter). So in high school, I, I thought long and hard about it, but remember, I had said, since sixth grade, "I'm gonna be a broadcast journalist." So I clung to that.
Story_ID: 653776
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, by the time I got to college, I was committed to being a lawyer so--this is probably jumping ahead of the story but, you know, my plan is that I--so I majored in broadcast journalism and English, and I minored in African American history mostly--African American studies mostly because those were the professors who I had a relationship with.
Speaker 2: This is at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yes. So my plan is that when I graduated from college, I was going to take a year off, travel to sort of Europe and Africa, then come back and go to law school. And--but my, my presence at Syracuse included me having to work, so I had a little campus work study job, and the department that I worked in was this sort of--I wouldn't call it home economics, but it was something like that. It was a department that was run by a little old black woman named Connie Timberlake [Constance Hector Timberlake], and Connie Timberlake was a good friend of the managing editor of the newspaper in Syracuse [New York]. So two weeks after I graduated from college, in what was gonna be my lost year where I was gonna travel and hang out, and then apply to law school, the managing editor [Tim Bunn] called and said, "Hey, we wanna offer you a postgraduate internship--a nine month postgraduate internship at the Syracuse Herald-Journal." And I was like, hey, that would be perfect because I can do this for nine months, I can still travel for ten or twelve weeks and, you know, I can go to law school. Two weeks into my internship, that managing editor offered me a full time permanent job, and that was in 1986; so twenty-eight years later, I haven't made it to law school yet (laughter).
Story_ID: 653777
Speaker 1: I wanna go--flash back a little bit to high school.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when your- so your, your activities are kind of cut down in high school; you didn't do as much as you did in middle school [Annie Fisher Elementary School; Annie Fisher STEM Magnet School, Hartford, Connecticut], I guess, but you're in Catholic school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, I did, but they weren't high school activities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they were church activities or--the double dutch team was like a citywide team or, you know, I think I was a Girl Scout; so there were activities but they weren't necessarily South Catholic High School [Hartford, Connecticut] based.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well tell us about--was church important? Was Faith Congregational [Faith Congregational Church, Hartford, Connecticut] important?
Speaker 2: Church was important, you know, my--somebody recently described my mother [Annie Lester Adams] as an evangelist, so she's not an evangelist in the technical sense, but she was definitely that woman so, you know, church was--church was on Sunday, and then on Wednesday, and then there were church activities on other days, so yes.
Speaker 1: So this is a church--it has a lot of tradition going back--as we mentioned Reverend J.C.--W.C. Pennington [James W.C. Pennington], the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --fugitive blacksmith--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, was a pastor, a, you know--brilliant man of the 19th century--mid-19th century--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --before the end of slavery--Underground Railroad church. This is--so this is--so did you have a sense of that history of that place when you were there?
Speaker 2: Some--you know, we knew it was--the church was a big deal but, you know, when you're young, you're like, "Why is everything so old?" Or--you know, I mean--you're just not necessarily appreciating the history as much until, you know, there's some hindsight. So when I was in high school, I wasn't thinking, wow, this is really, you know, this is important in the development of our history, or anything like that--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until maybe I was a senior; because when you start doing school projects--and I talked about the, the Catholic high school having religion classes, and so there was an opportunity to sort of talk about other faiths; and so--then, that was an opportunity to sort of put the family church on display and be proud of some of its history.
Story_ID: 653778
Speaker 1: What kind of c- counseling did you have about college in, in school?
Speaker 2: So, I think I went to a traditional high school [South Catholic High School, Hartford, Connecticut] that had, you know, three guidance counselors and probably most of the people at the school were headed toward state schools in New England, either in Connecticut or in Massachusetts. There were probably a group of us who were encouraged to apply at, you know, more stretch schools; I was one of those people, even though--and I had excellent grades but I had very average test scores.
Speaker 1: How do you account for that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are lots of theories. Maybe standardized tests aren't really framed around the experiences of children of color; I, I don't know. I just know I--you know, maybe I just wasn't a strong tester. I mean I was a straight A student, you know, graduated in the top five of my class, maybe would have graduated in the top two of my class, but I did a zig during my senior year. So I, I--we might have skipped the part where my--I, I referenced it, but we didn't talk much about my father [Rudolph Adams] dying the night of my twelfth birthday. So he had gone into the hospital; he was gonna have hip surgery, and when they--and I was only, I think, seventh grade here so I've backtracked a bit. When they went into his room the next morning to prep him for the surgery, he wasn't breathing. And so he died in his sleep; they believe he had a heart attack. So fast forward to my senior year in high school. There's some change in federal regulations that if you were not in college by December 31st, '81 [1981], I think, or something like that--the details are fuzzy here. But if you weren't in college by the end of the year in '81 [1981], then you wouldn't be able to maintain your benefits as a surviving child through college; these were social security benefits. And since I had really met all the academic requirements to go ahead and get a high school diploma, I enrolled in college my last semester of high school, so I was a full time college student and a full time high school student. But the high school basically gave me relief to go to these classes because I was gonna need that social security support during those four years that I was in college. So my class rank froze at where I was--well, I mean at the sort of average--my grade point average was 97.6; it was frozen there that last semester, and my colleagues could sort of navigate around that. So if you worked hard and you pushed your grades up, you know, I was sort of locked into that spot. So, you know, I think that when I went off on this quest, I might have been ranked number three, and then, with the movement, ended up being ranked number five. So that was a whole other--that was a zig, so I enrolled in a school called the Hartford College for Women [Hartford, Connecticut], which is not--I, I, I don't use it for anything, so it's not listed anywhere 'cause it's just where I went and took a couple of classes. But that really, in many ways, sort of changed my final semester of high school. So where everybody else was sort of planning trips to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and sort of hanging out and coasting in those final months, I was like, okay, I gotta sort of hunker down so I can get some, you know, good grades out of these classes that I'm taking.
Story_ID: 653779
Speaker 1: Now were you the first person in your family to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In the, in the traditional four year sense, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I mentioned that my mother [Annie Lester Adams] had gone to business school, my father [Rudolph Adams] went to this carpentry school, but I was the first four year degree person.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And you were accepted at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], and UCONN [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut], though UCONN was like, "We guess you can come; we're not gonna give you any financial support." I was like, "Really?"
Speaker 1: That's the state school--that's your state school.
Speaker 2: Exactly. I'm like, "Okay, well I won't be going to UCONN." And that's where several of my friends ended up. And then Yale--I mean we just really didn't think we were gonna be able to afford it because they gave me a huge scholarship but it just wasn't enough for what the expense of Yale was at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thy have a huge tuition.
Speaker 2: Now as fate would have it, I ended up getting lots of scholarships, but you don't really know what position you're gonna be in when it's time to say, "I am or am not coming." So I probably applied to ten schools though, and because I was so committed to journalism, I'm like, Syracuse is the place. And then I had a couple of friends who had gone a few years earlier so, you know, when you go and hang out on campus for a weekend, you have a really good time, I was sort of fixated on this idea of Syracuse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you alluded to some of the--your favorite professors and you took courses--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in other fields other than journalism because of an affinity for those professors.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So who were some of your mentors in school?
Speaker 2: So I mentioned that I was a dual major, you know, English and broadcast journalism; and English was in the College of Arts and Sciences, so there were a certain number of--you know, their requirements. You gotta have X number of these kind of class--this many humanities classes and this many science classes, and so several of those classes for me were in the African American studies department. My mentor at Syracuse was a woman named Janis Mayes, Dr. Janis Mayes [Janis A. Mayes] who is a--her expertise is francophone African literature. But before you get to the high end, sort of Ph.D. francophone African literature classes, she taught like AAS 112 (laughter), which was like introduction to African American studies. And so, you know, I had come from the very mainstream white Catholic, South Catholic experience [South Catholic High School, Hartford, Connecticut], and then I go to Syracuse, which is a very mainstream campus except in these African American studies classes that were 100 percent students of color, you know. Most of the times, the professors were of color, but not necessarily. You know, it was a good class, it was a fun class, you know; it was social--lots of history but, you know, because I was conscientious, she, you know, took a liking to me, and she taught classes in the freshman track and the sophomore track, and then the rest of her classes were collegiate classes. So I, I took every class that she taught, including some of the collegiate classes that I was allowed to take as a junior and senior. And then, as I mentioned, I ended up--my first newspaper job was in Syracuse [at the Syracuse Herald-Journal]; my relationship with her was maintained after I finished school.
Speaker 1: So she was a negritude expert, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm--
Speaker 1: Damas [Leon Damas] and Cesaire [Aime Cesaire], and--
Speaker 2: In fact, two summers ago, she was teaching a six week course in Paris [France]. She was like, "Come to Paris for six weeks." I'm like, "I don't think I'm gonna be able to leave for six weeks, but it sounds fun, but can I come for a week, and maybe teach a few classes or sit in on a few classes?" So she definitely was one of my early mentors.
Speaker 1: Presence Africaine (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and she was from Chicago [Illinois], went to Northwestern [sic.], her father was a dentist, so--yeah, so when I talk about the early mentors, it was Claytor [ph.] and there was Mayes; but by the time I got to my first newspaper job, you know, my early mentors were white men, (pause) and then black men--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then white women.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 653780
Speaker 1: So at Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] though--so did you write for the school newspaper and that sort of thing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The Daily Orange; I wrote on occasion for the paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But remember, I was gonna be a broadcast journalist so I wasn't thinking about the paper so much. There were broadcasting classes where you had to learn to shoot video and do standups and all that, so I did that. There was a sort of campus wide newscast, I did that. And then, as I mentioned, I also worked; so I worked in this sort of--I called it home ec [home economics], but that's not what the formal name is but I, I worked in the dean's office of one of the schools on campus, and then I also worked in the campus library. So I, I--you know, over the course of time, I had a lot going on, and then--and that was sort of my freshman and sophomore year, I was also kind of an activist on campus so I had to have time for that (laughter). So during my junior year, I ran for the--so there was a student government and then there was like the black student government, which was called the SAS, the Student Afro American Society [Student African American Society]. I ran to be the vice president of programing for that; and that, you know, involved bringing various speakers to campus, planning activities. The person who ran to be president and won ended up becoming my collegiate sweetheart [Charles Wynder, Jr.]. So, you know, he was the president, I was the vice president, we were gonna change the world; we're like, "Yeah, we're gonna invite Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] to campus and we're gonna--," you know, so we invited a number of sort of, you know, high profile names during the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Well who came to campus?
Speaker 2: There was some, you know, mild ones, so we had the Maya Angelous [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and the Stokely Carmichaels and the Jawanza Kunjufu. What's his name at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now, before he--Cornel West before he was Cornel West. You know, every year, we would have about two or three--Judge Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] before his name became as big as it is now. You know, we had this little tiny budget and we're like, "How can we stretch this budget to," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These are, these are people that really have something to say, and so you were doing your homework. You all knew--I mean you were into it deep.
Speaker 2: We were, we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You knew who you wanted to come to campus.
Speaker 2: We knew--very much so, very much so.
Speaker 1: So that had to cost a lot of money to do it.
Speaker 2: And so, you know we were considered this, you know, fairly militant power couple (laughter). Even though, you know, nothing like the sort of militancy of the '60s [1960s], but in this kind of environment where everybody's just sort of hanging out, having a good time, doing their work and we're like, "No, you need to hear what these people have to say." And that was also in the sort of early days of sort of stop apartheid; I mean it was--so we were sort of organizing campus rallies. I think we had a sit-in in the campus administration building to sort of protest some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The university was invested in South Africa?
Speaker 2: Yes, right. So we had this sort of divestment protest, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--go ahead; I didn't mean to interrupt you but I--
Speaker 2: Right, right. So, so these things might have gotten in the way of me having excellent grades for a couple of those year- (laughter).
Story_ID: 653781
Speaker 1: I was just thin- thinking that this is about the time that Spike Lee's 'School Daze'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --came out; it came out when you were in college [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it did, yep.
Speaker 1: And with some of the same issues--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know they were at a black college campus [HBCU] in the movie--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but did you see any parallels (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And was 'School Daze' the--didn't he have a movie before 'School Daze,' too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'She's Gotta Have It.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was the 'She's Gotta Have It' days, and so, you know, we were in the mode of, you know, we're gonna march in front of the president's house, we're gonna carry our signs, we're gonna sit in front of the administration, you know, building and sort of push for divestment. And it was also a time when the sort of federal and state laws were changing, so a lot of sort of financial aid and other kinds of grants and other benefits were being cut. So, you know, a lot of the sort of activism was around; finding alternatives for students--not just those who would come later, but for people who are our friends who were being cut off midstream and maybe weren't gonna be able to finish. So--you know, I did that, and then there was a campus publication called The Black Voice that I was the editor of, which was one of the SAS group's, Student Afro American Society [Student African American Society], projects. So this was probably my junior and senior year; I was really very active on campus, which is probably why I said, "You know I'm gonna wait a year and go to law school," 'cause I probably fooled around and didn't sort of apply by December 1st and January 1 of my senior year. Interestingly enough, so the guy who I was dating, whose name is Chuck Wynder [Charles Wynder, Jr.], said, "Well you could wait a year; I'm going to law school, I'm not waiting a year, I'm going now," 'cause he was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in addition to all of these other things. And his father [Charles Wynder, Sr.] was a captain in the [U.S.] Air Force. His father was like, "What are you doing? You're going to law school or you're going, you know, you're straight to [U.S.] military service," and so Chuck applied to a number of law schools and got into the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. In fact, I probably was spending time helping him get his applications done when I should have been doing mine. And so, you know, May rolls around, we find out that he's going to Michigan; I'm taking my year off, I think, and then two weeks later, I start this internship [at the Syracuse Herald-Journal]. So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's how that story sort of played out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Now did you graduate from Syracuse with any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: No, just regular graduation. So my, you know, my--the, the semester where I did the most activism, I got a 3.6 [grade point average], and I, I shocked even me (laughter) because I spent so much time doing other things.
Speaker 1: Now those were the days when you were a senior (unclear). Isn't that the year that Steve Biko was killed, I think--'86 [sic. 1977]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. I mean there was a lot going on, and I was a dual major. So I was scrambling to meet all the requirements for the College of Arts and Sciences as well as the Newhouse School [S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, Syracuse, New York], so that might--and I was an English major, so there were these--you know, I had to read 'The Canterbury Tales' [Geoffrey Chaucer] and 'Beowulf' and do these standups in the--for the, the broadcast degree.
Story_ID: 653782
Speaker 1: Syracuse Herald-Journal. What was your internship like? What did, what did you do, and did you learn--what did you learn, I guess in that year?
Speaker 2: So I mentioned that my internship, which was supposed to be nine months, two weeks in, the managing editor offered me a full time permanent job because he was concerned that I--you know, I, I, I sort of jumped in with both feet, I was doing a good job, and he was concerned that I was going to get picked off by another newspaper, and so one of the, one of the projects I did during my first year as a reporter was on children in foster care, and I worked with this senior editor who was just happy to have somebody who was young and who would do whatever he told 'em to do 'cause the veterans would sort of grouse and ignore him. He was like, "Okay, you gotta get these records, you gotta do this, you gotta do that." So when I talk about the--when I mention that when I got out of school, some of my first mentors were white men? Barry Katz [Barry E. Katz] was this great mentor, this sort of hard nose, hard core investigative journalist who sort of guided this project on children in foster care, the result of which were changes in the way that the foster care structure was organized and held accountable in the county where Syracuse is, and that's called Onondaga County [New York]. You know--so I--in the course of doing this, in addition to sort of the--gathering the data and the whole bit, I talked to these foster kids who had been in fourteen homes in eight years; some had been abused; but we really sort of shed light on all the--really, all the failures of the system. That won a huge statewide award; I, I was like named the newcomer of the year, which was an annual award they gave at that time, and so Tim Bunn, the person who had offered me this internship and then this full time permanent job, said after this project ran, "I wouldn't be surprised if Debbie Adams [HistoryMaker Debra Simmons] took her five part series and went home with it." And sure enough, sometime shortly thereafter, the Hartford Courant called and said, "Hey, you could do that work here; what do you wanna stay in Syracuse [New York] for?" And so I shifted from the Syracuse Herald-Journal to Hartford [Connecticut]. The interesting thing about the Syracuse paper is that--you know, I went to the Newhouse School, which was, you know, funded by the, you know, revenues of Newhouse family and Advance Publications [Advance Publications, Inc.], and the Syracuse Herald-Journal was a Newhouse newspaper, you know, Advance Publications, Newhouse family newspaper, and The Plain Dealer is an Advance Publication Newhouse newspaper, so when I came here, everybody said, "Oh, my goodness, your Newhouse career has gone full circle; you got your degree from the Newhouse School, and now you're running a Newhouse newspaper." And I think I might be one of the few Newhouse grads to run a Newhouse paper.
Story_ID: 653783
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask about this, but as a black woman in journalism in the '80s [1980s], I mean as you were finishing high school [South Catholic High School, Hartford, Connecticut], the Janet Cooke story broke in the news. Did this affect your career path at all, or did--
Speaker 2: So it didn't affect my commitment or approach, but I certainly think it probably impacted my sort of newsroom interactions. You know, even though Janet Cooke was at The Washington Post, you got people looking at you over your--over their glasses, sort of questioning your sort of capacity, sort of second guessing your even being there. You know, in addition to being a black woman, I was also twenty-one years old; so my birthday's in November, I start this internship [at the Syracuse Herald-Journal]--in fact, I wasn't quite twenty-one. I start this internship in May, I'm twenty years old, two weeks in they offer me a full time job. You know, the average sort of age of the news staff there was probably fifty or fifty-five, fifty-five year old white men, so of course they're looking like, "What is this little young black girl going to offer?" And so when you put Janet Cooke on top of that, you know, then there's a whole level of suspicion, and I'm sure--you know the belief that, oh, she only got this job because she's, you know, a black woman. But, you know, I don't think that ultimately hurt me; I worked hard. I didn't have any commitments so, you know, when there were people who needed to get out of the door by six o'clock to cook dinner, I could stay and work all night and I was, you know, I had a conscientious streak, and then being paired with a really talented editor [Barry E. Katz] I think really cut through a lot of that. You know, what I would say is that my first assignment was covering a small suburban town in the middle of nowhere who hadn't seen a black person there in a very, very long time, and that they were passing through.
Speaker 1: This is New York?
Speaker 2: Yes, Upstate New York. So to end up at--you know, covering a little town in Upstate New York where even the people who are the newsmakers are sort of suspicious, I think, made for a challenging sort of initial work environment. But I started working on this foster care project simultaneously, and ultimately it became so big that I was pulled off of the suburban municipal coverage and moved on to this project.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah, I--actually, [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman and I have had lots of conversations about Janet Cooke in the years since, and--
Speaker 1: He supervised her, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did, he did, and so he sort of feels responsible. But he, you know, talks about how it played out, over the years--you know, talks about what he would have done differently, you know. Apparently, her presentation of the--what appeared to be the facts was so poignant that it never, you know--the, the sort of normal journalist suspicions that one would have, I think they let their guard down. And so I think it probably has had--it had less effect on me in real time than it has in the years since. You know, particularly as an editor. When people--presenting stories that sound too good to be true, I'm like, "Let's see some facts and some data that support this." Or, "Let's meet the--bring the person into the newsroom; I wanna meet 'em, I wanna hear what they have to say, I wanna look them in the eye."
Story_ID: 653784
Speaker 1: Now I have a note here that in 1987, after you were involved as a professional journalist for a year, a federal jur- jury finds that the New York Daily News denied promotions to four black journalists between '79 [1979] and '82 [1982] because of their race. Now this is a federal court decision.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of that at the time? That you might have a--
Speaker 2: No, I was not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Interesting, though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Why were they denied?
Speaker 1: Because of their race; that's what the finding was.
Speaker 2: But--now what were the other variables though?
Speaker 1: I don't know; I don't have the whole thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay; that's interesting.
Speaker 1: It's in the outline here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, I guess in my case, I sort of stumbled into the job [at the Syracuse Herald-Journal], you know. 'Cause remember, I'm gonna be a broadcast journalist, I'm gonna be a lawyer, so I'm like, "Okay, well this newspaper job is kind of interesting; I could, you know, do this for a while." And then it was just supposed to be an internship and it becomes a job. I'm like, "Okay, well I guess I'm here until I decide to jump ship." So--and I think some of that may be a gender issue. You know, guys are like, "I'm gonna do these three things," and they have a plan, and they're, you know, often promoting themselves. And I was like, "Hey, if I work hard and keep my head down, somebody'll notice and I'll get promoted to the next thing." So even the job that I took in Hartford [Connecticut] and the job that I took in Detroit [Michigan], somebody called and said, "Hey, are you interested?" Even in Akron [Ohio] someb- and in Virginia, somebody called and said, "Hey, are you interested?" And so I, I think it wasn't until much later where I started being more intentional about the choices. Certainly, I wouldn't have picked Hartford, Detroit and Norfolk [Virginia] if I were picking places (laughter). No offense to whoever might be watching this at some point (laughter).
Speaker 1: How did things go in Hartford? This is your hometown, so did you have like an advantage by, you know, having grown up there in terms of the news (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say for every advantage, there's a disadvantage. So my first assignment at the Hartford Courant--
Speaker 1: This is '87 [1987]?
Speaker 2: This is--right, so this is--let's see, no, no, no. So I worked in Syracuse [New York] from '86 [1986] to the end of '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So like November '89 [1989], I go to the Hartford Courant; my first assignment is covering a, covering municipal government in a suburb called Southington. But my mother [Annie Lester Adams] was the school secretary at Weaver High School [Hartford, Connecticut] where all the educa- everything that's wrong with public--urban public education was happening, and she had a window seat and we had an education writer who, you know, sometimes had limited access to information that was going on, or was inconsistent with the word on the street, and so even though I was covering Southington, I would often--I was working in a bureau in New Britain, Connecticut, I'd be calling Hartford saying, "Hey, you need to change that or you need to check with this person and you need to make these adjustments." So when that person's assignment changed, and this was less than a year there, the metro editor called and said, "Hey, do you want to be the--do you want to cover Hartford schools [Hartford Public Schools] since you seem to be able to get the kinds of access we want?" And so, you know, a year in, I shifted from my municipal beat of Southington, Connecticut to the Hartford schools beat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The pro was that I knew a lot of the people in the district; the con is that, you know, I'm sure that put some pressure on my mother every time I wrote something unflattering, which was pretty often, 'cause the schools, you know, were fraught with the same kind of challenges they're fraught with today.
Story_ID: 653785
Speaker 1: I changed assignments from the, from the Southington, Connecticut beat to the Hartford schools [Hartford Public Schools] beat, put my mother [Annie Lester Adams] in a bit of an awkward position every time I wrote something controversial--
Speaker 2: She's a secretary in the administrative offices who--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --she has--she's privy to--
Speaker 1: Exactly; and quite frankly, she wasn't necessarily the source of information that I received, but of course it was gonna be like, "How does she know this? Who told her this?" And the school district and the newspaper [Hartford Courant], surprise, surprise, didn't really have a great relationship so, you know, in some ways that was awkward. I was mentioning there was this one story that I did that had an error, and I can still think about that story twenty-five years later, and it was just--it was a small de- it was a factual detail, and that may have been the only time that I was in that position 'cause you really wanna bend over backwards not to--you know, it's bad enough I'm putting her on the spot, but if I'm putting her on the spot and my information isn't correct, that's a problem. Interestingly enough, right around the time that I went to Hartford [Connecticut], the Detroit Free Press said, "Hey, um, wish you hadn't gone to Hartford? 'Cause we are really looking for someone to come to Detroit [Michigan]." But I had already made the commitment to go to Hartford. So after I had been covering the Hartford schools for a couple of years, the Detroit Free Press came back and said, "We really need you to do this here." You know, so it was a bigger paper, it was Knight Ridder, it was gonna be a great opportunity, it was late 1991, I make the commitment that in the sort of winter of '92 [1992], I'm gonna go to the Detroit Free Press. At the time, Detroit has hired Deborah McGriff, this lively and energetic superintendent who had been in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] who was going to change the face of public education in America as the superintendent in Detroit [Detroit Public Schools; Detroit Public Schools Community District]. So there was Deborah McGriff as the superintendent, and Debra Adams [HistoryMaker Debra Simmons] as the Detroit schools writer. And she was one of the first people to embrace charter schools and schools of choice in a Democratic city where the Democrats hadn't really embraced choice at that time; I mean I think things have changed now and we have, you know, charter schools in cities across the country; but at the time, it was very controversial, you know, but the Detroit schools were failing and she was on this mission to turn 'em around. So, you know, I get to Detroit, lots of sort of expertise in the subject matter, so I was able to jump in with both feet, you know; won a number of journalism awards for, for a number of stories. Deborah McGriff then gets hired by the Edison Project [EdisonLearning, Inc.], which was gonna be one of these education think tanks that was gonna create some of its own charter schools, and she leaves to go work with them. The Detroit newspapers had a strike that's a long protracted strike, and I'm in the--as a writer, I'm in the newspaper guild [NewsGuild-CWA] and so I'm like, "Okay, well I guess I can wait this strike out for some period of time." The Virginian-Pilot, which had been a paper that had called shortly after I got to Detroit, was like, "Why be on strike? You can come down to Virginia where the catfish are jumping and the living is easy." So I left Detroit in '95 [1995] and went to--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --Virginia.
Story_ID: 653786
Speaker 1: Before you--we get you out of Detroit [Michigan]--now the, I think when you arrived, if I'm not mistaken, Archer--Dennis Archer was mayor; he had just been elected (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had not been elected yet--
Speaker 1: Oh, he had not, okay.
Speaker 2: He had not been elected yet so--because I, you know, I got there in March and, you know, the election's in September or November. So Coleman Young is still very much the mayor of Detroit when I arrive--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in all his sort of fabulousness at the end of a storied career. He absolutely hated local media. He, you know, had a foul mouth and wasn't afraid to use it, and so I go from covering the Hartford school [Hartford Public Schools], which was kind of, you know, it's a challenge, but the people are civil, to Detroit where all hell's breaking loose, and the mayor is crazy every day; so that was a pretty sort of animated introduction. But shortly after I arrived, Dennis Archer announces that he is going to run for mayor.
Speaker 1: Didn't Coleman Young die in office? Didn't he pass away first or some- or--
Speaker 2: He didn't die in office (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or did he get sick, or something?
Speaker 2: I think he got sick and he--yes, right; he didn't die immediately.
Speaker 1: And I don't think he could have continued as mayor, you know.
Speaker 2: Correct, correct. So Dennis Archer announces he's gonna run; he's the sort of, you know, voice of hope for the city, you know. I meet this guy [Jonathan Simmons] who's like, "Yeah, Dennis Archer is gonna turn Detroit around; in five years, Detroit's gonna be great." I'm like, "I bet you it's gonna take twenty years, not five; Detroit is not going to be great in five years." So I go back and forth with this guy, and he's my husband now (laughter), that's why I told that story. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you met your husband in Detroit.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, this story--I don't know if I wanna put this story on tape, but it's, it's funny because he tells this story in a much more entertaining way. But one of my reporter friends and I go to a place where we like to hang out, a little sort of bar and grille called Flood's Bar and Grille [Detroit, Michigan]; she and I are talking about whatever, you know, stories we had been working on. We're sitting at a wall that has like high top bar stools, but on the other side of the wall are tables where people are having dinner, and there's this couple who are looking at each other like they really don't like each other very much, they really didn't wanna be in there, and we had been looking down at them saying, "Ooh, they look really miserable, don't they?" And then some minutes later, this guy comes in and he's animated and he's telling stories and they're laughing and we're looking down at them, and he looks up and he thinks we're staring at him. But really, we're just saying, "Huh, wow, this guy is really livening this couple up," but he thinks we're checking him out (laughter), so then he comes over and he introduces himself and, you know, we start dating, and the rest is history. That was in 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, he was very supportive of Dennis Archer, was working on Archer's campaign, really thought that Archer was gonna be the, you know, next great hope for the city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Flood's is the political hangout in Detroit, from what I understand (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is.
Speaker 1: So was he himself in politics? I mean he was helping the campaign--
Speaker 2: So my husband, at the time, worked at Blue Cross Blue Shield in Michigan [Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan], which was across the street from Flood's, so that was his daily hangout, so--yeah, he was involved in politics, but politics isn't necessarily what brought him into Flood's at that moment (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was really the after work spot. You know, he was single, in his twenties, lived downtown, you know, talking to this old married couple who didn't look like they liked each other very much, and then there were these two young women in their twenties who were looking at him while he's talking to them, and--now his version of this story is, "They fell in love with me when I walked in, and they were staring at me, and I could have chose either one of 'em and I chose her." And I sort of roll my eyes, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hopefully, you're gonna cut this out of the part before it goes to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll see, we'll see.
Story_ID: 653787
Speaker 1: So Detroit [Michigan], 1991 to '95 [1995]--?
Speaker 2: See, but here's the thing. So then I leave in November '95 [1995], and I go to The Virginian-Pilot because in '94 [1994], they had offered me a job and I turned it down; in fact, they--one of the people in the interview got on one knee and he recited a line from 'Casablanca,' you know, let's not say goodbye, let's make this the beginning of a beautiful relationship, or whatever the line is, and I'm like, "Uh, uh, I don't think so." But in '95 [1995] when they called back, they were like, "You're on strike, there's all this sort of labor unrest at the Free Press [Detroit Free Press], you should come here." I went to Detroit, but my husband, Jonathan [Jonathan Simmons]--I mean I went to Virginia, but Jonathan stays in Detroit. We're engaged, we're supposed to get married, we're living in different cities. And so when all is said and done, we get married, we have a baby--not necessarily in that order. In 1998, I went back to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you get married and have a baby even though he's still living in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yes. So--but we don't--but not until the--you know, the baby comes and we're in different cities so either he's moving to Virginia or I'm moving back to Detroit. So in 1998, I moved back to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay. You were with The Virginian-Pilot for a couple of years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before--for three years, then from '95 [1995] to--
Speaker 2: Ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 1: Eight [1998], okay; then back to Detroit, and did you work for the Free Press again?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my Free Press story is they tried to get me to come back three times. The first time was the sort of officially required job that they had to offer after the strike ended. I was like, "Um, that job doesn't sound that interesting; the job that I have now is a better job, so no thank you." The second time they offer a job, "Hey, we think this is a pretty good job for you," and I'm like, "Well, you know, Jonathan's there; maybe this job is okay." I accept the job, and then on the day that I'm supposed to start, I call and tell 'em I'm not coming. The Plain Dealer's managing editor was the deputy managing editor at the Free Press when I didn't show up on the day that I was supposed to start; we just had a nice laugh about this (laughter) a couple of weeks ago. He said, "Imagine being the deputy managing editor when the managing editor finds out you're not coming. Do you know how mad she was?" So we, we just had a laugh about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I decided to stay in Virginia. This may- maybe was '97 [1997]. And then in 1998, there really is this fabulous job that they have open, and the supervisor of this area is somebody I had a great relationship with, so he calls and says, "I'm gonna see if I can get her to take this one." And he called and I accepted the job, so I, after staying in, in Virginia from '95 [1995] to '98 [1998], I went back to the Free Press in July of '98 [1998].
Story_ID: 653788
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this before we--I'll ask you about the Free Press [Detroit Free Press] in a minute--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about the same kind of question. But what were some of the issues that you covered in Virgin- in, in Norfolk [Virginia], and who were some of the people you were working with? Who, who else was there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So here is the--the shift in Virginia was the shift from being a reporter to being an editor, and so the job that they had--so I had been covering the Detroit schools [Detroit Public Schools; Detroit Public Schools Community District], as I mentioned. The Virginian-Pilot was looking for an education editor, so from their perspective, I was a natural fit, somebody who--they had shifted to teams, so they put all the education writers--and The Virginian-Pilot covers five cities; Portsmouth [Virginia], Norfolk, Chesapeake [Virginia]--it put all the education writers together and created a team, and they were looking for someone to run it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is quite a little metro area--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Tidewater [Virginia] (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Unless you are there, you don't understand it, but all those cities are connected--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all those little towns are connected.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and they're not--it's not like there's one major and the rest are suburbs; they're all in their own sort of significant, metropolitan area in their own right.
Speaker 1: They're urban; I mean it's an urban area (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, very much so. So shifting from being a reporter to being an editor, I wasn't necessarily the person who had all the sort of external community relationships; my work was very much internally focused. How can we get the sort of best content from this reporting staff into the newspaper? But the person who facilitated my being there was a man by the name of Dennis Hartig, H-A-R-T-I-G, who was the Barry Katz [Barry E. Katz] of The Pilot. You know, Barry was to the Syracuse paper [Syracuse Herald-Journal] what Dennis was to the Virginia paper, and he was like hard scrabble, hardcore, you know, big investigative guy--hold government accountable; and I worked very closely with him. My interview was in March, and it was about five degrees in Detroit [Michigan] and it was about--my first interview--and it was about seventy in Norfolk. I'm like, "I think I could get used to this. This is my--the catfish really are jumping; this is good weather." And so when they called, you know, that second time around, it was a great opportunity to develop some different kinds of skills; sort of shift from, you know, being a reporter responsible only for myself, to being responsible for this team of ten people or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: However, that didn't last long 'cause in 2000, I went back to Detroit. So that's why on those forms that you give to say, "Tell me the years you worked at this location." I worked in Detroit twice, and I worked at The Virginian-Pilot twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--okay now, I'm losing--okay, so when--you were at The Virginian-Pilot from '95 [1995] to '98 [1998]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and went back to Detroit--
Speaker 2: For '98 [1998] to 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, '98 [1998] to 2000 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and then I went back to Virginia from 2000 to 2003.
Story_ID: 653789
Speaker 1: Who at the Detroit Free Press did you work with?  And I, I know there were several (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the highest profile person I worked with at the Detroit Free Press was Bob McGruder [Robert G. McGruder].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Bob McGruder, Dayton [Ohio] native, as you know, went to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], was a repor- the first black reporter hired at The Plain Dealer in Cleveland [Ohio], ultimately the managing editor here in Cleveland, and then he went to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you recently won the Bob McGruder Award [Robert G. McGruder Award for Diversity Leadership].
Speaker 2: I did, yes I did; one of my proudest accomplishments. So, you know, I get to Detroit both the first and the second time; Bob really is my mentor in Detroit. So I mentioned that my mentors were white men and then black men and then white women, so we are now at the sort of black men portion of that. And so, you know, one of Bob's, you know, words of wisdom, and one of his roles, was to sort of keep me grounded because there weren't necessarily lots of journalists of color; I mean there were a decent amount, but not necessarily many who were editors, and so when I became an editor, I was getting calls frequently from other newspapers all over the country. And Bob would say, "You know, you don't have to be the smartest person in the room; if you go there, you're not gonna learn anything, or if you go there and it's too big," in the case of The Washington Post, "you're gonna get buried in that." So Bob's job was to keep me in Detroit as long as possible. Interestingly enough, in 2000, The Virginian-Pilot where I had been--I mentioned that I was the education editor; I skipped the part where I went from being the education editor to being the metro editor. So I was the metro editor when I left The Pilot the first time and went back to Detroit. Well, when they were looking for a deputy managing editor for local news, they called me, and I was having this conversation with them at the same time I was having a conversation with The Washington Post about going there to be the Virginia editor. And interestingly enough, there were two sisters, one of whom worked at The Pilot and the other who worked at The Post, who were having this dueling competition to see who was gonna be able to talk me into working there. And so I skipped the part where I had a baby before I left in 2000, so I have this child who was born in 1998, and I have this baby who was born in 2000, and The Post has this great offer on the table, and they know that I'm concerned about juggling little babies and being an editor at The Post, and they identify four women that I should talk to to talk about how great a family environment The Post is. One of the four women quit that day because the work life balance was unreasonable; one asked to be reassigned because she couldn't handle it; one was spending four thousand dollars a month in child care, and only one was thriving. So I'm like, "You all came up with four people for me to talk to, and only one's a good example? I don't think this is the right job at the right time." And so I took the job at The Virginian-Pilot, much to the chagrin of many people at The Post who was like, "You turned us down to go to The Pilot? What's wrong with you?" But the job in Norfolk [Virginia] was a more senior--a return to a more senior role where I was gonna have more flexibility. And when all was said and done, this sister who was at The Post, later said, "You know, I was really sort of annoyed with you for a few years, and now I really feel like you made the right decision." Because that job in Norfolk is really what propelled me to the, the jobs that I've had in Akron [Ohio] and in Cleveland.
Story_ID: 653790
Speaker 1: So you're at The Virginian-Pi- Pi- Pilot again from 2000 to--how long were you there?
Speaker 2: So from 2000 to 2003--January 2003 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And your time--
Speaker 2: But during that time, Knight Ridder is like, "Why did you leave Knight Ridder? We wanna get you back in Knight Ridder." So in the fall of '99 [1999], I--
Speaker 1: So you were--just to be clear though, you were managing editor of Virginian-Pilot, right, from 2000 to 2003 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the, the deputy managing editor.
Speaker 1: Deputy managing editor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what does the managing editor do?
Speaker 2: The managing editor, or the deputy managing editor?
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was responsible for local news, so that--and we talked about the--that Tidewater [Virginia] region being five distinct cities; and so the deputy managing editor for local news was responsible for the--you know, all of the content coming out of those five municipal areas; Norfolk [Virginia], Chesapeake [Virginia], Portsmouth [Virginia], Suffolk [Virginia], and--what am I leaving out? I'm leaving somebody out; I'll think of it in a minute--Virginia Beach [Virginia]. And the City of Virginia Beach itself had 460,000 people, so we're talk- you know, it's a couple million metropolis, and that's with a small M because it's not, you know, a New York City [New York, New York] type city, but when you put those cities together, it's very populated, you know; you have several military bases, you have a lot of the sort of challenges of urban poverty but you also have a lot of suburban sprawl; all of the, you know, issues that communities are wrestling with was the kind of content I was responsible for, so all of the sort of government coverage, all of the public safety coverage, all of the education coverage. But there were other--there were a couple of deputy managing editors, so somebody else covered military affairs, and somebody else covered sports and features. And so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--all right, so--
Speaker 2: So essentially, the metro editor reported to me, as well as those sort of city editors in the various cities reported to me.
Speaker 1: Did you have--was there a philosophy about like what would make the news with these five localities generating all kinds of news, I guess, every day; but what would you--what made the news stick (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, that's kind of a broad question. I guess it depends, so for public safety, you know, that sort of speaks for itself. If there was, you know, a crime or punishment that was significant enough to get the public's attention, then that would be newsworthy. For government, any story that, you know, related to the sort of accountability of the institution would be something that would make the newspaper; if there was a lack of accountability, that would make the newspaper, or if there was corruption, that would make the newspaper. You know, as these municipalities figured out how to deal with the growth that was happening in their communities--that would be a variable. You know, there are always changes at the state and government level, so some of those, those stories would make the paper. This was the sort of post Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] era. You know, there were lots of stories, religion kinds of stories that would make the newspaper. Pat Robertson has a base down in southern Virginia, the Christian Coalition [Christian Coalition of America] sort of emerged during the time that I was there and they were becoming a political force; so those kinds of stories would make the paper. The Pilot actually was one of the first newspapers to get a website, but because it wasn't part of one of the big chains, it didn't necessarily get as much attention, so we were doing a lot of web related journalism way back in the, you know, the sort of late '90s [1990s], early 2000s, when others were still experimenting. So I would say basic news values; you know, any stories of significance that had those elements of who, what, when, where, why and how, were the kinds of news stories, we would jump on.
Story_ID: 653791
Speaker 1: Now, the Akron Beacon Journal in 2003--
Speaker 2: So during that time when I was at Norfolk [The Virginian-Pilot], my friends at Knight Ridder were like, "Why are you in Norfolk [Virginia]?" (Laughter) And one of the reasons I was in Norfolk is that one of the--another mentor was Kay Addis [Kay Tucker Addis], who was the editor in Norfolk when I went back for the deputy managing editor job. Kay was just a fantastic journalist and was very fond of me, and I had a great working relationship with her but, you know, Knight Ridder called and said, "We'd like to get you back in the company." I was gonna be in San Jose [California] hanging out with a friend who was the president of the features editors group [American Association of Sunday and Feature Editors; Society for Features Journalism], and they were like, "Well, why don't you stop by when you come through for that?" And I did, and they said, "Okay, we're looking for an editor in Monterey [California], a deputy managing editor in San Jose, or a managing editor in Akron." They had me go out with a realtor in San Jose, and I looked at a house that was a small little house that had a little--that had a utility pole in the middle of the front yard, and it was nine hundred thousand dollars 'cause the cost of living is so high. I was like, "I don't know if I'm gonna be able to move to San Jose; I'm not sure I'm gonna be able to make that cost of living adjustment." And when all was said and done, they--Knight Ridder needed somebody who had labor experience to move to Akron, and so I had these two sunny California options or Akron. And I can remember going on the Akron interview saying, "There's no way I'm moving to Akron, Ohio. I'm just not gonna do it." And, you know, as fate would have it, a few months later, I committed to moving to Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: What, what swayed you?
Speaker 2: You know, I thought it was a great opportunity. I had been a journalist for, you know, was it--not quite twenty years at that point but, you know, I was far enough along in my career that it was reasonable to move to a job--a position of increased responsibility; it offered that. My husband's [Jonathan Simmons] from Michigan, this was Ohio, it was a whole lot closer to my in-laws than living in southern Virginia, and as I mentioned, I had two small children at the time. So it was gonna be good for family, it was a good professional opportunity for me, I was gonna be working with people who I respected in the industry, and that was my plan. And then, before I got here, the publisher called me in Norfolk and said, "Are you sitting down?" And I said, "Why is the publisher at my new paper that I haven't started at yet calling me?" He said, "Well, I'm just calling to tell you Jan [Janet C. Leach] quit today, so I just wanna make sure you're still coming." Well, Jan was the editor of The Virginian--of the Akron Beacon Journal. So the editor who hired me quit before I got there. And I said, "Well, you know, I sort of announced that I'm leaving, so yes, I'm coming. I'll be there. What's going on?" And so when I got to Akron, we--she will hate for this to be on this tape. When I got to Akron, she worked for about three days so there could be some transition, and then she left and I spent the first six months as the managing editor with no editor while the publisher conducted a national search for an editor, and then I spent the next six months as the editor with no managing editor while I looked to replace myself. And that was my introduction to Ohio.
Speaker 1: I see. Okay, okay. So you actually become the managing editor of the--or the editor of the--
Speaker 2: I did, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Akron Beacon Journal. Okay. This is in 2003 when it was really--
Speaker 2: So I was named--I think I probably was named managing editor in December; started January of 2003, and then in July, I was named editor.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's, she's now teaching at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She hates when I tell this story; she's like, "Please don't tell that story" (laughter).
Story_ID: 653792
Speaker 1: I was asking you off camera is--if Al Fitzpatrick [HistoryMaker Albert Fitzpatrick] was there, he's a?
Speaker 2: Al, Al Fitzpatrick, who was a legend in the sort of Knight Ridder family, still lives in Akron, Ohio and was still very much a presence in the city and at the newspaper, but was no longer employed by the time I got there. So he was retired, but that didn't stop him from being around often. I was just telling someone, a couple of days ago, this story of Al Fitzpatrick inviting me to speak at the men's breakfast on the first Sunday in January a couple of years after I had gotten here, and it was about ten below zero, and a mound of snow, but I had committed to Al Fitzpatrick that I would talk to the men's breakfast at seven a.m. on a Sunday, and so if Al wanted you to be somewhere, you were there. And Al, interestingly, is a member of Akron's oldest black historic church, so it was interesting.
Speaker 1: What's the name of that church? Do you know?
Speaker 2: Wesley Temple [Wesley Temple A.M.E. Zion Church, Akron, Ohio], and it's an A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So you come to Akron in 2003 and--now, (unclear) well, it's a crisis when you come, but this is resolved; you're there the day after--how long did it take? About a year?
Speaker 2: Six months.
Speaker 1: Six months?
Speaker 2: So--well, it took about a year to have both an editor and a managing editor, so I--essentially I spent the first year doing both jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what was the Beacon Journal [Akron Beacon Journal] like? 'Cause this is a small area--well, would you say it's--northeast Ohio has a lot of, you know, people too, but--
Speaker 2: It is--so yeah, Akron is probably a smaller geographic area than The Virginian-Pilot, but there I was the deputy managing editor versus the editor, so I am, you know, responsible for all of the content across the board, and at a paper that had a storied reputation for doing great journalism. So I get there, it's a very talented staff; they're, you know, trying to figure out what's going on 'cause there's sort of a leadership upheaval. The person who had been the managing editor had left to go to the Detroit Free Press and the editor was looking to replace him; I come in and then she [Janet C. Leach] leaves, so we had to get through the leadership challenges. But then we, you know, go on to produce great work for a few years, and then in 2006, Knight Ridder gets acquired, so that creates a whole other round of upheaval. You know, McClatchy [The McClatchy Company] buys the company, you know, Knight Ridder becomes part of McClatchy, and then one by one, the papers that were unionized got sold off. So the Philadelphia paper [The Philadelphia Inquirer] got sold off, the San Jose paper [The Mercury News] got sold off, the Akron paper got sold off. And so, most of the leadership at the Beacon Journal sort of leaves at the end of that transition, myself included.
Story_ID: 653793
Speaker 1: Was there like a national movement to break up the unions in the newspaper world, or?
Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't say that. You know--I, I would say that, you know, each regional area has its own distinct set of labor challenges and so, you know, I'm sure there are times when newspapers have looked for strategic opportunities to, you know, shape things in a way that sort of work in their favor, but I--I wouldn't say there was ever a national effort to, to, you know, break the union or weaken the union.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know when they--several state governments have, you know, actually colluded on, you know, breaking up the unions on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, SB 5 [Senate Bill 5] in Ohio is a different kind of conversation. I don't know if you recall that a couple of years ago, (unclear) had, you know, proposed some sort of significant changes to the way that--at least public unions are supported, and that went to the ballot and was resoundingly defeated and so--
Speaker 1: Right. I think he was--there was a story about him being on the phone with Walker [Scott Walker] in Wisconsin--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, when Walker's statehouse is under siege, you know, for breaking up the union (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. But I, I wouldn't say there's ever been that kind of effort in the newspaper world specifically, though.
Speaker 1: Okay. I was wondering; I mean you got like management versus labor in a lot of situations in this country--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I just wondered what the--McClatchy [The McClatchy Company] comes in, do they have a different attitude about the unions than Knight Ridder?
Speaker 2: Well, none of McClatchy's papers were unionized, so I think that would suggest that they--they had a very distinct attitude about it (laughter) and then, you know, those that were unionized were largely sold off. You know, I think maybe there's one, but it's sort of a weak union form of government versus a strong union form of government. But those papers with the hardcore unions were picked off right away, even the St. Paul Pioneer Press--not necessarily the largest ever but, you know, the St. Pauls and the Akrons--where there was the potential for there to be labor strife, you know, those papers were sold off. McClatchy might argue that that wasn't the reason; I guess we'll never know. But, you know, in Akron [Ohio] it was significant because the Akron Beacon Journal was the Knight brothers' first newspaper; that was where it all began, and so there was this whole nostalgic belief that, you know, the Knight papers and Knight Ridder was going to exist forever. So people were really kind of sort of dumbstruck when the acquisition happened and the company was broken up. So, you know, hindsight years later, the industry has changed fairly dramatically in those--in the last eight years since that's occurred.
Story_ID: 653794
Speaker 1: What are some of the changes? I, I know that 25 percent of the staff was slashed by McClatchy [The McClatchy Company] when they took over the Ak- the Akron Beacon Journal--at least that's what it says on the notes (laughter), but what, what else happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well here's what happened. So McClatchy actually--once McClatchy acquired the company, they sold the Beacon Journal to a black publishing Canadian company [Black Press Group Ltd.] immediately, so when the staff reductions happened, that wasn't McClatchy's doing, that was David Black's doing; and David Black is not related to Conrad Black, so if someone's doing research, they shouldn't confuse those two. So McClatchy acquires the company, and then within six weeks or so, David Black acquires the company. You know, Black comes in, he decides that, "Hey, yeah, this is a pretty good paper but it probably doesn't really have to be this good, right? I mean it could--you know, the people in the community'll probably still buy it even if it's not as good as it is right now, and we can make it more profitable." And so, yes, there's a reduction of staff; 25 percent sounds about right, but a huge portion of that percentage was in the newsroom specifically, though the cuts were across the board. You know, as the editor, I'm the person who has to make those cuts happen. You know, the Akron union contract, however, very clearly stated how a layoff would play out, and it was seniority based. And so if we were reducing X number of people across the board, you know, the--you know, you start counting and you get to that number and whoever arrived after a certain point would be the people who would be laid off. And so shortly after that time, really simultaneous to that, all of the senior leadership was leaving or being asked to leave. And at the point that I laid everybody off that needed to be laid off, then it was my turn to be laid off--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, which was okay because the paper wasn't going to be what it had been; not that things can't change, but clearly there was a dramatic transition that was taking place. It made sense to get these sort of leadership choices of the new ownership to carry out the sort of agenda and vision for the paper that they had. So, interestingly enough, the paper in San Jose [California] was also a unionized paper that McClatchy acquired and promptly sold off. And so the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This the San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News]?
Speaker 2: Yes. So the San Jose Mercury News and the Akron Beacon Journal were in the same state of being sold; you know, the company was acquired and then they were sold again. Well, the editor in San Jose [Susan Goldberg] was the person who was trying to fill that deputy managing editor job that I didn't take when I went out with the realtor and saw the nine hundred thousand dollar house with the electrical pole in the front yard and came to Akron [Ohio] instead. Well, she became the editor in Cleveland [Ohio], and so when she got to Cleveland, she called and said, "Well, what do I need to do to get you to come north instead of south?" And so her arrival to Cleveland happened about three months after I left the Akron Beacon Journal. You know, I had committed to taking the semester off because I had spent so many hours working before the sale, and then through the transition and the layoffs and all of that; and again, I have small children. And so I was committed to going back to work when my children went back to school and so in September, 2007, I started here [The Plain Dealer] with my colleague who had been a sort of fellow--a sort of a sister editor at another Knight Ridder paper.
Story_ID: 653795
Speaker 1: As editor of a--you're in charge of all the content (unclear), right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Mostly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, until--until midyear last year, I was responsible for all of the content. As you know, Advance Publications [Advance Publications, Inc.] have gone through a fairly dramatic transition where we've shifted some of our resources to the digital side of the house, and so now I'm responsible for half the content, and my colleague on the digital side of the house is responsible for the other half of the content--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but we all feed all of the products--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the website, the newspaper, the weeklies.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Now, the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer] is an old newspaper with a decent reputation as well. How has it been here in Cleveland [Ohio]? Cleveland is a city that's trying to rebound, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cleveland's trying to rebound (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like Detroit [Michigan] in some ways, but not as in bad a shape as Detroit, right?
Speaker 2: Right. Cleveland's trying to rebound on many levels and so, interestingly enough, I think the people who are transplants from other places who live here have a greater regard for the city than some of the natives. I mean the, the natural resources, the--you know--the national park [Cuyahoga Valley National Park, Ohio], you know, the lake [Lake Erie], the sort of family entertainment; there's a lot that the region has to offer. The flip side is that the city proper, in particular, has lots of challenges. The schools [Cleveland Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District] are failing, the business climate has been questionable; regionally, the job losses have been noteworthy, the foreclosure crisis hit here earlier and deeper than in many other places, and so there are lots of challenges that Cleveland is trying to overcome, in addition to the failure of its sports teams, which influences the psyche of the city. And so, on the one hand, there are all these challenges; on the other hand, there's a lot of venture capital money being invested, there are lots of young entrepreneurs who've identified Cleveland as a place that they want to create startups. I was just talking to somebody the other day; the money being invested in Cleveland for tech startups is greater than anywhere else in the Midwest, but that isn't necessarily a story that gets told very often. This, you know, this Medical Mart and convention center [Global Center for Health Innovation, Cleveland, Ohio] just opened within the past year, and Cleveland's sort of hitching some of its rebounding potential on that. You know, a casino [Jack Cleveland Casino, Cleveland, Ohio] opened up in the last two years, there's some belief that tourism could be impacted by that. So there lots of projects underway; I think the big question for Cleveland's a question of leadership. You know, the mayor is a very nice guy [Frank G. Jackson]; there are people who question whether it's the right leadership at the right time, and so it'll be interesting to see how Cleveland navigates some of that. Around the time that I was in Detroit twenty years ago, Cleveland was seen as, hey, the west bank of the flats is open and Cleveland, you know, is experiencing a renaissance and so I, I think that renaissance might have been short lived and there's this sort of hope for this next renaissance to be underway. I think the verdict is still out on whether or not that's in fact happening. You know, there's a group called Positively Cleveland [Destination Cleveland] that's sort of the city's tourism arm that's doing a great job of selling the city and making it attractive in spite of the lack of sun that we are experiencing this February day. And so the Gay Games are gonna be here this summer [2014 Gay Games] and I was just in a meeting yesterday and we were talking, "Why would the Gay Games wanna come here versus the places they could have gone, not necessarily the most gay friendly city ever? Certainly not San Francisco [California]." You know, it was--maybe it's an opportunity to educate people to be more open minded and more thoughtful; it's a huge revenue boost for the region, and so people are looking forward to that. So I think good things are happening in Cleveland, I think that some of the malignment is unfair. You know, I don't think Clevelanders necessarily help tell their story though, and so some of that's a variable.
Story_ID: 653796
Speaker 1: At the newspaper [The Plain Dealer], we're going through dramatic change where we shift to--we're sort of nudging our audience to be more digitally focused; we've put many more of our resources there, but we're kind of an older staid community, and so a lot of our veteran readers don't love what we are doing, so the paper's only being home delivered four days a week, and the other three days, you can read the electronic edition of the paper, you can read cleveland.com or you can go to the newsstand or the convenience store and pick one up. We're probably about six months into that transition, and every day it continues to be a struggle with our veteran readers, but our audience is as big as it has ever been online. We have very steep audience goals for 2014, and so--often I get calls from people saying, "That's why you're dying, nobody's reading you." Actually, more people are reading us than ever have, and so we're sort of navigating that transition even as we tell the story of Cleveland's [Cleveland, Ohio] attempts to put itself in a position where it isn't struggling in the way that Detroit [Michigan] is. Interestingly enough though, Detroiters are sort of resolute, confident and, you know, believe in their city no matter how bad things get. Clevelanders tend to be a bit more, "Woe is us," you know, "why can't we get any respect?" It's a, a completely different vibe (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 653797
Speaker 1: I read cleveland.com every day to follow the sports teams, which are woeful (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but as an old, fan as a kid, I can't get that out of my bloodstream. I guess I wanna follow 'em--I want the Browns [Cleveland Browns] to win, the Cavaliers [Cleveland Cavaliers] but--this is despite the Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio], Cleveland symphony [Cleveland Orchestra], the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all the great things that have happened around here. The sports teams seem to drag down the--
Speaker 2: They do. In fact, we have columnists, you know, who write our sports teams don't define us; we have all these other things that collectively define us. But I do think the weather and the bad sports just make for a--an unhealthy psyche.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause even the sports teams--I was reading in Terry Pluto this morning, and he was remarking that, you know, if the Cavaliers or the Browns wanna improve, you know, they have to attract other--better players, but who wants to come here? I mean that's--'cause the impression nationwide is that this is--everybody's depressed, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right. And so the newspaper [The Plain Dealer] goes out of our way to, you know, show not just the depressed side, but the opportunities and the successes. You know, I always say that our content commitment is really four fold. So we wanna put a local lens on national and international stories, and so that might be, for example, talking about how the wars impact local families who have, you know, soldiers fighting in them--to really maximize our local expertise to talk about the strength of our businesses or the quality of our schools, or the effectiveness of our elected leadership. And then a third priority is to really be a community steward--to give people the information they need to know, you know, about the people who are running for office and what they stand for and what their choices are and what their variables are, and the impact of those choices. And then the fourth thing is emotional bond--to celebrate the city's successes or mourn it's losses, and I always say, "And our losses are formidable when you think about the Browns, the Indians [Cleveland Indians] and the Cavs." But there are many successes. You talked about some of the city's assets, and there are also a lot of business success that we go out of our way to try to outline, so we really are working to give a balanced perspective about everything that is Cleveland in spite of some of the energy and the challenges 'cause as we talked about the challenges, these aren't challenges that other urban areas don't have; I mean Chicago's sort of academic performance, or its sort of public safety challenges, or its sort of youth getting killed in the streets. Those statics aren't better. Certainly, their sports teams' statistics are better, and there's lots of fun to be had, but Chicagoans have a great attitude about Chicago [Illinois], and I think in Cleveland [Ohio] that that attitude varies, and the people who moved here three years ago are having a great time, and there's lots to do, and there're all these assets and they're on it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Theater district here [Playhouse Square, Cleveland, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: --and the natives tend not to be that way so much. So there's a lot of work that's being done to try to change that and we're writing that narrative.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the arts are big here, the theater district, I know is one of the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Second only to New York City [New York, New York]. I mean there are things to do; no, no shortage of ways to be entertained, but I, I think that the way one perceives themselves is really at the, at the heart of changing the, the attitudes here.
Story_ID: 653798
Speaker 1: We were at [HistoryMaker] Harry Boomer's house yesterday--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and what used--well, well what is still Hough [Cleveland, Ohio], but it's not that, the Hough it was in 1968--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when it was the quintessential ghetto of the United States (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --but it still is kind of desolate over there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's not a lot over there on the east side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What is the state of the African American community in the inner city of Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean if you look at the--if you look at the census data trends--so we, we, we know about, you know, the white flight of other generations. I mean really what you're seeing now is black flight--those who can leave are leaving and they're going to the inner ring suburbs and, in many cases, taking some of the challenges they have with them to those inner ring suburbs, and no one's filling behind them in these houses that are sitting vacant across the city. So I don't know what the raw number is of vacant houses, but it's in the tens of thousands. And there's some effort going on to try to repopulate some of those houses with immigrants who are coming in from other places. And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I heard this scheme related to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --advertise for immigrants from Eastern Europe to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eastern Europe, there's some African countries in the mix; the efforts tend to be targeted to get clusters of people of similar backgrounds so they can feel comfortable, or what have you. And then on the flip side, it's demolishing many of those old houses that are barely standing, so for those that can be repopulated, great; if not, you know, there's an effort to, to tear some of those houses down because the city doesn't have the infrastructure to really support the kind of numbers that it used to anyway. But key to, to making all of this happen in a successful way is getting the schools, you know, at an adequate level of performance, and so that's really where much of the effort is happening now, as well as downtown development; you know, developing the waterfront, which has never happened in Cleveland; you know, making downtown a more walkable city. So there are, there are lots of efforts both downtown and, and in the neighborhoods to try to stem the tide.
Story_ID: 653799
Speaker 1: When you look at your, your years here in Cleveland [Ohio], what is the highlight, I guess, in terms of The Plain Dealer?
Speaker 2: Hm, the highlight. Okay, I gotta think about this for a minute. So I've been in Ohio for ten years; came in 2003 as I mentioned, left the Beacon [Akron Beacon Journal] December 31st, 2006 and started at The Plain Dealer in 2007. I guess there have been a number of highlights; probably most significant is that a couple of years ago, the structure of county government in Cuyahoga County [Ohio] was changed, driven largely by the investigative reporting of The Plain Dealer, which unveiled widespread corruption. So being able to shed light on how the government has run, and to provide citizens with the kinds of information that would help them make a meaningful choice about doing things differently is probably the defining professional moment of my Cleveland experience. You know, there are a number of people--readers who would argue that The Plain Dealer should have been writing these stories twenty years ago, so as--one who wasn't here twenty years ago, can't really take the hit for what didn't happen. I don't necessarily disagree with, with some of those points but, you know, I think if you look at the work that we did in 2008 and 2009, that--not, not just one or two people of questionable character, but that really sort of unveiled a whole infrastructure of corruption and cronyism, and to get that broken down and to come up with a new structure that has, you know, leadership, you know, for the people by the people, where everyone has a seat at the table, really is significant.
Speaker 1: Okay. So 2010, I guess, was a landmark year for those investigations?
Speaker 2: Yes. That's when the sort of chickens came home to roost so to speak (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard--well, this morning, [HistoryMaker] Harry Boomer again; he was saying another, you know, corruption scandal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and he was talking about some other layer has been peeled back.
Speaker 2: I mean that's the thing. What we really helped to do is unveil this whole culture of corruption and, you know, what has sprung from that is a whole series of investigations and a whole series of, you know, identifying pockets of mismanagement and misbehavior, and so, you know, when you think about journalism as a public trust, I mean I think that we most effectively fulfilled that role in the kinds of content that we're talking about here; but we're also doing it now around rape. As you know, 2013 was the year that three women [Gina DeJesus, Amanda Berry and Michelle Knight] were found, you know, to have been locked in a house for a decade. Well, for the last three years, we have been pushing the state to do a better job of examining rape kits and, you know, I think our content, as well as, you know, other developments, have sort of moved the state to a place where it's more effectively and efficiently testing rape kits, and thousands of rapes are being resolved as a result of much of the work that we're doing. And so, you know, we are continuing to push to--particularly, you know, for poor women whose credibility is questionable, they've never--you know, they rarely have been able to get anybody to listen to their cries. And now the state attorney general [Mike DeWine] has made a commitment to testing every untested rape kit that's out there, and there are about four thousand, and they're about a third of the way through. And in some cases, the offenders are in custody; you know, they're right there but no one's ever tested and no one's ever asked, and so for many families, including families who've had people not just rape but murder, some of those murders have been resolved in the past year. In one case, a woman's daughter was killed thirty years ago and just gotten to a place where she knows what happened. But as it relates to the rape kits specifically, there's a twenty year statute of limitations, and so there's this race to get those tested before that statute runs out.
Story_ID: 653800
Speaker 1: One of the reasons the whole discussion of the rape kits is important is, if you recall, in 2008, the bodies of eleven dead women were found either in the house or in the yard of a serial killer in Cleveland [Ohio]; his name was Anthony Sowell--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so if you look on our front page the day that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, when you get to the second front page [of The Plain Dealer], you see the developments around the Anthony Sowell murders. And so we had Anthony Sowell and, you know, that's discovered in 2008, and then in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is an African American man--
Speaker 1: African American man--
Speaker 2: --living in--on the--
Speaker 1: --living on the east side of Cleveland who, you know, murdered women who were, you know, largely drug addicts who didn't necessarily have a lot of credibility with law enforcement. Since that time, other women have come forward to say, "Yes, I reported being raped by him and the police didn't do anything." So that really was the catalyst for this work. And then when you fast forward to 2013 and you see the Gina DeJesus, Amanda Berry, Michelle Knight developments, it just makes the case for why this work is so critically important. So we're--you know, if we have to look at what was our signature content in 2013, in addition to covering the live story of the escape of these women who lived this decade of captivity, it's really the impact of our journalism on the potential to reduce this from continuing to happen; so, you know, we think that's, we think that's important. Even as we change the way that we're distributing content, we think that deep investigative commitment is our competitive advantage--it's what we can do that nobody else can do in this town.
Story_ID: 653801
Speaker 1: At the same time, though, there are people that say that, that The Plain Dealer is not living up to its former journalistic standards; and there's a letter--somebody was saying that you were tight with Marcia Fudge and, you know, and there was--so what is--what are the critics about?  I mean what do they--where are they coming from?
Speaker 2: Well, you know--well, actually, I haven't gotten lots of complaints about Marcia but, you know, as you noted somewhere and read, I happen to be a member of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], as are at least, you know, half the sort of professional women of color in the United States, and so yes, we are in the same sorority. If you talk to Marcia, she's not particularly a fan of the paper, and would argue that we rarely cut her any slack ever, you know, particularly since she assumed Stephanie's [Stephanie Tubbs Jones] congressional seat. So yes, I have a relationship with Marcia, but I have a relationship with lots of people in town--any number of CEOs, any number of politicians, and probably spend time with quite a few others more than with her, but it's interesting that we don't hear that criticism of my relationship with some of the local CEOs because that's accepted; but somehow, if I'm having lunch with Nina Turner, there's a problem, but if I'm having lunch with Chris Conner [Christopher Conner] at Sherwin-Williams [Sherwin-Williams Company], that's okay. I'm, I'm not sure where the issue lies. And in the case of Fudge, she has had limited, if any, competition, so it's not like we're favoring her in lieu of someone else.  I mean there's very limited competition in her district [11th Congressional District]--that's not our doing.
Story_ID: 653802
Speaker 1: You spoke to some of the changes in The Plain Dealer's dis- distribution. And what, what other--or what's the direction of The Plain Dealer now, in terms of the--you've mentioned there're--you're doing more investigative reporting than ever before, distribution's been changed on some level.
Speaker 2: So--can't speak to the amount of investigation those who came before me were doing; maybe they--maybe they were doing a lot. Certainly, the news staff used to be a lot, you know, bigger, ten years ago than it is today. You know, what I would say is that our commitment to investigative and public service journalism is resolute, and that is going to be part of our foundation no matter the distribution changes. So Advance Publications [Advance Publications, Inc.] has made a strategic decision to make their companies more digitally focused because that's where our audience is shifting and they wanna be proactive rather than reactive, and so The Plain Dealer, as part of this company, is making that transition, but we don't believe it's affecting the quality of our journalism. We're presenting the information in a different way but we're still reporting and gathering that information. In general, newspapers have fewer employees than they did ten years ago as the audience shift and as revenues shift away, so that requires us to do things differently, but that different doesn't necessarily mean lesser. You know, in this last round of changes that we made, we went out of our way to preserve all of the significant hard news beats, and so for some newspapers, that might mean that they don't have a television critic or a movie critic; we still do, by the way. But I don't know that those papers are lesser papers because they're using syndicated TV coverage versus having somebody cover it. So there are, there are fewer people here than there were when I arrived but, you know, I believe that we kept the best possible talent on staff, and those people continue to produce great work. If you look at the number of awards The Plain Dealer has won in the last few years, since our cuts in 2008, and we'll see how that plays out for the cuts that we just had, but I would put our work up against any newspaper in the country. I mean I think that we're holding our own, you know. We've won awards from the American Society of News Editors, we've had finalists for the Pulitzer Prize, we've won a number of statewide awards including, you know, being named the, you know--still, the best overall excellent newspaper in the state, and the list goes on and on. We've been recognized by NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]; I think we won three awards last year, we won four the year before; that compares with our peers--you know, papers that are both larger and smaller than we are. So I think that we are doing an effective job covering our community. Do I think there are stories that are out there that we don't know about? Yes, but I think that is really up to the, the, the digging on the part of the people who are here as opposed to saying if we had, you know, four hundred more people we could do more. We all agree--if we had four hundred people more we could do more; I would argue that some of those people who used to be here weren't necessarily making The Plain Dealer a better newspaper, so instead of lamenting what we don't have or what we used to be, which can be the Cleveland [Ohio] way, my commitment is to, you know, maximizing the talents of the two hundred people who make up the news operation here now. Two Hundred people can get you a whole lot of content. I was a Pulitzer Prize juror four times, and one of the papers that was a finalist had a staff of five people. So if you have the right five people doing the digging, doing the work, asking the questions and presenting the information--you can make a difference in your community. And so that's where we are.
Story_ID: 653803
Speaker 1: And you've been recognized by everybody from the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] to the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] to, you know?
Speaker 2: I've received a few awards. You know, I'm still--I'm shy at heart, so I really like the attention not to be about me. In fact, when I was filling out some paperwork for this, I was like, "Do I really need to revisit all of these things?" And in fact, there's this, you know, National Coalition of 100 Black Women that is gonna be recognizing me in March; I really encourage them to recognize somebody else. I'm not to not be appreciative, but I think there are a lot of great people who live in this community who are working really hard who deserve attention.
Speaker 1: You're a black woman in a strategic place in this city [Cleveland, Ohio] and, you know, have a--I mean, you know, the editor of The Plain Dealer, that's big; that's really big and, you know, we've never had anybody (laughter) (unclear) Plain Dealer so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I understand (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I--does it make it tougher for you to do your job, being recognized for (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what I would say is that it certainly, you know, creates some challenges of time 'cause lots of organizations want to be able to reach out and touch the paper, particularly organizations of color who historically have felt a lack of access and opportunity, and so I usually try to go out of my way to be receptive to those groups who feel like they historically haven't been able to connect with the newspaper in addition to a lot of the traditional groups that have an expectation that they connect with the newspaper, so there are talents of--challenges of time. We do have to be more strategic in the news stories we choose to cover since there are fewer people, so there are challenges that way. The industry is shifting so our priorities are shifting, so one person on my staff says, "Yeah, you get to be the editor when all hell's breaking loose and you're doing things that no editor in the history of The Plain Dealer has ever been asked to do." And that's really because of the business climate that we find ourselves in but, you know, I see that as part of the job; I'm not complaining about it. I think that, you know, the challenge for this sort of generation of newspaper editors is to figure out how to do the best print newspaper, and how to do the best digital news that we can do.
Story_ID: 653804
Speaker 1: Now you're in a key position, but is diversity still an issue at The Plain Dealer like it is everywhere else?
Speaker 2: I would say that diversity is a key issue in the industry, including at The Plain Dealer. You are aware that I'm the--I'm sitting Associated Press Media Editors' president and one of APME's core strategic priorities is diversity and sort of increasing the sort of leadership diversity across the industry, and that continues to be a challenge, particularly as people leave. And so when The Plain Dealer was reducing its staff this past summer to align with the economic reality we find ourselves in, several people of color raised their hands to be the people to leave. Yes, that ultimately makes a difference when you are covering your community, and so a challenge for us is, is we have added some staff back just to make sure we have a diverse pool. But it's also important for the people who are here, no matter their backgrounds, to also be covering our broad community, and so we have tried to focus some effort there as well.
Speaker 1: Are schools producing enough reporters of color to take the place of those who are leaving?
Speaker 2: So there's a mix; some--you know, the--some, some journalism schools are producing a decent number of students of color, others not so much. I talk to lots of students of color who feel like, you know, "It's a questionable industry; I don't know if that's the right thing for me so I don't know--," you know, when I think about Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] whose Professional Advisory Board I sit on, a lot of their students are on the fence about whether or not this is a viable career choice and, you know, given the changes that are happening, it's hard not to appreciate where they're coming from. When you juxtapose that with the limited hiring that's happened on the news side in recent years, the challenges--the, in some cases inability to replenish either because you're not hiring anyone, or the pool isn't what the pool used to be. And when I think about the people who I used to hang out with at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], those people aren't there anymore and it's not just 'cause they're all old and got married and have children; they're moving on with their lives. Many have left the industry, and so I think that's the--probably the most dramatic change and challenge, and so--but when I look at applications for summer interns, there's a diverse pool in that group; they're not necessarily African Americans. And so I do think it's important to cultivate African American journalists who live in these communities; not just in Cleveland [Ohio], but across the country who can, you know, ultimately go and be a part of the staff there. And so every summer I try to look for some kind of opportunity for a young person from Cleveland, even if it's not a full blown internship. "Can you do some freelance writing, or can you do a little five week mini rotation here?" But, you know, that's hard to do when newspapers are trying to get in the black. And so, you know, I recognize that business reality as well.
Story_ID: 653805
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there--do you have any regrets? Do you regret not going to law school, or?
Speaker 2: So I do not regret not going to law school or med school. On occasion, I think, hm, I wonder what would have happened if I had taken that job at The Washington Post? So I mentioned that Post opportunity and I--I, I had another opportunity there that I didn't mention that I didn't take as well, but the person who took the job at The Washington Post that I didn't take was the editor for the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] part of the 9/11 story [September 11, 2001]. So after 9/11 happened and that editor was doing that story, I was like, hm, maybe I should have taken that job at The Post; I would have been the 9/11 editor for the Pentagon portion of the story. And so, you know, I guess on occasion I think--I've spent some time thinking about what my trajectory might have been if I had made some different choices, but in general, I think I have sort of chosen well for, you know, where I was in my life, and so I, I try not to look back. Interestingly enough, I have a young couple on my staff who is gonna be leaving in a couple of weeks to take a job at The Washington Post, and so I've told this young man my, you know, my whole story, "Well, I took this job, and then on the day I was supposed to arrive, I called and said I wasn't coming and they still called me back, so don't feel like you have to take it 'cause if they really want you, they might come back again." But I always end those conversations by saying, "If you're gonna be looking back with regret, then that's probably a sign that you should take it; you don't wanna walk away from an opportunity and then wonder what might have been." And so I try to live by that.
Story_ID: 653806
Speaker 1: What are your future plans? Now, I had a note here that you were writing a book on Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], or something, or you were (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my Katrina book has been delayed a bit. So my husband [Jonathan Simmons] attended Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and so we spent a lot of time in New Orleans [Louisiana]; I don't know if you're familiar with the Hubbard Mansion [Hubbard Mansion Bed and Breakfast, New Orleans, Louisiana], but that would be a good subject--the owners of the Hubbard Mansion would be a good couple. So after Katrina happened, I, I, I spent a lot of time interviewing people in New Orleans. You know, during my hiatus between Akron [Akron Beacon Journal] and Cleveland [The Plain Dealer], I spent a lot of time down there interviewing lots of people, and have stayed on the story periodically. You know, you might be referencing a--I, I did a story for Ebony after one of the anniversaries, and was committed to getting a book out the door shortly after that; it hasn't gotten out the door yet, so--you know, as we think about these sort of anniversaries of significance that are coming up, I will probably revisit, but right now it's on hold. Lots of fodder, but the book hasn't come together completely yet.
Speaker 1: I think--what--2015 will be ten years?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right. So, you know, if I was on it, I probably could pull it off for the ten year anniversary but that would be ambitious as possible, but I'd have to do some major, major work to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, to answer your question--so my short term future plans are to get my teenage sons through high school and college. And really, the media, as an industry, is evolving, and so while I'm getting my children through college, I can also watch where the industry is going and decide what the best role would be for me in the industry. I mean I'm still committed to improving the quality of life in the communities where I've lived and where I'm living now; and so the question for me would be, what's the best way to sort of effect change?
Story_ID: 653807
Speaker 1: And likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: So, again, I would say--you know, trying to--I would say my legacy is trying to leave each community better than I found it. I would say my legacy is really nurturing the talent of the journalists in the room where I've been, and so--you know, even more than sort of massaging stories--really developing to--identifying talent, developing that talent, supporting people in the way that I described a number of people who were supportive of me over the years. Interestingly enough, I often tell the young journalists, "I remember when I used to be the twenty year old in the room and now I'm the old person in the room; how did that happen?" And when you go to our digital side, I'm like the grandmother in the room. But when I think about the impact that those people over the years had on me in the--sort of the circuitous route of my career, I really sort of pride myself on playing that kind of role in the lives of young journalists; you know, particularly, journalists of color, but really all journalists. You know, I have people come into my office and saying, "I'm not sure what the future holds; should I still be doing this?" I'm like, "You're one of my best reporters. Yes, you should still be doing this." You know, I think that in the United States we're blessed with having a free press who can really make a difference in the way that our communities work and, you know, I've always focused on the hard news side and trying to, you know, make sure those institutions are operating effectively and so I would say that's my legacy in Cleveland [Ohio] and in Akron [Ohio], and in, in Detroit [Michigan] and Norfolk [Virginia] as well.
Story_ID: 653808
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: So I have two teenage sons, they're athletes; one's--I have a fifteen year old sophomore and a thirteen year old eighth grader. Both my children, as fate would have it, were born in Virginia; I stayed in Virginia long enough for them to both be born there, and they--I moved to Akron [Ohio] when my youngest son was starting kindergarten; he attended the same school through eighth grade and now he goes to a high school up in suburban Cleveland [Ohio]. And my youngest is trying to decide what high school he's going to go to--will he follow in his brother's footsteps or will he do something differently.
Story_ID: 653809
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes for Cleveland's future?
Speaker 2: Well, I--one of my hopes for Cleveland [Ohio] would be for Clevelanders to fall in love with themselves and their community again. You know, it may not be perfect but, you know, it's, it's their sort of like, you know, relationships (laughter), and so, you know, if Cleveland could find some success--if Cleveland could find a football championship or even a playoff, that would, I think, really make a difference in the psyche of the city, but in many ways, I think that's a metaphor for the success that Cleveland, I think, deserves to find, and could really benefit from and flourish from; so if Cleveland could be first at some of the things we'd like it to be first at. I, I covered schools for a long time, so unlike others, I'm not sure that there's a perfect solution to public education; if you look around the country, I don't know that there's a city that's figured it out, but if Cleveland could figure out the challenge of public education in an urban environment, that would be a sign of success. Or, if you can't figure out--figure it out for a hundred percent of the residents, could you, could you figure it out for 50 percent of the kids who are in public schools in the city? That would be a sign of success. If there could be more business investment that would be a sign of success. You know, if Cleveland had more positive stories to tell--and it has a lot now; I don't know that everyone's reading them, but if the--if those numbers multiplied, I think that, you know, those would be good signs for Cleveland. If Cleveland's on a list of cities that people wanna come to rather than the list that they want to avoid being assigned--that would be a sign of success.
Story_ID: 653810
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't covered that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't imagine that there's something that we have not discussed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, well the, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: So, you know, I was just making a point a few minutes ago about I used to be the twenty something in the room and now I'm one of the older people, and you just reinforced that when you called me ma'am (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm older (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So earlier in the conversation, we talked about me receiving the Bob McGruder award and they're two McGruder awards. I received the Robert McGruder Award for Diversity in Leadership [Robert G. McGruder Award for Diversity Leadership] from Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], and then the APME [Associated Press Media Editors] and ASNE [American Society of News Editors], those are two journalism organizations, they also have a McGruder award, and the award is really focused around Bob's [Robert G. McGruder] sort of legacy and commitment to developing journalists. And so if, after I'm gone, there is a Debra Adams Simmons award for diversity in leadership that follows in the footsteps of Bob, I think that would be a way that I would like to be remembered; but I think to get there--you know, the foundation for that is built now, in some of the ways I talked about in terms of developing and nurturing not just young talent but even older journalists who wanna shift from being reporters who are responsible for themselves to leading news entities--you know, print in newsrooms, television newsrooms, so you look at the numbers in terms of diversity; it's very, very small. And so if there's something that I can do to move the needle to enable those who are coming behind me to have the opportunities that I've had, that would be--that, that would be a legacy worth remembering.
