Story_ID: 625022
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Maxine A. Smith: M-A-X-I-N-E, A is for my maiden name, Atkins, A-T-K-I-N-S, Smith, S-M-I-T-H [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith].
Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 31, 1929, I was born in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.  I've been two or three things, I taught French for three years, four years and married [Vasco Smith, Jr.] and after a short spell I became executive secretary of the Memphis Branch, NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay and you were also member of the school board here [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education]?
Speaker 2: Yes I served on the school board twenty-four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I served on the Tennessee state board of regents [Tennessee Board of Regents] for twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: July 30, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at 1208 East Parkway South [Memphis, Tennessee], at my home.
Story_ID: 625023
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well just cut me off 'cause I'm not short (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Okay the first one is--they're kind of a warm up--the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess pasta in general.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red I would (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere a cruise will take me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  A favorite saying, or a phrase?
Speaker 2: I gave it my best shot.
Story_ID: 625024
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history, and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we're gonna start with your mother's side first.  And first of all can you give us your mother's full name and spell for us please?
Speaker 2: Georgia Rounds Atkins: G-E-O-R-G-I-A, R-O-U-N-D-S, A-T-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 26, 1899.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Near Grenada, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I've heard of Grenada, I'm not sure where--where is it, can you, I mean geographically (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's, it's about 100 miles due south of Memphis [Tennessee].  It's halfway between Memphis and Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same street all the way (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can't go further back than her mother and father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Ada Jackson when I knew her; she was no longer married to my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Robert Rounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.   All right, well what did they do for a living then?
Speaker 2: My mother I'll start with her, I know more about her, only went to work after my father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] died when she left three children: nine, eleven and thirteen [years old].  And that time she did mostly what she could get, but before she had married she had worked as a schoolteacher.  And as--you know a local bank, we had a couple black banks in Memphis and she had worked--this was before I came along--at one or two of them after Dad died.  She ended up being the clerk secretary of our church [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee], where she spent most of the rest of her life before she retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wanted to talk about how she grew up first and can you tell us something about your grandparents first and then get, let's try to get her early life in.
Speaker 2: Well when I knew my grandmother, she lived in Chicago [Illinois], I didn't know my grandmother--well, naturally I didn't know her the time Ma Dear was living with her.   And we visited her every summer in Chicago and we looked forward to that like Santa Claus, and I think my mama did too.  I don't remember what Mama Ada as I called her did; I don't know that she worked.  Because she lived with, in an apartment building with my uncle, or perhaps my two uncles, and I don't remember her working.  Now I imagine my grandfather, Robert Rounds, did farming work around Grenada, Coffeeville [Mississippi] I think was the little town where they lived, which is out from Grenada really.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, I didn't know him very well, he used to come see us occasionally before he passed away, and I really can't remember when he passed away now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, would you imagine they were probably born in the 1870s I guess, I'm thinking?
Speaker 2: Had to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah or '80 [1880] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ma Dear was--
Speaker 1: --around nine- 1880, late 1870s?
Speaker 2: Ma Dear was born 19--1897.
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-seven [1897].
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1899] rather.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So her mother if you say you know maybe 18--
Speaker 2: 'Course folks married earlier (laughter) in those days.  And Ma Dear wasn't the oldest child, she had--I don't remember where she ranked, but I do know my Uncle Eugene [Eugene Rounds], who I never knew, was the oldest.  And I think the two uncles that I did know, Uncle Fred [Frederick Rounds] and Uncle Robert [Robert Rounds], were older than my mother [sic.].  So they, she had--and Ma Dear was born in '99 [1899].  So whatever (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So her mother probably I'm--circa around 1875 I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah that's somewhere in that area, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then so that would be that would put her maybe ten years away from slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: She was born after slavery, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, I would think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now is there, there any, any stories in the family about slavery or Reconstruction or any of those events?
Speaker 2: No I guess we need to look that up (laughter).  My sister in law that I was just talking to did--I mentioned family you know went back as far as she could go.  I don't remember right now, but she's gone back farther I was so busy I had to move but I hadn't done much of this.  And then Vasco [Vasco Smith, Jr.], my husband, had a brother [Herman Smith] who's passed on now who did just what families do; he went back as far as--but I don't think he really did it scientifically at all as people, as it's being done now.
Story_ID: 625025
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins]--what, what, what did your mother say about growing up, did she talk about being a little girl and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Well they grew up in the country (laughter) that's all, that's what they called it then.  You know they were, that's why I said our grandfather [Robert Rounds] must've worked on somebody's farm, or did farm work.  But somehow she went to Rust College, which is about fifty miles down the road from here, you know and got out of the country.
Speaker 1: Now that's in Holl- Holly Springs [Mississippi], right, Rust College?  And did she, she got a teaching degree, I mean a--
Speaker 2: Yes, she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) education degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, I don't think she got a degree, but she got a certificate; she was qualified to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay well they call it normal degree in those days you do two years--
Speaker 2: I don't know what they called it then you know; now we have the junior colleges and the community colleges and the setup is a little bit different then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she went to Rust College and did she come to Memphis [Tennessee] after this?
Speaker 2: She came to Memphis after that, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Taught school until she got married [to Smith's father, Joseph Atkins, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: I would imagine so, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I know some places they--well, all over the U.S., if you, if a teacher, if a female got married they had to quit teaching or--
Speaker 2: Well in Memphis they (laughter) they didn't allow teachers to be married; I can remember that as a student not, you know from my mother, but.  Which I don't know why they had that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, (unclear). But that's--yeah.
Story_ID: 625026
Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jose- Joseph Percy Atkins, Sr.: J-O-S-E-P-H, P-E-R-C-Y, A-T-K-I-N-S, Sr. [Joseph Atkins, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 17, I think it was 1895.
Speaker 1: Okay and where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother [Hattie Atkins] wanted to stay young so she had to put Daddy's age, she had to change it around, but I think that's the closest to the truth I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, then where, where was your father born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Memphis [Tennessee] out on what's called President's Island, it's a part of Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's out on the river [Mississippi River], I mean it's all built up now, I don't know whether--'cause I used to hear him say that.  I thought he was born out in the river but you know you drive right on the President Island (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your father's side of the family, how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Just his mother and father, and I did not know--Papa Carey knew my siblings [Clementine Atkins Ramsey and Joseph Atkins, Jr.], but he had passed away, he died in '27 [1927] and I was born in '29 [1929].
Speaker 1: His name was Carey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Carey Atkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  K-E-R-R or?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-E-Y (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C-R- okay, C-A-R-E-Y, okay, okay.  Do you know what he did for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a postman.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a pretty good job for those days.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah he would, we were pretty well off we thought (laughter) well Daddy thought we were anyway (laughter) he tried to give us the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what did your, your father say about growing up in Memphis?  Did he say anything about what it was like and--?
Speaker 2: I don't know but I think whatever spirit for fighting injustices must've come from him.  See I was nine years old when he passed.  And I do remember my mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins] just being concerned about him raising Cain at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] (laughter) because it was very segregated as was everything else, and blacks didn't get much above the area of carrier, the rank of carrier.  There may be an example of just a--very few railway, railway clerks I think they called them.  I--but in, in administrative or higher levels there just weren't any blacks and I can remember my father--not him, but more my mother worried about him.  I don't think he had too many allies, he died in 1939, and there weren't many black folks gonna fight that, those issues, in, in those days.  But he had a, a real spirit.  I got all his heart trouble and he passed away at forty-four, when he was forty-four from--he was just sick all the time; that's the most I remember about my daddy.  And when we get to fighting and the black and white kids used to fight a lot (laughter) well kids just fight a lot.  He'd be out there protecting his children, not fighting but he had very little tolerance for racial injustice.
Story_ID: 625027
Speaker 1: All right now is there a story about how your parents [Georgia Rounds Atkins and Joseph Atkins, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well they, I'll show you a picture them--of them, wedding of a good friend.  Some, on a tennis court and that's unusual for those days (laughter).  I don't play tennis today, hundred years later (laughter).  But I guess they met playing tennis some, some friend they had, I'll show their picture at that friend's wedding, which was the same year, year before or around the same time.
Story_ID: 625028
Speaker 1: Oh, did your father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.]--I forgot to ask if your father--did he have a, a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No he didn't go to college, I heard my mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins] discuss this.  Many of our, back in those days his age group, we had a, I don't remember the name, a dental, medical; you could get all kinds of degrees there.  They could get a little lawyer--my husband talked about this so much 'cause he was a dentist (unclear), and that's where most of the dentists, before Vasco's time, now Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] was eighty-nine years old when he died last year.  So the group older than him, most of them went to, boy I wish I could recall the name.  Smitty [Smith's son, Vasco Smith III] may have remembered his daddy, his talking about it.  And my mama, Ma Dear as we called her, often said Mama Hattie [Hattie Atkins] should've let Daddy go there, because that's where his contemporaries went.  But she was so anxious for him to get a job to take care, help take--to give her you know lavish something on her.  That's just my mother's version.  Mama Hattie was a little proud, she was a sweet grandmother she loved her grandchildren.  I think I was about sixteen, fifteen or sixteen when she passed away, so she was here longer than her son.  But people in his league or group or what--were going on to that professional school, where they degrees of some kind.  But they were the people who took care of her, us as far as dentists, pharmacists, physicians and--I don't know whether Vasco was telling the truth, but a little bit longer you could get a law degree.  So I, I just don't remember that school; I know where it i- was because of what he told me.  But as you said, Daddy had a good living being a postman, in fact in the '30s [1930s] he made more money than some of the graduates of, of those schools because those were hard times, very hard times.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was hard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) right at the Depression [Great Depression], October 31, you know.  You've heard of that date, October 30, '29 [1929], wasn't easy times.  So he had a secure job, the only hindrance could've been his health and his mouth, Ma Dear thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now did he come out of Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] or Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: He came out of what is now Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was Kortrec- Kortrec- [Kortrecht High School], I'm, I'm not saying it right, K-O-R-C (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, how, what's it, how do you spell it again?
Speaker 2: Let me see, can I get up on it 'cause it didn't exist when I--C-O-R-C-H-E-T-D-Z, that's what it sounds like phonetically to me.  But I don't know if that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard that name before, people have talked about it on this trip you know, then they renamed it Booker T. Washington later.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: They renamed it Booker T. Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Later, the high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Kortre- or (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: They had Kortrec- intermediate had Kortrecht, Kortrecht elementary, Kortrecht intermediate; they raise the grades, so.  I think kids came out of school at eleventh grade then.  Um-hm.
Story_ID: 625029
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' talents and their dispositions and their--even what they looked like, what, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I look more like my mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins].  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your behavior?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What about your behavior?
Speaker 2: I think it's more like my father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay now you have siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just one left, there was, there were three of us, I was the youngest, my brother was in the middle, who's deceased, he's deceased now.
Speaker 1: What was, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Joseph P. Atkins, Jr. [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Junior, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your sister?
Speaker 2: Clementine Atkins--let me see, she's had a couple of husbands--Hughes Ramsey [Clementine Atkins Ramsey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She lives here in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now it's just the, it was just the five of you in the household growing up or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, your [paternal] grandmother [Hattie Atkins] didn't live with you or anything like that or?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625030
Speaker 1: Well can you describe the, the house you grew up in and, and describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, my daddy [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] built this house in, had it built in '27 [1927], so when I came along in '29 [1929] it was you know relatively new house.  It was on the same street I'm on now, it was on South Parkway East.  This is East Parkway South.  So that was a, a good neighborhood you know of middle class people, and at that time it, there was many whites as blacks in the neighborhood.  And we, we only cele- separate when we went to school, nobody bothered about that too much.  But I guess they knew would, we'd be separated at six years old or whatever age we started school.
Speaker 1: Well what ethnic groups? Were these whites, were they the same--I mean just a general group of white people?
Speaker 2: Just general group, we didn't know anything.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I wondered if they mostly Jewish people or some other group.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't think so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I would say the grocer on the corner was Italian.  I wouldn't think because the Jewish pop- population isn't that big in Memphis [Tennessee] now.  And I'm trying to--Coletas [ph.] was, that doesn't sound Jewish; I'm trying to think of the businesspeople in the area.  Schoenberg [ph.] that sounds Jewish doesn't it, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: It could be, or German.  It sounds, it does sound Jewish, yeah.
Speaker 2: These are just some merchants in the area, restaurant, hardware store.  But you know all, all we, there weren't any others per se, the black or white (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay now this neighborhood is, was atypical of Memphis, right?  In terms of blacks and whites living together or, or, or was it?
Speaker 2: Not then it, it is now, I mean well its coming back where does.  'Cause see when we moved here Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] and I were the first ones that moved across Lamar [Avenue] right down here.  Were the only blacks in, in and this is not a very poor neighborhood, it's poor now since I'm here (laughter) but it was not a poor neighborhood, you can tell by the homes here.  But they soon moved so that's--when the threat of desegregation you know after '54 [1954] I'll say, that's when the white flight really, really took hold.
Speaker 1: Okay so you, you did have some mixed neighborhoods in Memphis prior to--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --desegregation--
Speaker 2: Not a lot of 'em, but I guess mine was a little different because we, you could (unclear) the same, we played together, we, and I don't know what happened in the, the same economic level you know.  So we didn't have any problems (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625031
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh you know I'm trying to say when I started remembering things.  My father was very, very sick most of the time.  I inherited all his heart problems.  One of my--and this is, I was trying to think of something more pleasant.  But going to see him at Veterans Hospital [Memphis Veterans Hospital; Memphis VA Medical Center, Memphis, Tennessee] where he was, I would ask to see Mr. Joseph Atkins [Joseph Atkins, Sr.], and the clerk at the desk would say, "Who is that?"  I said, "That's my father."  "You don't call a nigger Mr. around white folk."  I think that's my first real confrontation with the ugliness of racism and I thought that was the ugliest woman.  She might've been beautiful (laughter), but my mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins] would go one day and the three children would leave school and go the next day; we'd alternate days.  And Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] and Joe [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] my brother and sister, Ma Dear and each day I, I'm the youngest now, I'd push them aside.  "Who you wanna see?"  "Mr. Joseph Atkins."  "I told you not to call him Mr. Joseph Atkins!"  I said, "That's my daddy, and that's his name."  Finally she told me, "You aren't getting another pass," you had to have a card or something.  I said, "I don't care, I know where my daddy's room is," and (laughter) Joe and Clem would tell, "Ma Dear, make Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] stop," they were scared all the time (laughter).  But I never missed seeing my daddy (laughter) on our day.  But that (gesture), you know rings in me now, I, I'll never forget that.  That's what I (unclear).
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Eight years old because he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight and your, your brothers and sisters were--
Speaker 2: They were two years apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ten and twelve; we were nine, eleven and thirteen when he passed away, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you were the youngest one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Talking the baddest at the--?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Talking the baddest at the desk (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah I thought I was bad (laughter).
Story_ID: 625032
Speaker 1: Now if somebody bothered me they [Smith's siblings, Clementine Atkins Ramsey and Joseph Atkins, Jr.] would've been protecting me (laughter) I don't think I ever could fight too well.  You know I used to get in fights with kids and it had nothing to do with race, blacks, or white ones.  Or I think it was, it was in school, you're with black kids.  And, and, and, but we would play, I just saw a, the, I mentioned the store, the store owner who was Italian.  I just saw his, we have memories, days of fast--memories or something, they have an article, starting twenty--100 ye- they go from 125 on up to twenty-five years ago.  And I saw Pete Aviotti [Pete Aviotti, Jr.] (laughter), and I've seen him since.  He was--you mentioned Herenton [W.W. Herenton], the mayor, he was some kind of assistant.  I never knew what Pete's connection with the mayor, but they were very close.  And we were at barbeque, you ever been here with the Memphis in May barbecue thing on the river [Mississippi River]?  Do you know about--?
Speaker 2: I've heard about it.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well I was up in Willie's, Mayor Herenton, in his barbeque booth, and Pete came in there and say, "You know me," I said, "I, I don't remember."  And he was kind teasing me and (laughter) he said, "You forgotten me?  I'm Pete, Pete Aviotti."  I said, "Heck you were--had hair and wasn't so ugly," (laughter) then we became very good friends again.  That was one of my favorite playmates.  Pete was maybe a year younger than I, but he was younger and I could boss him (laughter).  And we'd steal grapes out of his daddy's store, or nuts you know (laughter), and he was showing me how to steal, but, but this is the kind of relationship kids had.  And somehow Pete stands out as my buddy, and we both loved Willie Herenton you know Willie was very, very special to me.  And we're not talking politics now, that's--.  But life was simple in those days, we played, we went to church [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee], we went to school.  Adversity came when we lost our father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.], I don't know if I'm hitting at the things you want, but we built playhouses.  We slipped next door and got in the folks' swing, I remember breaking it down and hitting my head on a stone, I--my mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] whipping me (laughter).  Little things, naughty things that children do, I can remember.  Ma Dear was a disciplinarian in the family.  And when she had her little meetings, they had a young mothers club that met once a month, we had--Daddy knew it was a part of an act.  We'd get all the blankets and quilts or whatever we had, and pile them on the bed and do something so daddy could come whip us (laughter).  And we would laugh, we wouldn't feel a thing and then he, he knew he was part of the joke.  But those are the childish things I can remember, and, and Daddy was, well he wanted so much for his children.
Story_ID: 625033
Speaker 1: What was your personality like as a little girl?  Now you described, you gave us a good descript- idea of it at the, at the hospital.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: Well I had a lot of friends, I like, I've always liked people contrary to what many people think, I'm really not mean.  I really liked people.  And I was a sort of generally the, the youngest child in my little group.  See I went to kindergarten at three, which was a little early back in those days really, we have early child development and all that now.  And I was babied by--at home (laughter) I was Daddy's [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] baby, I was Ma Dear's baby 'cause she was a housewife, he couldn't think of a wife doing anything but being a housewife.  So I, I got kind of spoiled by everybody and I was a pretty good learner, I know one of my friends who's gone, most of my friends are gone now.  Mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] would fuss at her about not making grades like I did, I was a terrible student but I just made good grades (laughter).  And she said, "Mama, Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] learned the Gettysburg Address walking, under the sub- through the subway."  That's something where--trains (laughter) right, you know it was right there by Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] when we'd be walking home.  But they all loved me, but they hated to be compared to me, they thought I was smart and they made me think I was smart and I wasn't very (laughter) smart really.  But I was a kind of the go ahead person, like with my brother [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] and sister [Clementine Atkins Ramsey], who were older, I was the one tackling that lady in Veterans Hospital [Memphis Veterans Hospital; Memphis VA Medical Center, Memphis, Tennessee].  I was so glad when they tore that down, it's all torn down now (laughter).  But my mouth was always running, preacher had to separate me and my friends in church [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee]. He'd put me by a deacon or usher and then he'd--he said, "And then she'd start talking to him," (laughter) I talk all the time, so you stop me when you get ready.  The junior choir when I was probably the youngest in all these things sat in a balcony.  And I would take, we had a fine candy store, Anderson's Candy Shop [ph.], candy was two for a penny (laughter), and I'd take everybody's orders and I'd slip out of church and jump out the window and go up to (laughter) Anderson's and get the candy.  I was the one doing these things, they'd put me up to anything (laughter) and I was crazy enough to do it.
Story_ID: 625034
Speaker 1: I just remember a happy childhood, a warm family life.  I guess we had one of the few radios back in the '30s [1930s].  And when Joe Louis would fight, people would come from the neighborhood [in Memphis, Tennessee] to listen to the fight on the radio.  My daddy was a big sp- whatever sports was going in his day, and he would always stop at a--he believed in shopping at black businesses.  We had a Montgomery's Grocery Store [ph.], and they had a deli type you know I didn't know what deli was, but like boiled ham and things like that.  And he al- would always bring things like that for fight night.  So and people just liked us, I saw a picture just looking through some pictures yesterday I think of a kid, I mean she's--lives across the street, she was younger than me.  We had a piano (laughter) she loved to come over there, she said, "I thought y'all were rich?"  I said, "We were poor as we could be," (laughter) but I had a very happy life.  And, and, and one thing my parents [Georgia Rounds Atkins and Joseph Atkins, Sr.], both of them, they you know weren't over educated, but they knew the value of education.  So it was--that was just a must (laughter) you know you never thought about if but when.  And after Daddy died, when I was nine--well before he died now, Daddy had been off work for a long time from sickness.  And I inherited all his sickle cell, well I have this trait, he has the disease, as I said to have--
Speaker 2: Now he had sickle cell anemia?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.  Heart--course when they first checked my cholesterol it was 600, I didn't know what cholesterol was (laughter) you know.  But all these things and they couldn't understand it, but I'm eighty years old now, he died when he was forty-four that it shows you the advances in medical science.  And, and so I fared pretty well physically.  I think I've done very well for that, I never thought I was--I never thought I was old until I got eighty, (laughter).  But I'm all right with that too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I had a happy childhood, a happy family life, I used to fight with my sister [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] and brother [Joseph Atkins, Jr.], but they knew better than to--
Story_ID: 625035
Speaker 1: Well I was gonna say, we moved off the parkway, you keep straight down you'll get to my house (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After you--after your father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: Oh it's gone now 'cause expressway come in.
Speaker 2: No but after your father died--
Speaker 1: Before that--no, before he died.
Speaker 2: Before?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Because he wasn't making any money, he used up all his sick days at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  And a family that I know very well now, those around my age, they lived in the country and Dr. Pinkston [Greene Fort Pinkston] wanted his kids to come in town and go to school, so they rented our house on Parkway [South Parkway, Memphis, Tennessee], which is something like a three bedroom, dining room, kitchen, you know a typical bungalow, and paid Ma Dear [Georgia Rounds Atkins] twenty dollars a month, and that's what we lived on.  But see Daddy and my grandmother had shotgun houses backing up to each other.  On streets called Edith [Avenue] and Ida [Place], and one was four room, and one was three room.  And ma- Mama Hattie [Hattie Atkins] moved to the, well was probably always in the four room and rented the three room.  But when we moved over there, we had to move for economic reasons, Mama Hattie took the smaller ones and the five of us lived in the four room.  And that that really broke my daddy's heart; he wanted the very best, he didn't want his kids--I don't even know if y'all heard of a shotgun house, living in a shotgun house.  The toilet was on the back porch.  His heart was broken, he died there within a year.  And I can remember my mother--.  Well, first of all let me remember that Thanksgiving right after daddy died.  The next Thanksgiving, I think it was Thanksgiving, 'cause he died in December--no he was born in December, he died June, no he di- he was born in December.  But Ma Dear had taken a chance on a turkey for a nickel and we couldn't afford turkeys, and we wanted a turkey.  And it was such a jubilee (laughter) so much jubilation you know little things like that meant so much.  But anyway, my mother decided the, his insurance, whatever it was, I don't know, which she thought first would be better to save for our education, but she decided to pay for the house, finish paying for the house on Parkway because that house meant so much to Daddy, and he didn't want his kids raised in that shotgun house where he had been raised.  Ma Dear decided to finish paying for the house so she never had another house note, and just, God just sent us to college.  And with her efforts and God's help and we all made it, my brother [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] had his doctorate, I have a master's [degree] and two or three honorary doctorates, my sister has her bachelor's [degree]; Ma Dear did it.  And I look back now, I know Ma Dear probably never had a change of underclothes, she'd have to wash them.  Because she, everything we thought she wanted--and being the youngest, my sister she's crazy (laughter) I love her to death though.  But she can get emotional--she went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] before she left--went to LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] here her first two years and then she went to Tennessee State.  She lost her coat, she lost everything; she might've pawned it, (laughter) I don't know what Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] was doing.  But whatever she needed, well, "Ma Dear I need so and so," Ma Dear somehow would go out with that determined look, I doubt if Ma Dear made a hundred dollars a month whatever she's doing in those days, but probably was before she went to the church [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee], and get it, you know some kind of way.  She probably stayed in debt.  So I, from then, and my brother left high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], and what, what is it?  Army Specialized Training Program, or ASTP, and that's what sent him on.  He had, he had to go, some kind of program, but it ended up sending him to part of his college.  But I never asked Ma Dear for anything 'cause I knew she would be doing all she could.  And I could see the pain in her face, but she always complied.  She was a wonderful woman, wonderful woman.  She lived to be ninety-seven, so I said I got my heart problems from Daddy and my, hopefully my longevity (laughter) from Ma Dear.  But I think those things are good for kids.
Story_ID: 625036
Speaker 1: One of the local television stations did, what you call them?  Hour long what you call those things?
Speaker 2: Documentary, or?
Speaker 1: Documentary on me.  And Craig Leake, he's back in Memphis [Tennessee] now, he's at the university [University of Memphis], he went to NBC I think or CBS, one, in New York [New York].  And I remember when we, 'cause I was sitting in that chair right back there you said covered the back of my neck (laughter) at some interview, it may not been the one with Craig.  But I remember that chair being in the interview, that's why I got a little amused when you say that.  We hadn't been too long in this house then (laughter) and, all, it was all beautifully decorated, it, it used to be a beautiful house.  But, and he was talking about all that, I said, "Wait a minute, let me take you where I came from," so I took him to 778 Ida Street [sic. Ida Place].  And told him much the story, and that's a part of the documentary, that's, that's, that's a part of my life, those are the things which--everything.  And I think all your circumstances make you and mold you one way or the other, but I had--my mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] and daddy [Joseph Atkins, Sr.], I always say I came from good stuff.  That they're good people, good people.  My daddy was so glad that my [paternal] grandfather, Papa Carey [Carey Atkins], that I didn't know, was a founding deacon in the church that I attended all my life [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] until eight years ago.  And, and I joined churches, they say when you accept Christ, when I was nine in April and Daddy passed in June, and he was so happy that all his children were a part of the, of the church where I accepted Christ.  So those are, are things that that made me whatever I am or I ain't.
Story_ID: 625037
Speaker 1: I had good teachers.  They talk about me, I--so--they've gone now mostly, I'm not sure, I don't know if I can find a teacher around here now.  I'm sure I can't.  But I was pretty bad though, I used to run in and all, they'd be out there with the straps after me.  And I can remember one, she was such a good teacher, I say that's the best English teacher anybody could ever have.  And she used to tell me, "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] you will never amount to anything," (laughter) and she laughed about it.  And--'cause I was devilish I was too young, I went to high school, I was in the ninth grade at ten, I went to college at fifteen.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: And that's too young (laughter).
Speaker 2: Let me go back, now what, what school did you start at and, and what age did start?
Speaker 1: I started Potts kindergarten at three years old, that's a little private school, and it went through the second grade.  It's gone; I can just--right next to that candy shop [Anderson's Candy Shop (ph.)] that I used to slip out the church [Metropolitan Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] to go to.
Speaker 2: So in those days they had private kindergartens, I know I've heard about Ms. Snell's kindergarten [ph.] and about three other different--
Speaker 1: Here in Memphis [Tennessee] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) kinder- uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They, there, there were (laughter) there were I'm trying to think oh, some more, gosh, my mind is failing.  There was one in big competition with us, it--close, it wasn't in completion and we teased each other those of us who are living, I say (laughter) that--I have a good friend who died recently said he wouldn't let me in, in Potts 'cause I was too dark (laughter).  They say all the little yellow kids were (laughter)--
Speaker 2: You were too dark to get in the--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) He, he was kind of black (laughter), and we teased each other about that all our lives.  I bet--I saw somebody the other night--well in, in within the month here's one of my Potts kindergarten--'course he was there long after I was there.  I said, "Boy you couldn't have been at--," and I've forgotten, but he's a physician, or dentist or something around here.  Now you were asking about school, I went to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to Potts and in the third grade I--
Speaker 2: So you, so you were three years old then and then when you started at Potts?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then, then?
Speaker 1: I stayed there through kindergarten, when--until I got to third grade.
Speaker 2: So you're about eight years old then when--
Speaker 1: I went to the third grade, I was six (laughter).
Speaker 2: Six okay, six okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know what we were--I must've got irregularly promoted because I loved that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah you were--
Speaker 1: I think I entered six or seven.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they pushed you up.  Yeah, they pushed you up.
Speaker 1: Oh they did, that's why I got out so early, Ma Dear [Georgia Rounds Atkins] didn't know I was going up.  I asked (laughter) they came--well the only reason they did, some grades were too crowded (laughter) and they needed to shift some of us around.
Speaker 2: And you can do the work fine apparently.
Speaker 1: I was able to do the work I guess.
Speaker 2: So, so what was the name of your grade school?  Do you--?
Speaker 1: My first, my first one was Lincoln, Lincoln Elementary [Lincoln Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee], still there.  And they're still fussing over keeping it and rebuilding it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that was in 1936 when I went there (laughter).  Well I stayed there just one year because my sister was in the seventh grade and my brother [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] was in the fifth grade.  And Lincoln didn't go any further than the seventh grade and Ma Dear wanted us to be together, so we changed to Porter--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Elementary [Porter Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] 'cause Smit- Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] was going into the eighth grade at Porter, it's just down the street from Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee].  And so when she went on to the ninth grade at Booker Washington we were all you know in one little group then.
Speaker 2: Okay so did you, did you finish grade school at--
Speaker 1: At Porter I finished.
Speaker 2: All the way to the--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: --to the sixth grade or to the--?
Speaker 1: Eighth grade, it was eighth grade then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I know sometimes they have middle schools, so.
Speaker 1: No they didn't have middle schools--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We graduated from the eighth grade.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) eighth grade.  And your, your father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] passed when you were in the fifth grade, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ten?
Speaker 1: Yeah I was nine, I was fourth or fifth.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Probably fifth grade, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh I, well let's see, let's see now let's see you were, you were in the fifth grade when you were eight I guess you were eight years old and then--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I never was good with math (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah I see, yeah I forgot that you were back two--your--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But at any rate that's--
Speaker 1: I start--see my birthday comes on Halloween in October, I think I was ten when I first went to Booker Washington.  Nine and became eleven--I mean ten and became eleven the next month.  That makes my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When you first went to high school?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, in ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well I graduated at fifteen, and I entered Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at fifteen and then graduated at nineteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, if the numbers do funny, you adjust (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay so you graduated from high school in--so what year is that, let's see if you--
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 625038
Speaker 1: Now did your, your father's death affect your behavior?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: You talk about all the things you did, you know, you're a good student, but you do all these pranks and things--not pranks but you know, different things that agitate the teachers.
Speaker 2: Yeah I did do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think your, your behavior was affected by your father's death at all?
Speaker 2: I was probably agitating before he died (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't put that on Daddy [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] (laughter).  Oh but I missed him so, and at nine you really don't understand things as--.  You know my mem- biggest memory of his whole dying is when they lowered him in the grave.  In those days they kind of crank you down and it made an awful sound, they don't let you down now, 'til the family's gone when you go down.  And that's the first time Ma Dear [Georgia Rounds Atkins] broke down and that has stayed with me all these years.  And I have s- a thing about that part of the service.  In fact I haven't even put Vasco's [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.]--I, it's ordered now, his tomb, his stone 'cause you know I have something about cemeteries from Ma Dear crying when Daddy was lowered.  It was a terrible noise: squeak, squeak, (laughter) crank, crank (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625039
Speaker 1: Now you're at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], you're very young, most people are older and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean how did you--did you feel like you were a youngster there?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did, did you feel like a youngster in high school?
Speaker 2: You know, people always catered to me 'cause I was young (laughter) and I guess I must've liked that (laughter).  I've been a spoiled brat all my life.  Really not but, but I always got a little extra attention that I didn't deserve.  Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] and Joe [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] gave 'em to me.  I know after Daddy [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] died, oh we wanted bicycles so bad and during those later years Ma Dear [Georgia Rounds Atkins] didn't buy things you know just before his death.  And when it--she was able to get one second hand bicycle you know.  The first bicycle came, I don't remember that was before or after Dad died.  "Well let Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] have it 'cause she's the baby," (laughter) you know those kinds of little favors came to me.  And I eat them up; I didn't turn down anything (laughter).
Story_ID: 625040
Speaker 1: Now did you like popular culture stuff, did you listen to radio at home or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Go to movies?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh I would--on Saturdays, they'd put me out every Saturday, there was a neighborhood movie, 'cause everything was segregated of course then.  But there was a neighborhood theater and they had triple features you know, and you went for a nickel, and we'd stay and stay 'til they put us out (laughter).  And then I had to say I want my nickel back (laughter), I'd seen all three of them about three times.  But we loved to go to movies but Mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] wouldn't let us go on Sunday, and not on school days, so Saturdays was movie day.  See we couldn't go the fairgrounds, well I didn't live here, I just--much further down on Parkway, that they're just tearing down, around on East Parkway [Memphis, Tennessee].  We went once a year you know everything was completely, completely segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay. You said you went to the fair once, once a year you said, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah they didn't--they had the colored fair (laughter) once a year, three days in September for us; that's the only time we could go.
Speaker 1: So would the black farmers go too or just, was it--
Speaker 2: That's where the black farmers and, every- everybody, black children and everything, 'cause it wasn't black anything in there the rest of the days in the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They called it the Tri-State Fair, and they had a big fair called the Mid- Mid-South Fair, all of this was in the fairgrounds.  But the Tri-State Fair was a colored fair and the Mid-South Fair was a white fair within the fairgrounds.  But when those were--the only time we could get into the Tri-State--or into the fairgrounds was during the Tri-State Fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They still have the Mid-South Fair right?   Now?
Speaker 2: No well they've torn--oh well once it's open it was just, we went you know we you know filed our lawsuits, set-in, got arrested did everything that we.  We hit every public accommodation there at, in town, all of it was segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was our job when we--
Story_ID: 625041
Speaker 1: Now it sounds like your, your mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins] and father [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] kept up with the news, did they get the Tri-State Defender and the other, the other, some of the black papers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, um-hm.  Chicago Defender, you remember that, they still have that don't they?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: When, when you were coming up did they have a Tri-State Defender or was it the Chicago Defender that you would get?
Speaker 2: Well the Tri-State Defender was originally owned by the Chicago--
Speaker 1: It still, I think it still is.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Is the Chicago Defender still?  That's good 'cause Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] says you know a lot of places you couldn't even buy, I mean--.  There was another black paper, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].
Speaker 1: Courier, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh and Vasco's daddy [Vasco Smith, Sr.], you know Vasco's almost ten years older than I, but he used to bring those, 'cause Vasco was a little boy I don't think they could even--I don't know where Daddy would get those papers.  Well that was before my time, but the black press was our delivery now.
Speaker 1: Yeah now did you get magazines like Life and Look and Time and that sort of thing at home?
Speaker 2: Yeah we knew Life, Look, Reader's Digest my mama like (laughter).  I remember one of hers, magazine, is Pageant magazine still around?
Speaker 1: Pageant, I've heard of that, yeah, I don't--I don't know if it is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had a special on me years and years ago.  Something like--it's one here you know when they featured me, they, I wasn't the only one they featured, but some people looked forward, looked to in the future.  I, I don't remember what the title was, or.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember because I had to go New York [New York] I think to get that interview.
Speaker 1: Now this is later on, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah this is--uh-huh, since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625042
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], did, were you, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a very good student, I made good grades (laughter).  I made good grades.
Speaker 1: You were an honor student or?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Honor roll?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tell you how I got my reputation.  I loved--I, I ended up getting my master's in French [from Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont].  I loved Latin, I had the smartest man to teach me Latin, my superintendent of Sunday school was a Latin teacher, but he was one of the dumbest people I knew, and some kind of way I got--and I knew how dumb he was 'cause he couldn't read the Bible (laughter).  And so I asked the principal I guess to please transfer me out and that was not nice for a student to do that.  But I went to Mr. McGee [ph.] for Latin.  You know I never understood English 'til I took Latin, I just never--there would be analyzing sentences?  They probably didn't do that when y'all came along.  Draw those lines and your subject and verb, your modifiers and all.  I said what the heck are they talking about (laughter)?  I didn't know what they were talking about.  See that was eighth grade, ninth grade I started studying Latin.  Well I just liked Latin, I don't know why, never had a foreign language.  And maybe once or twice a year, once a semester I don't know, I don't remember, the white folks on the board would come out to see how the colored folks were doing at our two schools (laughter).  And it would be a group of them, and they'd be in different rooms and Mr. McGee was showing me off.  And, "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] read," (laughter) "read this and this," oh and I read that Latin and they were just amazed.  They ran and got the rest of the group, they've never seen anything like it (laughter) don't know what, what they were calling me under their breath, (unclear) "Where she read that Latin?"  So word got around that I was smart, so all the teachers always gave me A's (laughter). I certainly didn't deserve that many 'cause I was a lousy student.  I can remember in college, my English teacher: "Maxine just please exert yourself."  Well I was a very lazy student.  But I was a very demanding teacher, and all my teaching was on the college level because I looked back at myself and saw how I did almost nothing to develop my mind.  I got out of high school after the last course in math I had was algebra--geometry was algebra was first two years geometry was third--eleventh grade.  That's the last course I didn't go to trig [trigonometry] or any of those, and I was so glad--that was all that was required.  I don't know how you have exams, you know, entrance exams or something when you get to college, I don't know how I got out of having to take math.  I scored out of math, you know I test well but I didn't know anything (laughter).  And so I never had any math since eleventh grade geometry.  I was so--I should've just gone and taken some basic math but, but that's me you know, happy go lucky Maxine.  So I was glad was to get from under that burden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you in--did you run for any class offices in high school?
Speaker 2: Let me see, I don't think I was a class officer, I don't think they looked on me as an officer.  I was the ribbon bearer in the majorettes, stuff like that (laughter).  I don't remember being an officer, I was say in like the Spanish club or, or the Latin club or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't, I don't think I was an officer.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to the prom and everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah my sister took--my mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] took my sister, then my sister took me (laughter).   Yeah they was strict in those days.  She didn't know she was Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] for (laughter) she may as well have had anybody off the corner take me there (unclear) (laughter).  Yeah but I went to the prom, I got a prom picture sitting back there, I'll show it to you before you leave (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now did you, when graduation time came, did you have a special role, did you, were you any of the--did you speak or anything?
Speaker 2: You know I can't remember, I know I finished very high.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you weren't the valedictorian or anything?
Speaker 2: I think I was a salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I don't remember speaking though.  I finished second at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] I know.
Story_ID: 625043
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] in 1945.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right?  And you went on to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] now how did you chose Spelman or how, I mean, I mean what happened that you chose Spelman instead of some other school?
Speaker 2: I think my mother [Georgia Rounds Atkins] chose it for me and the big question is how did she pay for it?  I wanted to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I had chosen Fisk, I mean that was the name you heard all the time.  And Ma Dear wanted, thought her fifteen year old baby ought to be at Spelman where there were no boys and they were you know, they didn't you let you go out in the streets.  So I ended up at Spelman, and I, oh god I, you know I went to my sixtieth anniversary last year or whenever, in '09 [2009] (laughter).  I'm just showing you how much I, I--how happy I am that I made the decision, those--it's a wonderful period in my life.  It's nothing like, like schools for our children, and we're gonna need them, you fight to integrate them, but you're gonna need black schools for a long, long time.  And although Spelman was you know, Spelman is probably thirty thousand dollars or more now, back then it was some hundreds, maybe four or five; I don't know what it was.  But to Ma Dear that was a lot of money.
Speaker 1: So you, you didn't get a scholarship or anything?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't--scholarships weren't plentiful in '45 [1945]. There were--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They weren't going around unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So even if you were an honor student you, the likelihood of you getting a scholarship was pretty slim, huh?  Or were there any at all?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were there any scholarships at all?
Speaker 2: I don't remember scholarships as a student, I really don't.  And now you know they have guidance counselors and teachers and principals trying to outdo each other.  And that's some of that money is slipping away now, but they get thousands and hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarships.  In fact, maybe that's why I have a couple, three scholarships for in my name you know, Maxine Smith scholarships.  They aren't that much but, they're very important.  And, and to me--education is so important to me, I told you Ma Dear said--I guess what--it took that little money from Daddy's [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] insurance and did part of it.  If she kept it that long, and she did 'cause she lived miserly.  But most of the things that have happened to me have been involved with education somehow.
Story_ID: 625044
Speaker 1: That's how I got out in the freedom struggle.  I mentioned my friend who said, "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith]--," you interviewed her, Miriam [HistoryMaker Miriam DeCosta-Willis].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Smitty [Smith's son, Vasco Smith III] and her boy [Tarik Sugarmon] were six and seven, five and six months old we have a, Smitty, talked with him this morning.  They were babies, and I said, "Now suppose they take us," now Laurie was Phi Beta Kappa from Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], and you know we didn't know much about Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society].  Very, none of our schools and in those days had Phi Beta Kappa chapters.  So they didn't take us, they said we weren't good enough.  Now I had a master's [degree] from Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont], and I was second in my class from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and you know Spelman ain't no fly by night school.  And we weren't good enough and that's when my righteous indignation came through the surface.  And I was saying, if they take--it was so hot, I remember we didn't have any air conditioned cars in those days, that was in '57 [1957].  And it was so hot and that old president [J. Millard "Jack" Smith] wouldn't even see us, he had his little lackeys you know deliver his message we, we didn't, may- well he--how did he know what we--maybe told us the next day.  But somehow that got in the papers, I don't know how 'cause we knew nothing about press conferences or calling the newspaper.  And it had to be some staff member or somebody at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] who at that time was certainly white and saw the injustice there.  And that's when the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee]--well NAACP didn't have any women on their board, I don't think they did.  They called us to serve on their board of directors and, so my--I got down there and just stayed (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well I wanna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know I was the chief volunteer.
Story_ID: 625045
Speaker 1: Who were some of your mentors at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or were there some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--
Speaker 1: --teachers that, that were special and?
Speaker 2: Ms., Ms. Youngstone [ph.], she was the one who tried so hard to stimulate me into working hard.  I majored in biology at Spelman.  Dr. Albrough [ph.].  I, I took a Latin course, there's, at first I couldn't--I read Cicero and Virgil, and then I took a course in German there too, 'cause I just liked language; that Latin opened me up.  And, and it's Mademoiselle--what's her name?  She was my Spanish teacher, I'm trying to think of my name--the name of my, oh, oh Dr. Smith [ph.] was his name, was my French teacher.  And the things where--oh, and I guess most of all was Dr. Smith when it was Madame Thomas [Billie Geter Thomas].  She took Muriel [ph.] and me, my roommate at Spelman, Muriel was--I, I ended up with a double major with one in French and one in biology.  Well French was supposed to be my minor, but I had enough hours.  She took us to Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont], she was the first black to attend Middlebury.  And way up there in Vermont it was still prejudice.  See we went for, they have the big summer program for languages.  And they weren't expecting us to stay for the fall and winter (laughter) and the spring so and we thought we had been accepted.  So we--the ug- ugly face of racism rose again.  Now let me go back just--a little back 'cause my mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] certainly couldn't of have sent me to Middlebury.  I don't know how she found out about Tennessee state aid; when they don't let you go to their own colleges they have to pay your way.  Russ Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon], the one you interviewed, they had sent him to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], you don't have schools like Middlebury and Harvard in, in--.  So they had to pay our way there.  That shows how, how ridiculous, how expensive and we're beneficiaries of it because they just couldn't--and Russ is very one of the most brilliant people I know.  Very keen man, and I'm sure you detected--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --when, when, when you interviewed him.
Speaker 1: So this is 1949 right, when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you go to Middlebury for your master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: We went right, right after--well Russ went to the [U.S.] Army, when, when I went to Middlebury that was '49 [1949] right after I finished Spelman.  And, Ma Dear had been working on that.  The same year I met Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.], I was on my way to Middlebury when I met him.
Story_ID: 625046
Speaker 1: Now how did you meet Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.]?  Tell, tell us how that happened.
Speaker 2: Well now that's a long story (laughter).  He--there's a, a lady that we don't know, but all through my and probably his, 'cause Vasco's grown and gone when I was still at s- home.  There was a lady from my church that used to keep me in the cradle room and you know that's babies in church and I, I don't remember that, you know I don't remember her.  And she always called me her baby, and Vasco's mama worked at, it's the MED [E.H. Crump Hospital; Regional One Health, Memphis, Tennessee], now I'm sure you've heard of that, the big public hospital is one, a very fine hospital.  I'm so proud of Vasco, he fought so hard to get that hospital; he was on the county commission [Shelby County Board of Commissioners].  But Mama was a maid or something there and the nurses would treat Ms. Collins [Florence Smith] is her name, so mean.  They wouldn't bother about her eating you know they didn't care, and Mama used to tell her, "I got a little boy at home.  If you eat something for me, I'll give you my little boy."  So from both of us being babies, Vasco never saw--I saw her but I was just too young to remember, we became her, her children in her mind.  I think she was, had a little mental problem too.  But she was worrisome on the phone and all during when I was in college it went on back that--it went on all my life.  I tried to dodge her on the phone--
Speaker 1: So she'd call you and, and--
Speaker 2: She was calling my mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins], she wasn't calling me (laughter) but she'd tell me she got this young man she want me to meet, it's her other son.  And anything she had I didn't wanna meet (laughter).  But finally I think after all these years we both got curious 'cause I heard the girls talking about him.  He was a su- successful dentist up in Dyersburg, Tennessee, and he had a big Hudson.  You remember the Hudson (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Very big ugly car (laughter) well we thought it was fine.  I just got curious, this is a name I'd heard and he got curious, and he called, I was about to go for, to Middlebury [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont].  Sammy Davis, Jr. was still singing with his father [Sammy Davis, Sr.] and uncle; you don't remember those days do you?
Speaker 1: I saw them on--
Speaker 2: Will Ma- Mastin--
Speaker 1: --'The Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] once, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Trio [Will Mastin Trio].
Speaker 1: Mast- yeah.
Speaker 2: He wasn't the big top bill, but he was playing in a neighborhood right around the corner from here, it's closed down now.  And he called and asked me would I go see Sammy Davis, and I was so mad 'cause a little old boy in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] when we--.  And I couldn't stand that he had asked me, but I couldn't tell him no (laughter) 'cause I was curious to meet Vasco.  So he, he had to go back and I, and I had to leave in a day or two to go to Middlebury, yeah, I had just finished Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I said, "Well come by after the show," and we sat in that yard 'til Ma Dear put him out (laughter).  She knocked on the window, her bedroom (laughter) and said, "Baby, I believe you ought to come home--come in," (laughter).  Vasco said he was moving in and Ma Dear got scared in there (laughter).  So, so that's how we met after years of years of hearing--.  And, and we actually courted, see I, I went to Middlebury for a year and I had to finish in a year.  'Cause even with the state aid, Ma Dear still had to pay room and board.  The state had to pay my transportation up there, but she had to get that room and board, which was much for her then, and so I had to finish it in a year.
Story_ID: 625047
Speaker 1: And then after I finished that, I went to, to--when I got my master's [degree], I taught a couple of years at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University] in Texas [Prairie View, Texas], then a year at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] in Tallahassee [Florida].
Speaker 2: So all this time no Vasco [Vasco Smith, Jr.] though; you all were separated?
Speaker 1: Yeah we--no we, we were courting through the mail.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh and, and over the phone, I didn't have no money to pay no phone bill so he was a big time dentist so he'd call occasionally.  But we--and we'd see each other at Christmas or summer before--'cause I had, I taught summer school most times.  And I used to tease him, he'd asked--we courted for four years.  I'd say, "Baby you must've been retarded," (laughter).  I tell folks it took him four years to ask me to marry him (laughter).  I said, "Look what you might've missed," I'd tease him like that.  But we had an absentee courtship through grad school [Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont] and three years of teaching away from home.
Speaker 2: So you went all the way to Prairie View in Te- Texas, that's pretty far, far off here, and so.  And then where, where else was it?  Prairie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Florida A and M.
Speaker 2: Florida A and M, oh that's a long--
Speaker 1: FAMU, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a long ways away too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Tallahassee, uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So did he ever try to come and visit you?
Speaker 1: Yeah he came both places but I al- I always have boyfriends  and I didn't (laughter) I didn't--in fact when he came to Texas to visit me--I can't think of that fella's name.  But he, he wanted to make sure Vasco knew--Vasco didn't know about him, but he knew about Vasco (laughter).  And Vasco left and went to Mexico and then he quit, so both of them quit (laughter).  So we, we got back together (laughter), but we had a good courtship, just a long courtship.  But Vasco was in Dyersburg [Tennessee], which is a, about seven, eight, eighty miles north of here [Memphis, Tennessee]; a small, small town.  Nothing for us to do and he didn't wanna take his, take a wife to Dyersburg and he was wo- trying to wait until he could pay, he had to pay Uncle Sam two years--see Uncle Sam sent him to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] now, this ASTP [Army Specialized Training Program], AS--it was different at that level, but he went to school.  And for his dental degree he had to pay Uncle Sam with two years of [U.S. military] service.
Story_ID: 625048
Speaker 1: So when he decided to go on and go--and he always wanted to be in a position to take care of a wife, he decided to go on and pay Uncle Sam.  And we married and he went on, he had gone a few weeks ahead 'cause he had to drive down from St. Louis [Missouri] to, to come--to get married.  But he had a good mama [Florence Smith] and daddy [Vasco Smith, Sr.], he was good to them, he bought them a little house.  He was trying to do--'cause they were, they were poorer than we were.  I (unclear) Mama and Daddy were good, good people, they had a col- a six grade education between the two of them.   But they left Arkansas, Daddy was a laborer on the railroad, and these little towns we passed between, Mama would say, "That's where my baby was born.  That's where--," she had two boys, "that's where my baby was born," and all there was a tree (laughter), they had little train stops or something there you know back when they were boys.  But they were determined, now Ma Dear [Georgia Rounds Atkins] and Daddy [Joseph Atkins, Sr.], my mother and daddy had been exposed, Ma Dear had been to college [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi], Daddy finished high school.  So you could see they understood the importance of education, but Mama and Daddy just didn't have that kind of exposure.  But it was a driving, driving seed in them and they were determined that their boys would get an education.  So I think Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] was--I think it's two years difference, maybe Vasco was two and Herman [Herman Smith] was four when they moved from Arkansas.  I also took Craig Leake, this documentarian to some of the places and they just squatted on the river, they came here from Arkansas.  And they squatted down there and they moved every time the rent man came, you know, so that's--
Speaker 2: So he was raised--did, did you say he was raised in St. Louis or, or?
Speaker 1: No, no, he's stationed in Scott Air Force Base [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he was stationed--
Speaker 1: --out, out from St. Louis.
Speaker 2: But he was raised in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: He was raised right here in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Oh in Memphis?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh.  Yeah they came this way--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to get, get them to, to school, I doubt if they had schools in those little, they weren't even towns, I don't know where they would have had to go.  But they knew there was something better from whatever they would have to do in those, the railroad stops.  So they both started first grade over here and finished, both finished Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], well everybody you knew, half the people.  You live on one side of town--well they lived kind of in between and they'd walk for miles and miles.  They lived in what's called Binghampton here [Memphis, Tennessee], so folks didn't care you know what happened to those kids. Or, or how to get school, wasn't no problem you know in their minds, so kids really were walking all over down--.  We had a long--now South Parkway is a long way from, to Booker Washington, I don't know if you know where Booker Washington is, if you've passed it and all, but it's downtown.  And I didn't know it then, but one of the girls took me by my hand, a neighbor was Vasco's classmate at Booker Washington.  I was--no at when I went to Porter [Porter Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee], well Ma Dear took us, we always had a car.  But sometime--when she had to go to work after Daddy died, we'd walk to school, sometimes she'd let us ride the bus.  But it's not tough now, Smitty [Smith's son, Vasco Smith III]: "Mama take me up here to drugstore."  I said, "Boy you better get up and walk to the drugstore," (laughter).  This is, you know they aren't used to anything like that, this was you know some years ago when he was in school up here and when we lived here.  But they're lazy, I, lost my point I do that sometime (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 625049
Speaker 1: We just wanted you to just kind of tell us little bit about Vasco [Vasco Smith, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Well he's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you, you all met and got married in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --nineteen forty what?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953] okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Married in '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: September 19th.
Speaker 1: Okay and then you moved to, decided to move to Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah we could hardly wait to get home, Vasco owed Uncle Sam two years, we were there from '53 [1953] to '55 [1955].  We were there when the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision of '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down.  As I said I had, you know I didn't keep a, keep my jobs where I was, and he had closed his practice in Dyersburg [Tennessee].  And we were just, oh god we were so excited getting back to Memphis, and finally we asked each other, we didn't have a job.  We didn't have a house, Memphis was completely, completely segregated, we had no idea--we didn't have any money.  You know we thought it was a lot of money making four hundred dollars a month to, as captain in the [U.S.] Air Force.  But you know we was spending that too but, you know you don't think when you're twenty-three and thirty-three (laughter).  But we, we just look and say why we so anxious, we're waiting for the moving men to pack up our stuff, it was home.  We were coming home and that was important.
Story_ID: 625050
Speaker 1: During that same period, that's when Russ Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon], he came back with Laurie [HistoryMaker Miriam DeCosta-Willis], with his wife.  But as you probably--not--no, well Jesse Turner's [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] dead, so you know you didn't--he and Va- he and Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] were classmates at LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee].  But there was a little and I ask about Lockett [H.T. Lockett], he's a, has had several strokes now, but he's doing well, he had his ninetieth birthday on the 23rd, of this summer; recently.  There was a little kernel, kernel of us.  We used to just talk and visit and, and Russ and A.W. Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.], his wife just died this morning, his first--his next wife, his, his first wife [Annie Ervin Willis].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Met--Laurie was his second wife (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: His first wife died this morning.  But there was just a little handful of us, little core group and--
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: Most of--Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] came back in that time.  Let's see, Ben Hooks' younger children were--younger siblings were at Potts kindergarten [Memphis, Tennessee] with me.  I've known them all my life too.  Ben and my sister [Clementine Atkins Ramsey], I thought they were gonna get married (laughter).
Speaker 2: So now this is, now, talking about this little kernel of, core group really forms the, the engine for a lot of social change--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], and on up to the present, this core group.  And be- before you all got here was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] doing--what were they doing in Memphis [Tennessee] the?
Speaker 1: I don't--not much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--was there a chapter here?  What--
Speaker 1: Yeah there was a chapter, and we, I remember, I remember the dues was two dollars.  We had hard time trying somewhere to take the membership.
Speaker 2: So low profile.
Speaker 1: Local chapter, lo- low profile, yes, you're right.  And, and I look at them now, see I was twenty-five by this time when we came back to Memphis, I was twenty-three when we married.  And some of the most sainted looking men, there were twelve or fifteen and as I remember, I don't remember women there, you know I mean maybe some women were there.  And they were unlettered, unread.  One of them was my daddy's [Joseph Atkins, Sr.] friend in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  I remember Brother Bishop [ph.], he used to take--I knew him well 'cause one car took the kids to school, and one car took, took the men to work.   But he was one of them and, and they just had so many.  And he was probably the most well off of all of them, yeah, because Mr. Bishop married well (laughter) and, and they left plenty money.  But, but all they wanted was a little freedom.  And I just I idolized those people.  I was, I know it was at the office when they first called me to sit on the board.  They'd taken all the seats, I had to sit on the floor.  But I was sitting on--this was in a church where we still meet (laughter).
Story_ID: 625051
Speaker 1: You described earlier how you and Laurie Sugarmon who's now, now [HistoryMaker] Miriam DeCosta-Willis--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tried to integrate Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and were rejected even though she had a degree from--where, where did she go from?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: She had a degree from one of those Seven Sister schools [Seven Sisters] out in--
Speaker 2: Yeah she--
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: --she had her first degree from Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], her bachelor's [degree].
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And she really was interested in getting her master's [degree], that's why I wasn't so interested 'cause I had my master's [from Middlebury College, Middlebury, Vermont]. I was sick of school.
Speaker 1: You come out of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], she's out of Wellesley College--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and you can't get in Memphis State?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: She's Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] out of Wellesley (laughter).
Speaker 1: Phi Beta Kappa and can't get in, so that's when you're invited to--
Speaker 2: To ser- when they rejected us at Memphis State--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it made the paper.
Speaker 1: It made the paper, then you, were you both invited to join the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The board, we were members of the board, they need some--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --women and some (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Now that's when your husband [Vasco Smith, Jr.] got involved in NAACP too?
Speaker 2: Well we went together.
Speaker 1: Oh you--okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, we went to NAACP together.
Speaker 1: So did, did Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] go too at the same time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wasn't as fervent as I am.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Did, did Russell Sugarmon come at the same time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh, he was one of the lawyers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  He used to get us out of jail, and I used to tell him, "Don't tell me what to do; you just come get me out of here."  "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith], you're gonna get arrested."  I say, "Just get me out," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you say the first meeting you had to sit on the floor?
Speaker 2: That was a board meeting (laughter) I can remember sitting, maybe that's in my mind today, but I don't remember anybody getting up, coming across in the little office where I worked as executive director, secretary whatever they called it, for forty years.  And it wasn't very many space, much space for us, and so I remember sitting on, on the floor, 'cause I was scared of them men (laughter).  I was scared of Jesse Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] who was president, that's Vasco's classmate who was a real warrior, his son [Jesse H. Turner, Jr.] is here.  He's president of the bank that his daddy was president, Tri-State Bank here [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay so, all right so, so what did you--did you make any early resolution about what had to be done?
Speaker 2: Well my first assignment, this was in '57 [1957] when we were called to the board and my fir- first, first, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had just been kicked out of Alabama.  You remember back there, that's why Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had to form SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Story_ID: 625052
Speaker 1: Oh incidentally, this may not be important, but somewhere and I can inject some more of this.  When I went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at fifteen, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a sixteen year old sophomore, that's when I first met him.
Speaker 2: Oh so he was at, he was at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: --Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you knew him when--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you were about the same age?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, he's just about a year--less than a year.
Speaker 2: What, what did you think about him?
Speaker 1: He was a nerd (laughter), he was all about books and I was all about boys (laughter) he didn't pay any attention to us.  He carried books, he was so smart, we didn't know all--whoever dr- 'cause he was just a little ol' boy too, he was sixteen years old.  I don't know why I remember him having an umbrella all the time when it wasn't raining (laughter).  He had books and an umbrella, and I guess I wouldn't have known who he was, his daddy was the biggest, Reverend King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], Daddy King as you know everybody called--was the biggest black preacher in Atlanta [Georgia].  And, and his, he had a sister, Christine [HistoryMaker Christine King Farris] was a, a student, she was a couple of years ahead of me, Martin was one year.  We called him ML then, that's what all of them called him, ML.  I knew her better than I knew him 'cause ML was very serious then, he was very serious.  He was just a student, and as I said, I was a lousy student (laughter).  So our passed didn't cross that mu- much, it was--
Speaker 2: You keep saying you were a lousy student, but you made good grades, you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I made good grades, but I could've of learned, I could've of had so much sense.  That's why I say to students get all you can, there's so much to know.  And if you get all of it, it's such an infinitesimally small amount of the knowledge in the world.  And I hate to see students goof off, off 'cause I was a goof off and I did enough.  I was playing jacks when I went to Spelman, I was playing jacks 'cause that's what I was still doing at home.  And the kids when we go to reunions they still talk about, "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith] would play jacks and we'd be like a fool out there sitting there with her, and we hadn't played jacks in years.  And she'd get out and make the, set this curve, the curve for the, for the thing, which all of us were failing," (laughter) 'cause our scores too, they graded on a curve, some teachers did.  And they used to tease me and then I get, "If y'all--I can't make this bed," (laughter) they'd make my bed for me.  They were sweet too, we love each other, as I say I went to my sixtieth reunion and there were thirty something of us there out of seventy-two, which was the biggest class Spelman had ever had.  Seventy-two of us finished in '49 [1949] and for thirty of us to go back in '69 [1969]--in 2009 (laughter), it was my sixtieth reunion, that's miraculous.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were kind of decrepit and all (laughter).
Story_ID: 625053
Speaker 1: All right NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee] though, so we're, we're, you're at 1957?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, you're just on the board and, what were the, I mean where, what direction was the NAACP heading then, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well part of that direction was that little cohort of people, we'd be on, we didn't live here, what year did I say?  It wasn't 'til '68 [1968] we moved.  We bought this house in '67 [1967] and we moved here just a little before ML [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  So we were, mostly at my house on Englewood [Englewood Street, Memphis, Tennessee] where we lived, and there are other houses.  Map and strategy, just old friends.  Russ [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] and I were high school classmates, Jesse Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] and Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] were college classmate [at LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], A.W. [A.W. Willis, Jr.] and my sister [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] were high school classmates [at Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee].  We all had connections, Jesse came here from Mississippi, but the rest of were Memphians.  Ben Hooks' [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]--I'd known his family all my, I say his younger siblings were in Potts kindergarten [Memphis, Tennessee] with me, I'm trying to think, now H.T. Lockett had come here from up in Tennessee, Ripley, Tennessee I believe.  But, but that little cohort, we knew each other you know for the years.  And, and we would have--it's too bad we didn't start just putting a microphone 'cause nobody's left but Lockett, Russ and me, and we're slowing down now.  Lockett has had two, three strokes, and I think I got a little Alzheimer's (laughter) and Russ got a little more than me.  But, but we were on a panel down at the civil rights museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee] for the past two weeks, so we're holding our own.  But I want the kids to, that's why I was looking for my book ['Maxine Smith's Unwilling Pupils: Lessons Learned in Memphis's Civil Rights Classroom,' Sherry L. Hoppe and Bruce W. Speck], for some pictures.  They wrote a book about me and I don't even have one (laughter).  I just gave some to my--kids received my scho- scholarship, the last ones that I had.
Story_ID: 625054
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we got you talking about the, you know planning what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was gonna do.  This is 1957, yeah, and I know on the national scene the Montgomery Bus Boycott's going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There some students are trying to integrate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're beginning to sit-in, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --with--we interviewed people who were part of the Norfolk 17, black students interview- integrating the Norfolk high school--I mean white high schools [in Norfolk, Virginia] for the first time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Little Rock [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], there was--
Speaker 1: Little Rock's going on, yeah, getting ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was--what year?  As well as I know that--
Speaker 1: Around that same era I, I don't know if it was before you know, yeah.  Emmett Till case had just happened--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--yeah I remember that--
Speaker 1: --before that, just before.
Speaker 2: That was '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955], right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Little Rock was '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: I think so, the same year that you all (unclear).
Speaker 2: I used to know--I could rattle those numbers off.  Those were brave kids.  I served as the national chair of the NAACP's education committee, and for their fiftieth anniversary in '97 [1997] we had them all together.  We met, our national board met in Little Rock [Arkansas].  You know I had been with them, I--every time they get together I would go be with them, because Little Rock's right across--well not right, right,  but.  But those are some brave kids, they (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now NAACP Youth [NAACP Youth Council] was real strong in a lot cities and they started doing sit-ins and things, this is before 1960 I know that, I know--I talked to Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] in Wichita [Kansas], they had, they had a sit-in going on in Wichita.  And the Mitchell brothers [HistoryMaker Michael Mitchell, Sr. and HistoryMaker Clarence Mitchell, III] are doing stuff out in Maryland.  Did you know about that kind of thing at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were two or three here, what's the college in North Carolina A--
Speaker 1: A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], yeah.
Speaker 2: A and T, yeah, I think--
Speaker 1: They, they had their sit-in in 1960.
Speaker 2: In when?
Speaker 1: In 1960.
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960], well that's when ours were, and ours was in March so we were probably right together.  There was somebody in the '50s [1950s] oh I can't--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, Wichita--
Speaker 2: Wichita, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Maryland, and Maryland--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh yeah that's true 'cause I, you mentioned them, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and there were others around the country.  CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] did some too.
Speaker 2: Yeah SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was--you know the Freedom Summer they call it down in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: That's '64 [1964], yeah.
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: A little later (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's when we had to talk about--Jackson State College [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Rhodes College here [Memphis, Tennessee], which is a different kinds of colleges, but for several years they have been coming together on a Fannie Lou Hamer Institute, and Russ Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon], Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] and I, for the last two years they've added Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles].  And I felt so lost without Vasco this year, you know he was here last year, but I would, well Russ did a very good job.
Speaker 1: So you, you all get together once a year and have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, yeah it's at, at--well the colleges bring us together and it's always at civil rights museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the, we're addressing community college teachers, very diverse group and you know they're much younger than we are.  So they just don't know these stories we tell, and they're a good group to talk to, they ask very interesting questions.  So--
Speaker 1: You're just trying to pass down a sense of what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Of history to these young teachers?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, see they call it from--our subject is always 'cause we talk to different people from the Freedom Summer to sanitation strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike].  Freedom Summer '64 [1964], sanitation was Martin King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death, early '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625055
Speaker 1: In '57 [1957] now what did you all plan to do first, what did you, what were your plans?
Speaker 2: Well I guess our first attention then, our big push was on political action.  Now you know the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is non-partisan, but we're very political.  And side by side with NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee], we had what we call the Shelby County Democratic Club.  Same people, but we never got the two confused.  'Cause we do not endorse candidates; we work for the election of black candidates.  We're the candidates (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) yeah say too that, that from what I understand Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was a Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was.
Speaker 1: And so he wasn't been--he wouldn't be part of the Democratic coa-
Speaker 2: He wasn't a part of that.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  But our thoughts were always inventing he's been a little bit of everything, (laughter) no, he is Republican (unclear) Democrat.  But when we came back to Memphis [Tennessee] in the mid-'50s [1950s], '55 [1955] was when Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] was discharged from the [U.S.] Air Force, there were less than ten thousand black registered voters in Memphis.  And I mentioned you know during the early '50s [1950s] the NAACP had been kicked out of the State of Alabama, because we wouldn't expose our rolls, which they couldn't make us do, they didn't make us do.  And then they accused the lawyers of--oh, I want, want to say battery, but it's not battery when it's, when you--is it bat- what is it now?
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Of something unprofessional for a lawyer, which wasn't true, oh, oh I don't know.
Speaker 1: Mal- malpractice is it?
Speaker 2: It wasn't mal- it's some word that begins it's all--anything, anything they can find.  So we had to--see lawyers were very, those lawyers that were working with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  That's when SCLC was formed during those years, because NAACP couldn't operate there.  Daisy Bates, not Daisy Bates, she's Arkansas, but Rosa Parks was secretary of the NAACP and chaplain of our--our Youth Council [NAACP Youth Council] chairman.  So you had the people of like mind, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was the new preacher come there.  But they had the, our staff had to get out of there, we couldn't have staff there, and H.T. Lockett that I've asked you about was a, he's a lawyer, he retired as a judge a year or two ago.  But we could not have lawyers as our, you know during those years when they were after us, as our presidents.  I'll think of that word and tell you what it means sometime.
Story_ID: 625056
Speaker 1: What, what did you just ask me?
Speaker 2: I was asking you what they, what the agenda of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Somehow it got to be political action because we weren't really in '57 [1957], that's when I went on board, Mr. Patton [W.C. Patton] that's where I went through the--he was from Birmingham [Alabama]--Montgomery [Alabama] or Birmingham.  But he was NAACP's staff, he was a staff person for NAACP.  I, he I tell you he, he's why we because voter registration, voter education, get out the vote was his big thing.  And they had to transfer staff from Alabama, well he came to Memphis [Tennessee] and one other young lady came to Memphis, so they could keep jobs.  And he asked me to coordinate the voter registration campaign, and we had less than ten thousand people registered, black people registered to vote at that time.  And I, I knew what I was doing, but I got out there, I guess the season was coming, the city, and as you mentioned were coming in other parts of the country.  We were getting restless you know we were just getting restless, because then we were sitting on my floor or somebody's floor talking.  Laurie [HistoryMaker Miriam DeCosta-Willis] when they told her, and I used that all time now when she applied for teacher's job at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] she asked--at the city schools, she, they asked her first name she said Mrs. (laughter) and so she wasn't a good candidate, that's our Ph.D. now.  So there were so many--everything was just separate, everything was segregated.  We had to go to the top of the theatres if we could get in them.  We could only go to the zoo on Thursdays, and if that was the day that the maids were off, we had to switch it, we couldn't go 'cause--for some reason it had something to do with the maids.  We had changed days, I said we go to the fairgrounds once a year, to the Tri-State Fair, everything, the libraries, the museums, all the restaurants; everything.  And, but we started with voter registration 'cause Mr. Patton was here, that's probably where--why.  And, and Memphis blacks have had a fairly good reputation of voting, of participating.
Story_ID: 625057
Speaker 1: We were under the Crump machine, I don't know if y'all know anything about that old Crump.
Speaker 2: Well tell us about the Crump machine.
Speaker 1: Well I wasn't first hand but he ran this town, and this state too.
Speaker 2: And he was the mayor, right?  Of the--
Speaker 1: For a short period.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he did better now, he ran everything, I was just reading something from bygone days as I was mentioned they call it memories or something now, when he was mayor.  But somehow he determined who was gonna be the commissioners, the counc- whatever the, the terms may be, city councilman now, school board members; all that you had to go by Boss Crump (laughter).  This Boss Crump was--now see I was a little girl then.
Speaker 2: Now what, what his first name?
Speaker 1: E.H. Crump, Ed I think that's it, Ed H. Crump.
Speaker 2: That's C-R-U-M-P?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, um-hm, um-hm.  He would pass out watermelons--this is what they say--whiskey on Election Day.  And the school teachers were just dreadfully afraid of him.  They voted somebody was there, and sometimes they were us, most times he'd send his boys to tell us how to vote.  So we were voted, we didn't actually vote, but it did, that's the one thing out of machine po- politics, if anything is good it did get us accustomed to going to the polls.
Speaker 2: And so, so Memphis [Tennessee] like--unlike some towns in the South--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --allowed black folks to vote.
Speaker 1: To vote (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like you were under--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause Crump told them (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were in a machine though--
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's why we had--
Speaker 2: --run by Boss Crump.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And Boss Crump would actually tell the blacks--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --how to vote, basically.
Speaker 1: That's right, uh-huh and, and (unclear) said--
Speaker 2: Did he have black people working in his machine?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah he had some of them, yeah uh-huh, they're called little brown Crumplettes [ph.] (laughter).  My principal, who is one of the persons that influenced me more than anybody, my principal, Blair Hunt [Blair T. Hunt], he was principal of Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], he was principal of so many that came here, that came through Memphis schools.  'Cause if even--but wasn't a Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] as you already know, he was a preacher too.  But he was known as a biggest Crumplette, but I had the greatest respect 'cause I remember from one of his speeches and he, he was a heck of a speaker.  "If you think I scratch when I don't itch, I laugh when it's not funny, I have to do this, because my boys and girls aren't getting anything.  I'm just trying to get the crumbs off of the table so we have to do something--," that was a lesson to me.  You know so many of us think we invented the wheel, but we're standing on somebody's fro- shoulders, and what boss, (laughter) Blair Hunt has some great, Professor Hunt had some great shoulders.  And, and, and I say I don't know how old he would've been now 'cause he was an older man when I was a little girl.  But that was the kind of lessons that he passed on to us.
Speaker 2: This is Blair Hunt?
Speaker 1: Blair Hunt.
Speaker 2: And he was--
Speaker 1: My principal.
Speaker 2: --your, your principal of your school?  The principal--
Speaker 1: Yeah my principal of Booker Washington.
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, he'll go down as the greatest principal ever, Booker Washington ever had or probably in Memphis, when you com- compare his time and what he had to do.
Story_ID: 625058
Speaker 1: But that man, let me just interject this, it has nothing to do with what I'm saying.  When Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] and, got out of [U.S. military] service in '55 [1955], now I finished Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] in '45 [1945], Vasco finished in '37 [1937].  Neither of us had been back to Booker Washington since then, but we had to go see somebody, say a lady Ms. McClinton [ph.], McClinton who taught there that pos- possibly have, help us find a house to rent.  We were on the way back home and Mr. Hunt [Blair T. Hunt] saw us coming, come up the steps, the steps are still there, "Why hi there, Vasco Smith, how's your brother [Herman Smith]?"  And he knew all my, he knew Joe [Joseph Atkins, Jr.] and Clem [Clementine Atkins Ramsey], that man is prob- perhaps the most brilliant man.  But, but I say this, doesn't have anything to do, but, but he had to do some things, because he was thinking of us all the time.  He, he was a great man, they called him Uncle Tom and I probably did it some myself at some time in my life.  But, but he was a mighty preacher and he was a mighty principal.
Speaker 2: So he was a reverend too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a rev- and he could cuss good too (laughter) and he didn't have any discipline problems, 'cause we were scared in those days (laughter).  Well in those days there weren't really discipline problems in school 'cause we had to walk straight and narrow.  But we know that he loved us.  And, and he had to take a course that he probably didn't want to.  He was probably the first black person appointed to the board of education here [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education], the first blacks that got to be anything, I think Professor Hunt was all of them (laughter) because he was a little brown Crumplette [ph.], that's what they thought, but he loved his brown children too, he loved us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he, he would try to be able--you know try to arrest something away from, for the black community?
Speaker 1: Yeah he was just--well 'cause you know those, those folks they don't get, get--you know nobody was giving you anything, you had to take it.  And that's what the sit-in movement was all about, that whole movement of that era, and to a great extent it's still like that today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause in so many ways we're retrogressing, which is pathetic, but it's happening.
Story_ID: 625059
Speaker 1: But then you all were registering voters and, now--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) getting more voters.
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're getting into the voter registration?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now this is in f- my first little task on the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went in, in two years we had over fifty thousand and all since the history of Memphis [Tennessee], we had less than ten thousand.  We had ten thou- fifty thousand black registered voters.
Speaker 1: New, new voters?
Speaker 2: New voters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Registered there.
Speaker 1: Now how, how did you do it?  Did you go door to door or?
Speaker 2: Door to door, yeah, that's what I tell these politicians now; they got my old self out here trying to help our politicians (laughter).  I said I'm too old, but, so they put me on the billboard (laughter).  But you know everything is so technical, so computer now, which is good.  But I still, well that's my age and that's you know how I was raised.  See the good in that personal contact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I'll, I mentioned the political club, the Democratic club [Shelby County Democratic Club], you said, how did we get--?  We organized, we had eighty precincts all with a significant amount of black votes organized block by block.  Each block worker was assigned or responsible for his block, if it was too short, two blocks maybe.  And, and we'd ret- we'd go get them 'cause we didn't have postcard voting, registration then.  Take them down to the, you know, voter registration office and then peo- people got killed, this what Chaney [James Chaney], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman] got killed for in Mississippi, and they aren't the only ones.  But what we were doing in many places before they went crazy, and Memphis never tried to block us because Crump [E.H. Crump] wanted these folks voting, so they couldn't stop that.  But block by block we'd call by telephone, well we'd get them registered.  We'd have to pick them up, find somebody with a car, buy a little gas to help him 'cause we couldn't even--some of us couldn't even afford gas.  Then we had to go get them on voting day or Election Day and see that they voted and we had a little card file; we didn't have computers then.  With every registered voter, we'd spend our money instead of paying folks, getting voter registration lists.  We'd have card files, and as they voted, we'd put the voters in one box and about two o'clock in the evening if whatever's left we start sending troops out there to get them.  "Go on out of this house and vote."  We could get--'cause it wasn't as many voters then, it wasn't as many of us, we could get a 75 percent turnout.  And 90 to 95 percent of us were voting together, you understand what I mean?  Now NAACP could work up to the point of who you vote for 'cause our dri- drive, voter registration drives was to get 'em out, get 'em to vote, but we couldn't tell them who to vote for.  So that's where the political club came in and we were so effective.
Story_ID: 625060
Speaker 1: We were so effective and it's pitiful.  It got to be that that we just let--we became destroyed, that the, the, the folks who got elected instead of coming to the club picked off the leaders, promised them jobs.  We weren't looking for a job; Russ [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] was a lawyer, Jesse [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] was the president of the bank [Tri-State Bank, Memphis, Tennessee], Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] was a dentist, A.W. [A.W. Willis, Jr.] was a lawyer.  And any of them I'm naming had a job.  We weren't looking for jobs, I ain't never wanted--when I went to work for the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee], they didn't have a dime to pay me.  I know they didn't have no money, I didn't care, wish I'd known then (laughter) how poor I would get in my old age.  But we never had a personal wish, and that's how we garnered the respect.  You see some ballots going out, now we were Shelby County Democratic Club.  They got something called the Memphis Democratic Club [Greater Memphis Democratic Club].  So many, it's so many crooked folks out here, they got names so similar to it.  But we got destroyed by our success, the laws passed.  Back in the day, we could, we had numbered votes, numbers by each name, and we had some long names that nobody could pronounce, I mean we had people illiterate more.  Memphis [Tennessee] has a high percentage of illiteracy now today and, and, and we've always have.  They can read--we just tell 'em number four, number ten, number eleven--.  They took the numbers off.  Then we had the crank, the, the lever where you could just vote the party.  They took that off.  Then instead of--as we rose in votes, we kept getting the, we got close to a third and then we got to be the, the balance of power.  And now of course we're the majority, so with each change, the laws changed, the rules changed, the game changed to render our vote less effective.  And, and although I never considered myself a politician, I know, I never wanted to run for a political office, they just tricked me into running for school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] 'cause--have you heard of our school boycotts here?  I know somebody's mentioned.  I had to coordinate that, and we pulled sixty-eight thousand black kids out, or somewhere in that range on Monday and told 'em they better be back there on Tuesday.  That's power, but you have to organize when you are, are creating what could be an incendiary condition.  Sixty-eight thousand kids out in the street?  We had a debt to their parents, we couldn't let nothing happen to them.  And the parents had to be a pa- involved in this.
Story_ID: 625061
Speaker 1: Let's kind of save that for a minute, and I wanted to, to pick up where--okay you're registering fifty thousand new voters.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right now what, what was your first I guess major victory at the polls?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Took--it was slow (laughter).
Speaker 1: How long did it take to get that fif- fifty thousand?
Speaker 2: About two years or more.
Speaker 1: Okay so about '59 [1959] or '60 [1960], you have like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, in '60 [1960] we began to--I'm trying to see, the first, because they had changed, these changes I--made when--made it more difficult for blacks to get elected.  By '64 [1964], that's the year Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] ran?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was running (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  We had almost become the power, Russ and A.W. were our first blacks to go to the state legislature [Tennessee General Assembly].
Speaker 1: That's Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] and A.W. Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.  And they were very effective, they probably, I think A.W. was the very first one, and Russ went the next term.  'Cause they weren't out there cutting no deals.  Now A.W. was slick but he wasn't a thief or a crook or nothing.  He, he came from a family of means, his grandfather had the money to yell to them about university--that big building's still down there.  To, to create that--well that's where the bank [Tri-State Bank, Memphis, Tennessee] and the university [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] was (unclear), his, his grandfather's money, from out of Mississippi.  The Walker family, they 'bout gone now but they were friends, and the Walker family probably had the brains and the something, but the Willis had the money.  So he was never a hustler.  He was a little bitty man (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now who--there's a story--somebody was telling me, and I think it may been Mrs. Knee- Kneeland Jones [HistoryMaker Marvis Kneeland Jones] was telling me a story of someone in--associated with the bank that was killed or something early on?  And their son--I mean was it Jesse Turner's father [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.] or something or?  I'm trying to think who it was now that that, that--
Speaker 2: Well he died, but he, you mean the present Jesse Turner that's Jesse Turner, Jr. [Jesse H. Turner, Jr.] now who's president of the bank.  His father--
Speaker 1: Right, somebody that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was--
Speaker 1: --they said was killed--
Speaker 2: He wasn't killed, he--
Speaker 1: Some--there's some key figure that was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah, the founder, Maceo Walker's daddy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Maceo Walker [A. Maceo Walker].
Speaker 2: Dr. Walker, Dr. J.E. Walker [Joseph Edison Walker], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah what, what was the story--
Speaker 2: But that wasn't--(laughter) that was about an old friend that had, he felt he owned him some money; it was about money.
Speaker 1: Okay it wasn't political.
Speaker 2: It wasn't, had nothing to do with politics.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh that's another long story, we don't need to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well forget that, we don't need to get into that.  All right.
Speaker 2: My mama [Georgia Rounds Atkins] could tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, better than (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was about money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in '64 [1964] A.W. Willis is in the state legislature then next Ru- Russell Sugarmon--
Speaker 2: Russell Sugarmon, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --comes in.
Speaker 2: And I think J.O. Patterson [J.O. Patterson, Jr.] was probably next when--uh-huh.
Story_ID: 625062
Speaker 1: And on the national scene you got Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] as president, he's kind of sympathetic to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --civil rights.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] is passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah he--yeah, under him.  Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] never would've been able to praise him, you know he took Ken- Kennedy you know would, would not have been able to make it you know, to make, to pass it.  But Johnson was a different personality you know.
Speaker 1: Let me backtrack a little bit, to the summer of '63 [1963], now that was a dramatic summer all over the country.  And did you all participate in the March on Washington?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, um-hm, I didn't close my eyes the whole time--I didn't eat the whole time I was there (laughter).  Smitty [Smith's son, Vasco Smith III] was there; he was on his daddy's shoulders.
Speaker 1: Yeah he had a story about going down there and he told us the story that--I don't know if you'll tell it, but.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  We were, 04:27:55:28we'd been over--my sister [Clementine Atkins Ramsey] that I mentioned here lived in New Jersey then, and we'd dropped Smitty off in New Jersey.  And we went to Puerto Rico somewhere, we were on vacation, we planned our vacation around the March on Washington.  And we picked up Smitty 'cause he wanted, we wanted him to be a part of it.  He was born in '56 [1956] I guess he was about seven years old then.  And coming out, everybody, that was, gosh I never seen anything--I talked about that the other day at civil rights museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee], when America just seemed right to me.  You know there was you know estimate a quarter million people and it was the most diverse crowd I'd ever seen.  Those were the most peaceful, but any- but before I get Smitty, people were just coming down from everywhere, trains, planes, everything you can get, cars were full.  And you just gave folks rides stops in shifts all on the highway; we trusted each other in those days.  But they all the way from New Jersey to down to Washington [D.C.], we just hollered as we passed.  And I guess we were saying, what did we say?  "The niggers is here tonight," and we had a little boy sitting there, back there, cried it out (laughter).  And when he got up the next morning, we went down to get in the march, there was Lena Horne and I remember her 'cause she so pretty, and two or three celebrities.  And Smitty got there as loud as he could scream: "The niggers is here!"  (Laughter) I say, "Boy, if you don't--."  But I can't say nothing 'cause that's what he heard all night (laughter).  I'll say, we said, "The niggers are coming," (laughter).04:29:34:08
Speaker 1: Well that was--yeah, at the time did you have a sense of how historic that was when it?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: At the time of the march in August of '63 [1963], did you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really.  I guess I, when I saw that many people I seen assembled, and that was Martin King's speech [I Have a Dream], that was his big thing that day.  And Smitty and Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.], well Smitty got tired and he went back to the hotel.  Two buses came from Memphis [Tennessee] see, came up from--I never saw.  And I was gonna stay--there was a lot of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] people there, and I was trying to get to Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and to our little crowd.  But they, they--talk about a city filling up and, and they dispense themselves so fast.  I never saw, I saw a few down by the, what's that, the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] around, down there.  But everybody was getting out, they didn't even leave no trash much there (laughter).  I never ever seen, you never heard a cuss word, excuse me, thank you.  I said that was the most polite people, but Vasco, Smitty had killed him on his shoulders.  And they'd gone back to the hotel and watched it on TV and Smitty was sitting there ordering room service (laughter).  "Send me a bag of potato chips," (laughter).  And I never got a bite to eat 'cause we were leaving the next morning.  I looked and looked for the Memphis people, you just couldn't, everybody came to that march and left.  That's why '68 [1968], this is five years later.  I guess I, I am a born optimist, I couldn't believe people would be mean enough to kill Dr. King.
Story_ID: 625063
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, just this is five years later, and I'm not that naive.
Speaker 2: I hear you, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I've been out there fighting them, and during those years we were getting lawsuits filed, see we were out there in the streets picketing.  We were holding our money, department stores just crumbled.  We were filing suits.  We were registering to vote, we were voting.  During that period we were solidifying all this thing.  And then comes all the hate and, and, and people so often would say we didn't have anything to do with it.  That man didn't live here, I said it happened here; you can't change that, that's history.  You cannot change that.  We created the climate for that dumb man [James Earl Ray] to come here [Memphis, Tennessee] and have nerve to shoot Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And, and nobody that dumb and that poor, trailer trash, would have sense enough to do--although he was stalking him all the time.  You see this latest--what is the name, I've forgotten, I saw it on TV once.  But I couldn't have the big thing--what did they call that thing.  The two or three weeks he, there was a black movement here, very few whites were, were involved.  They came out--I can't think of it, I sent, Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.], I just called 'em an Uncle Tom (laughter) I say, "You go."  In a big park, they all get together, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  I couldn't look at all those hypocrites. I wouldn't go.
Speaker 2: Memorial service or, or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, something to talk about the grief.  It wasn't a memorial to Dr. King it was a memorial for their guilty consciences for allowing Dr. King to die here.  That was, we--that--it had to have been at Kyles' [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] house right around the corner.
Story_ID: 625064
Speaker 1: So I'm going to take you to 1964, back to '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about the summer of '64 [1964] I don't know, what--okay.
Speaker 2: That was a big Mississippi summer.
Speaker 1: Yeah now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Freedom Summer.
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty-four [1964] is Freedom Summer in Mississippi.  Did--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did you play any role in that at all?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't in that.
Speaker 1: Oh you didn't?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: I didn't think you went down there, but did they use--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Memphis [Tennessee] as a staging area to do anything in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: You know, no, they didn't do--they were on the buses, they didn't do--I think they started up north (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now when they organized all those voters down there in Mississippi (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] went down when it--Medgar [Medgar Evers] died.  Well I went to Mississippi, but I wasn't riding the bus with the Freedom Riders.  See they called them Freedom Riders 'cause they (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Medgar Evers died the spring of '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 2: They--the--yeah, June of '63 [1963].  I was the last person to touch him.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Vasco was speaking that night.  I kissed him and I wasn't flirting. At the age I was still flirting a little bit, but I wasn't flirting, I was just so proud of him.  And he left the house we were--oh god that was so painful, and went to get the supplies for the kids' demonstrations next day.  And when he got to his driveway, they shot him dead.  Billy was with us, we asked Billy to ride down with us, Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles].  Vasco, Billy, Billy and I rode down.
Speaker 1: I did not know that.  That's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was sitting there hand feeding him ice cream and holding barbeque bones for him.  I just felt so close to him.  And the atmosphere, that, I never have seen a rally like that.  Oh gosh those folks were--and Vasco turned the house out (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is in Jackson [Mississippi], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your husband spoke and then--yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That night.
Speaker 2: Then they had a little social, 'cause we couldn't go anywhere, you know we couldn't go any places, so the--you know the people in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know they found the nicest house they could find and the, our friends there.
Speaker 1: Where was the speech at, was it at a?
Speaker 2: It's a little church, it was a little old church.  It was rocking.  I don't remember, I probably could get Myrlie to tell.   Myrlie Evers [Myrlie Evers-Williams] and I serve on the board at NAACP together now.  We're both up for election, they came and told me, I told them I gotta quit I'm tired, I'm old and Myrlie, we come together.  They said, "Nah, y'all--sorry, I'm sorry, we're gonna run you anyway."  I said, "Well I hope I get beat," (laughter).  They won't even let me get--they didn't let me go to this last one, I'm going in October.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My term doesn't expire, February is my last meeting.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: If I don't run again, February's the last meeting, that's the annual meeting they call.
Story_ID: 625065
Speaker 1: Now you all had experienced some success in the elections of '64 [1964] and the, the, I guess that's, that's the year you said A.W. Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.] was elected to the state legislature here [Tennessee General Assembly]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was already there, I'm trying, maybe--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because let me just think through this and, and--is he rolling now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was with that election, I wish Russ [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] were here to tell me 'cause Russ remembers, that that we changed from being the balance of power to the power, really.  Because you see, every Democratic legislator, either House [Tennessee House of Representatives] or Senate [Tennessee Senate] who was successful had a majority black vote.  That's what put them there, so we were more than the ballot, that's when the Dixiecrats and all those people in politics--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's what they started changing, or--
Speaker 2: Changing over, uh-huh, and, and in Memphis [Tennessee] by '64 [1964] see it was the end of the '50s [1950s] when we had gotten up fifty thousand to add to that first, near ten thousand dollars just put up.  Because by that time we might've been up close to a hundred thousand, I would have to look way back to know that.  Because--and we had to really kind of weigh and think through, we had good minds to think through these things.  When do you want runoffs, when don't you want runoffs, when is it best 'cause I'm not too crazy.  You have to look at the whole situation.  It's more than just being the biggest in the population, I don't think it has that much to do, but we had to weigh out all those things.  And thank god we had people able to, to--mathematicians like Jesse Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.], first black CPA [certified public accountant] in the State of Tennessee.  Two lawyers, three or four lawyers, you know who, who knew how to think through these things.  So we used the vote to, to its fullest extent, its fullest extent.
Speaker 1: Now this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it wasn't until '71 [1971] that they made me run, after the school board cuts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we opened up they had to reorgan- restructure the whole school system [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District].
Story_ID: 625066
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you a question about Fannie Lou Hamer.  Did, did, did she ever come to Memphis [Tennessee] to talk or anything that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah I saw her somewhere, oh gosh she was quite a figure.  I remember her better at the Democratic National Convention in '72 [1972 Democratic National Convention] when that was my first national convention.  That was in Miami [Florida], Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] didn't even know I was going.  I had, and I was--my heart troubles were beginning to show I guess.
Speaker 1: Well maybe let's wait to the end then.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Just talk about, now, 'cause what you, we, you, we had started talking about the school crisis in Memphis [Tennessee] and the Black Mondays--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about what Black Monday was all about and what?
Speaker 2: Well we had a list, I have them somewhere here, I'm so disorganized, of fifteen demands that we took to the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education].
Speaker 1: And you took them as, as what?  As, as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or as--
Speaker 2: Yeah, as NAACP.  I was the spokesperson because I was executive secretary of the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee].  For years, see, we always had kept a pretty even balance racially--numerically and racially.  You know some years it may be a few more whites, some years it may be a few more black, but we never had a black school board member.  We didn't have any black administrators, the only administrators we had was black principals who were principals over black schools.  And, and whatever, they did it over black schools.  And we were demanding more black representation that kind of imaged the s- school system.  Every time a vacancy would occur on the school board, we'd go down--you know by death or resignation or something, we'd go down and ask for a representative, a black person to be appointed.  'Cause it filled themselves, I think the, the mayor of the city commission in those days I think it was called, had to okay whatever the school board ruled it was filled.  You know not by vote, but, but they just turned their backs on us.  I'll never forget the straw that really broke them down that began, I told, I'm so glad I didn't know this lady was about to die.  There was a group of white women, mostly Jewish women who had, they called funds for--their, their primary interest was feeding the hungry children.  I think they called themselves funds for needy children, fund for something; they had a name for that movement.  And I went to the school board, Laurie Willis Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Miriam DeCosta-Willis], she was one, I don't think I got four in that car (laughter) looked like I had a vacant space, I was kind of late getting to the school board.  'Cause I was trying to get at least one car full (laughter).  But we went in there and Bailey (unclear)--what is his name?  Ed Bailey, Edward Bailey [sic. Edgar H. Bailey] was president, and I threw, told him--you know I served on the board twenty-four years after that.  I didn't know what the procedure was then, but he was telling me I couldn't speak and I kept walking.  "I, I, I have something I would like to present to the board."  Now these women--I just knew it was full of people.  I didn't look around--and it happened that I knew most of them, I wasn't looking around, but I was just, see the cameras had closed up.  And I wasn't looking for a camera, I never have looked for a camera, that's never really excited me.  And these, all these women and these are white women now, jumped up and started clapping.  How them cameras--and they thought, everybody, they thought I was with them (laughter).  I didn't know what was going on (laughter).  So I got there and presented my fifteen demands from the NAACP, and we had some kind of exchange of words or, I don't know, I don't remember what.  But the big thing I had a roomful of women they were mostly women it maybe a few men.  White women mostly if any blacks, I don't know, and that was headlines (laughter) that was the beginning of Black Monday.
Story_ID: 625067
Speaker 1: And one of the ladies, this is not just right after that, this is years after that.  I can't think if she's dead now, but I knew her well.  I was at a party one of the, the, the daughter of the founder of these, the Dreyfuses, they had a jewelry store here [Dreyfus Jewelry Company, Memphis, Tennessee].  But she had a party for some reason, some of her children had come home.  And I was standing there by the table eating like I usually do, I'm a big eater, I love to eat, you can tell that.  And I told her, "You know, we never know what, what any little motion we make or any little statement we make or--how it will affect history."  I think by that time Willie [W.W. Herenton] had been elected mayor.  I said, "If y'all hadn't come, hadn't been there and cheered for me, we never would have gotten school board members [on the Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education]," not then anyway, 'cause the chamber of commerce had to pull us together.  The boycott [Black Mondays] was so, we--that folks were going out of business, the school, the city gonna collapse if we didn't--'cause we getting over a third of the population now.  Willie never been in superintendent had he not been superintendent he wouldn't of been mayor and none of this would of happened had y'all not been sitting in that school board auditorium boosting me.  Said, "Y'all had a lot to do with the destiny of this city," which is true we don't know, that's why, you know I try so hard to be honest.  Well my memory's too bad to be a liar because if you gonna lie you need to be--remember the lie you're gonna tell.  And that lady was going on a vacation the next day I told you, got killed in a car accident.  So I say--Selma Lewis [Selma S. Lewis] was her name, I, I'm so glad we had that talk you know, and she was so happy, she'd never thought of, thought of, of that really.  But they were a powerful force, just their attitudes because feeding the hungry children was one of our fifteen demands.  'Cause poor black children or poor any kind of children wasn't eating well (laughter).  You know they didn't have free lunches, or if they had 'em they were limited in the '60s [1960s].  But that's how you have, have to watch things you know.  I don't--I went in one of our stores, Macy's, I know you've heard of Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.]; they have them everywhere now.  I had just left a live television--or something, I don't know what it was for, and the folks were looking.  I ran in there to get something on my way from the studio, it must've been somewhere near Macy's.  And they said, "Well we just saw you on TV."  I, I said, "Oh yeah I just left the--," whatever channel it was, I don't remember what it was now.  And, and they were just you know they thought there was a star.  I don't even know what it was about, I have no idea now.  And as I walked on over there to, to find what I was looking for, the lady that was waiting on me say, "I guess you really have to watch yourself, 'cause everybody sees you."  I say, "Baby, I just try to do the right thing."  I don't have time to go around watching myself (laughter) if I watch myself I wouldn't have been in some of them lines having them throw me out of these places.  You don't have time to watch yourself; you have to do what's in you.  I'm not making sense, I'm all out--you go back to your script, doll (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm following you.
Story_ID: 625068
Speaker 1: So what--tell us what Black Monday--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was about.
Speaker 2: Okay that's another--by that time we were at this house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Figuring that out, we had grown a little bit.
Speaker 1: Was there a struggle to move into this house I know--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --when we interviewed Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] he talked about some of the housing struggles.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a struggle to move into this neighborhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There really wasn't, and, and we were the first to buy past Lamar [Avenue] down here, and Billy right around the corner.  You, you didn't--weren't at this house, but he's right around the corner.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Reverend Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles], yeah?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I think he actually moved in before, 'fore we did.  But no, nobody--
Speaker 1: Okay well let's go on to Black Mon- Monday then.  What happened, what, what was that about, I know it was a boycott but how, what was it about (unclear)--
Speaker 2: We had a boycott going on.  We--
Speaker 1: You had the fifteen demands then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, we had these fifteen demands, they were not heeding this.  The first thing I did when I got on the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] was ask--and that was '71 [1971] I was elected, and I start serving in '72 [1972].  Still carried on this--trying to get black administrators, trying to get blacks--well that was in the working then because after Black Mondays--the first blacks were elected, I was one of the first three.
Speaker 1: Black was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had--
Speaker 1: I, I think you're skipping over what Black Monday is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You just tell us what it was and what, what happened.
Speaker 2: On, on Mondays after much deliberation and planning and scheming and everything else we could do, we decided to do something drastic: pull kids out of school.  And we did it, I think in six Mondays, we pulled up to sixty-eight or sixty-nine thousand black kids out of school on Monday, and they had to be back on Tuesday.  See we didn't work just with us, but we had the whole community: the churches, the mamas, the PTAs [Parent Teacher Association], everything, 'cause you can't mess with children now.  Education is too, too important 'cause we don't need to ever be out of school, we need to be on there an extra Monday, if they could add one to it.  But, but we were tired of being denied, we were tired of being denied; it looks like we would never get an administrator, we'd never get a board member.  We, we, we--I guess by then they'd stop giving us secondhand books, see that, when I came up, sure they had by then.  But school system was dismal so that was a straw that make the--that's the hammer that broke the camel's back, really.  Because merchants were leaving, losing money.  Well school system, that's the big thing.  See the school is funded on the basis of average daily attendance.  And when sixty-eight thousand kids come out of school, that month they didn't get much (laughter); it hurt.  And we know we're doing this to our kids, their kids, everybody's kids, but it was a very drastic measure.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--national thought we'd gone crazy: "What they doing down there in Memphis [Tennessee] taking them children out of school," (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Was that Roy Wilkins then?  He's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, they thought we had gone completely--.  Ben [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] might've been in--no, no, Ben didn't come in to the '70s [1970s], I get my years mixed up.  But we lived through it.  And, and then they had two sides, the school board, the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee] and the chamber of commerce [Memphis Chamber of Commerce; Greater Memphis Chamber].  The chamber of commerce was kind of the arbiter in the whole thing.  So we worked out--I didn't like it 'cause I didn't think we got enough, they worked out so we'd get three school board members.  They broke--we had to--the state had to redistrict, and that's--see we're state product of, the state school system is.  So politically we could be elected, and we were redistricted on--the same way that the counc- city council [Memphis City Council] was districted.  Which gave us a possibility of three--surely two and possibly three.  And I was that swing one, 'cause this, this district was maybe at a little more white, but it was nearly even.  And they wanted what they call a strong candidate here and they dropped the word in the paper, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith.  I saw it in the paper I said, who told that lie?  (Laughter) Go run for school board?  And I ended up joining and I stayed there twenty-four--I did it six times (laughter).
Story_ID: 625069
Speaker 1: So you ended up--you were elected to the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] in 19--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy- '71 [1971]--
Speaker 2: Elected and started serving in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the first.
Speaker 1: Now let me go back--so that's the story how you got on the school board.  And let me go back again and ask you--
Speaker 2: And I had my first heart attack--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --the day I was supposed to have my kick off campaign.  I did not campaign, they wouldn't let me out (laughter).  Well Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] had a fit.  I had folks coming in, getting my little stuff signed in the hospital to help because Vasco, "You not running for anything," (laughter).  And I never wanted to, but I'd gotten the fever (laughter), and I kind of wanted to.  But they took me on through, they really--people, that's, I love people, these people out in the street for me, so.  They were out in the street and, and this is some, somebody just asked me something about, you always talk about that marvel of people that nobody ever knows.  But they were the folks that had my back, they still got my back.  This president that came here, I said--but y'all be gone ever I give you her name, I don't even know what I did 'cause she's a story from a different (unclear), she's from Brownsville, Tennessee where they didn't allow folks there, Ebonys and Jets and all that.  But anyway those people are out there.  And we had what- had whatever--prepared to have a runoff, I was in that bed back there at the end of this house.  They took me out one time over here in Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee] to a rally and let me stand up there and then Vasco pulled me down and made me go home.  But the people did that, I don't know whether I should've said thanks or, or something nasty (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah the re- the reward for good work is more work.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 625070
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about 1968, I didn't ask you about this and you, you did mention the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and what that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and how you felt about it, but, did you play a role in the sanitation workers strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Yeah even before the union came here we were making those signs, it was a little thing.  And their big fight was to get a union, which the city had denied.  But we were making signs on behalf of the sanitation workers.  They treated those gar- garbage men like dogs, no money, no job security--
Speaker 1: These are black garbage men?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The black garbage men, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, why, we didn't have any--I don't know if we got any white ones now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there weren't any white ones then, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We might, I don't know.
Speaker 1: --they--the issue had something to do with they, the AFSCME union [American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Local 1733], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, they were trying to get--they were not unionized at that, and, and a number of un- of--although NAACP and, and, and labor has a pretty good relationship, the names of which union didn't met, mean that much to me, AFSCME was one that, that guided and AFSCME took off.  And one of the biggest unions I imagine now in the country, I don't really know that.
Speaker 1: It was association of federal, state and city employees or something--
Speaker 2: Federal, state, city, municipal--
Speaker 1: --employees.
Speaker 2: --employees, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you all were, were involved in it before Dr. King came--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --to town.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, as I say we had been picketing whoever, the commissioner that was head of public services, we'd make signs, we'd go to their meetings and, they were so pitiful.  They had to carry those garbage cans home and the seepage would be--we used to go up and they had a little place where they would meet.  And it would be stinking you know from the drippings from the garbage.  And we worked with them for years.  But see that's a problem with Memphis [Tennessee]: we never think or act creatively, we react.  I mean those men weren't asking for anything but just plain old decency.  Even after they got the little raise, the union, they still qualified for, for welfare; I mean they're still in poverty.  I think they got, I said Dr. King's blood was so expensive.  What it--was it a nickel?  I don't wanna lie.  Five or ten cent, or something like that increase in raise.  I mean he came here and died for that.  And I was sitting just at the table at a banquet.  Somebody, some group that had honored me the year before and, and I went back.  And I was in awe just like I told you at the NAACP meeting when I used to go, and this is one of those sanitation workers just last year who's still working.  I was so honored to sit there with him, I was so honored and, and I'm still he's still here, 'cause we ought to have a big (unclear) for him if anything happens to him.  But he still looking good.  So this is, this is why you know I have had so many good things in my life.  You know I lived through Dr. King, I lived through Medgar Evers, I've--I got a picture back there doing the twist with, what's the crazy man with Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], James Meredith when they had dropped him in my house to keep him from the public, and I'm out there at some little dump doing the twist with him (laughter) 'cause we couldn't go nowhere else.  So I'll show you the pictures back there.  I sat at the feet of Thurgood Marshall.  Roy Wilkins was a great man, people don't recognize him, but he, he was just different from we are.  I mean he had to do what he had to do in his time, you do and I do what we have to do--my times different from yours, of course.  But we do, we are all products of our society, and, at some point we have to break it, break through, I ain't gonna take this no more, I ain't gonna take this no more.
Story_ID: 625071
Speaker 1: What were some of the, your activities as a member of the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education]?  Did, were you able to get more black administrators?  And how did, well how, how did you get Willie Herenton [W.W. Herenton] elected to the--as superintendent?
Speaker 2: Oh, god.
Speaker 1: How did you, when did you meet him first of all, and, and how did--
Speaker 2: Well I met Willie when he was doing his dissertation for his doctorate degree.  And he did it on the desegregation of Memphis City Schools [Shelby County School District], he was a principal in the school system then [at LaRose Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee].  And that was kind of daring 'cause teachers were scared to take NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] membership.  And he'd come down to my--he and his wife [Ida Jones Herenton], I know his wife's people.  His wife was sister to Rufus Jones [Rufus E. Jones, Sr.].  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: It's the Jones family, and they were some pretty well off blacks and Willie was a poor little boy going way out there to Boxtown [Memphis, Tennessee] trying to court his wife,  what's her name (laughter).  I can't, I know them all so well.  But I just kind of fell in love with him.  I mean he was, his only job before getting to be mayor was in the school system.  You know when he got to finish college [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], he--'cause he wanted to be a boxer and somebody opened his eyes how far he'd get, which wasn't far at all you know.  And that's when I first met him, although I knew his wife and her family, working on his dissertation.  And Willie was so--I don't remember what year, but he was so impressed with Miriam Willis, [HistoryMaker] Miriam DeCosta-Willis and I 'cause we had a, a big role in trying to get these folks get the kids out of school and all of that.  And, and the principals met and Willie said he saw those two little women there willing to give their all, and the men sitting there shaking.  I would never ask anybody to take a chance at that job, now I got better sense.  You can do things other than that, just don't mess with the children when they come back to school.  See some of them had pre- test every, every Monday to make sure they failed, you know that kind of stuff; that's not, that I wouldn't ask anybody--.  But Willie got on that line and walked with us.  He put his black, it was Black Mondays and we wore black, they almost kicked me off of jury duty after fighting, that's another side fight.  I think that's why they called me 'cause they knew Black Mondays were going on.  And I'd be late all the time, I had a big black hat and my black dress (laughter) and be late and the judge would (laughter)--.   But he never did put me out 'cause he so right, I didn't cuss back at him (laughter).  But that's how I met--Willie came on the li- pick- on the line with us during the--okay, we're about to--it goes back a long time.
Story_ID: 625072
Speaker 1: Well tell us about how Willie Herenton [W.W. Herenton] was elected to the school board [sic.] and?
Speaker 2: Well Willie started his career after he finished his education or some part of his education, as a teacher and, and ironically as a teacher where he first went to school.  And then later as a principal of that school.
Speaker 1: Where, where was that?
Speaker 2: LaRose school [LaRose Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee].  And incidentally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here in Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: --my husband [Vasco Smith, Jr.] went to LaRose school you know much, much earlier.  And Willie had just worked himself up through the ranks as a teacher and a principal.  And the superintendent just before Wi- Willie, John Freeman who's passed on now, was a very decent person, very, very decent person.  And Willie had gone and gotten his--well when I first knew him as I said he was doing his dissertation for--his doctoral dissertation.  But he was you know taking leaves and going to school, and then he did post-doctoral work at Harvard.  He did his dissertation, his, his doctorate at, at Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], I believe it's one of the schools in Illinois.  But very, very well qualified.  And we were in, in '60s [1960s] we were desegregating things, we wanted representation at all levels in the school system.  And John Freeman, the superintendent, as he was leaving recommended Willie.  Willie became his deputy really; Willie had moved up to that.  And, and--
Speaker 1: Freeman was a white man, right?
Speaker 2: Freeman at that time was superintendent of schools [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District].
Speaker 1: Yeah but he, he was white, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, I thought you said vice president.  Yeah.  I went to Africa with him, we were good buddies, Nairobi [Kenya].  But we couldn't stand to see a black at the top.  And we thought there were, school board was made up of nine people, three blacks.  Three so called liberals and three racists I guess you'd call, who would never think of a black being at the head.  But we had gotten two, we were working with them, two of the so called liberal contingency to commit to Willie.  'Cause they knew Willie was smart now we--Willie was smart, clean, good family man, had three fine children.  He was just a good guy, good prospect and he was a homegrown boy.  So we thought we had it, but at that last minute--I was out of town, I'd gotten those missions I was on a little confused.  They met and they changed their minds, the two whites we thought we had.  They just could not--and they were decent people, but they couldn't see.  The woman who is, had been on the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education], we walked for her years and years ago, long before I thought about school board.  She was an older person than the rest of us.  I remember she asked me, "Maxine [HistoryMaker Maxine Smith], I've got to be sure Willie is head and shoulders above the rest of the applicants."  And I said is she telling me something?  I said, "Frances [Frances Coe], you know I have too.  I just never thought he'd be anything but head and shoulders, I just never thought about it."  So what that made me go into my little closet and ask me, Maxine, can you make sure he's the best as far as you know?  I had to really talk to me, you see what I'm saying, 'cause I don't ever want to put--education is too important to me.  I don't care what color the children are, we need the very best, the very best.  I'm still looking back, what a lousy student I was (laughter).  And, and I, I, I came out knowing that I could do the same thing as Frances said she could do.
Story_ID: 625073
Speaker 1: But some, she got weak kneed and now that's one thing that I regret, I, first time in my life I ever cursed another (laughter).  Things, feelings were high during that period, I called her a thing or two, I don't know what it was, it wasn't nice though.  But I was so hurt because I thought we were allies in this thing and they just flubbed the dub, and then we really (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay so this was, well, what year is this that, that?
Speaker 1: This was--when was he elected to the school board [sic.] seventy--
Speaker 2: He was elected in '78 [1978], so this was before then, right?  This is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You said it was '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was elected--
Speaker 1: This is just shortly before 'cause we had to have a cooling, a year or so--it, it got terrible, and then the merchants got upset.  We sent our troops back out (laughter), we boycotted everything again.  That's when they had the chamber of commerce [Memphis Chamber of Commerce; Greater Memphis Chamber] and the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] and the NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee] have roundtable meetings or square table meetings or some, some kind of meetings where we worked, worked on restructuring.  They were hurting financially.  See Black Mondays were in '69 [1969], I'm trying to keep this chronology straight for you.  And we wore them down again, we just wore them down again.  That--Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968], and so this was somewhere, and we had to--you know right after Martin died, we had this Dr. King--had, had to have a cooling off period.  So I was willing to give a cooling off period 'cause I need to cool off too, but I wasn't conceding anything.
Speaker 2: So, and so in '78 [1978] was the school board constituted the same way it was before, or were there new members or other members on there--
Speaker 1: Well we first--
Speaker 2: --that you could--
Speaker 1: See until '72 [1972] there were five all white school board members.  In '72 [1972] when we came, we were elected in '71 [1971], the new, the restructured board, there were six whites and three blacks starting in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And see John Freeman was superintendent at that time [of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District] and Willie [W.W. Herenton] had worked up to this deputy.  Willie had been studying somewhere (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) I just wondered if the same school members that voted against him a couple of years before were there when they, when they voted for him in '78 [1978]?  When he got elected in '78 [1978] were there the same--were those the same people--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the same structure.
Speaker 2: No, but the same people?  Was that woman that you said that you fell out with, was she on the board--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  She, she was one.  Uh-huh.  There probably was a change or two, but the, the ideology was still much the same.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how did you convince them to vote for--well the pressure you said was on them?
Speaker 1: We wore down one of the very, very conservative--you got the three blacks, you got Frances [Frances Coe].  And by that time they were so glad to get rid of Willie (laughter).  We probably picked up one more.   And then before the vote was over I think they all picked him then, he got the five votes, somehow we just picked up the five, that's what we needed out of nine.  And then I think they all, you know how they do this proper thing, this polite thing to do, but it didn't come from the heart.  I can't say he was unanimously with ge- with glee.  But and pressure was coming from the business community 'cause their businesses were hurting '69 [1969] boycotts, you know, Black Mondays, were coming from the political community 'cause they wanted their schools financed.  And, and so we had to have--we, we knew it was good for us too, so we couldn't play hardball all the way.  We had to balance these things out and, and, and do them so no kids would be hurt too badly.
Story_ID: 625074
Speaker 1: Well how, how did Dr. Herenton [W.W. Herenton] perform as school board president, I mean as--
Speaker 2: Superintendent [of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District].
Speaker 1: --superintendent (unclear).
Speaker 2: He was a very good superintendent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was very good superintendent, very smart he made a lot of changes.  Everybody gets tired of a superintendent after a while, but he, he was a good superintendent, and he was a very good mayor.  He began to have a--was a little personal problems at the end of his tenure that I thought would really kill him professionally.  I never will forget those two little stools, stools right in the door, he and his campaign manager.  I didn't know, I didn't even know he was running, 'cause I had fought like a tiger to keep him from being kicked off the school board [sic.] over a very personal matter.  And he said, I think he called me Ma, "I'm a run for mayor."  I said, "Are you crazy?"  (Laughter) This was the same year now.  I said, "Are you crazy?"  I never know, Carl- Charles [Charles Carpenter] is very fine guy, he's a lawyer, they were friends, church friends or something.  I just didn't know.  But I'm so glad he didn't heed my advice because he was an excellent mayor.  He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now, let me just get, get a quick jump--check the chronology again.  In '90 [1990], he was, he resigned from his position as school superintendent?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  And what was that, what was that over?
Speaker 2: I guess it was--when was it over?
Speaker 1: No, why did he resign?
Speaker 2: Because I said he had some personal problems that they were trying to push him out, but I was resolved that he was gonna walk out the same man he was when he walked in.  So that was a hard fact; that almost ran me crazy.  We don't need to go into all the details.  But he knew it was time to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as sentiment there was concern, and I happened to be president of school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] that year, and that's the only--first time somebody served president two consecutive years.  'Cause we, we had a--it was rule or agreement that the president just to serve one year.  But we had a, almost complete new, we had recent- a new board coming in, and they wanted continuity you know of me having been there, and already president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you stayed on the school board until 1994, right?  No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Twenty-four years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Meanwhile, so, so did you play a major role in the election of Willie Herenton to mayor?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tried to, I was there when--all the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well he was elected mayor--first black mayor of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: First black superintendent.
Speaker 1: Yeah--right.  And so he was mayor for seventeen years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Seventeen, he was elected for twenty years, seventeen or eighteen, he was elected five times, but he resigned from that too.
Speaker 1: Now what happened well--
Speaker 2: I don't know, that's when Willie--it started getting away from me.  Since his last run for mayor which was the one he resigned for after serving, what year was that?  Ninety- what, when?
Speaker 1: Last run was just--
Speaker 2: It was in the two thousands then.
Speaker 1: Yeah just, he just reelected in 2008.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was his fifth term but then he resigned--
Speaker 2: Yeah he resigned when?  Two o-nine [2009]?
Speaker 1: --after ninety days.  It was not--it was, it was still 2008 I think, I'm not--
Speaker 2: Well whenever he--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know what was happening.  And that--he had kind of removed himself from everybody.  The last time I talked to Willie I spoke at a women's luncheon during his campaign, which was in '98 [1998].  So I haven't, I haven't seen him close up since then.
Speaker 1: Since 1998?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.   And I was--(laughter) he was still my child 'cause I wouldn't of been speaking at his luncheon.  Something just happened to him, I don't know what it is, but and whatever I did, if I did anything I'd do it all over again.
Speaker 1: Okay, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause he was worthy.
Story_ID: 625075
Speaker 1: Now, now he's running again--for [U.S.] Congress--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess, and you're actually supporting the incumbent, Congressman Cohen, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  See Steve has been at, was in the legislature twenty years; he served on the county commission [Shelby County Board of Commissioners] with Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] you were asking where--for four years, whatever their terms were.  And Steve just happened to be my, I lived in his district most of that time because he was a Midtown guy.  And you understand Midtown [Memphis, Tennessee] and white flight folks, they're different.  But even in the state, I'd never knew he'd run for Congress.  He was one of the best legislators up there, he was in the House [sic.] and the Senate [Tennessee Senate] I believe, you know during those twenty years.  He got the--but he, he always voted, he had a good voting record.  See if NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had been given a report card at, on the state legislat- like they do on the Congress, he would've gotten an A  (laughter); he was that kind of legislator.  And the first time--this is his third term he ran, that's coming up now--I didn't vote for Steve, for no particular reason, but I voted on the color line.  And I told some little girl who came in Nikki Tinker, nice little girl and--even the name was strange.  But I said, "Baby you got to let people know who you are."  She came because she said, "I'm your soror [in Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]."  And you know at my age what difference does it make about you being my soror (laughter)?  But I voted for her 'cause she was a young black lady.  Two years later, what--I said, "Nikki you got to get out in this community and, and people got to know you," (laughter), "I mean you got to pay some dues."  I said, "Now, now I'll help you out, whatever."  So two years later I saw her at Memphis NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee] it was cel- celebrating its ninetieth, I think that's where I saw Nikki.  But she came to that to tell me she had, she was running.  I said, "Nikki, you running?  I told you what you needed to do."  She said, "I know I got your support."  I said, "I can't tell you that.  No, I can't tell you got my support.  I haven't seen you since the last time."  So that's when I--Willie [W.W. Herenton], A C [HistoryMaker A C Wharton, Jr.], the mayor who lives right across the street that you ever, have you any reason to do him, he lives right across the street.  They were the two mayors then and Russ Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon].  In fact everybody that you say was anybody that y'all have--.  You know we were standing there in front of city hall supporting Steve Cohen and that was just two years ago now.  And I don't know why, Willie turned so on Steve, and he has a good record there.  And Willie started getting stranger and stranger, getting farther and farther--I just don't know what is on, on his mind, I don't know.  So and I'm not gonna--'cause I voted for Steve all the years when I happened to be in his district, which was most of the years in the state legislature.  And if, if I was in his district for the county commissioner I just don't remember that 'cause I know I was in Vasco's district [District 8, Shelby County, Tennessee].  I'm not sure I was in there.  But he was always a good servant, and I had no reason here in 2010 not to support him.
Story_ID: 625076
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I do things wholly--you've heard what?
Speaker 2: Well I've heard like several people say that they, that the thing about Memphis politics is that for some reason the black community which is once together once can't get together now around certain things.  And, and they bemoan that and that there are you know they all have different, there're different sides of it.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: People are in there too often for their own selfish reasons.  That's what happened in the Democratic club [Shelby County Democratic Club].  The, the white people who could put them in a position would go to you: I need you to take this job.  They would turn their backs.  They didn't talk about the eighty thousand, whatever thousand people that had put them in that job.  And we fell for that, we fell for that.  And now we got--politics just aren't what they wanna be.  When they first put the first--Odell Horton who's died, he lived right around the corner too was our first U.S. attorney.  They called us, A.W. [A.W. Willis, Jr.], Russell [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon], me, whoever--Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was the president, his brother, Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy], was he the man over there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And half of those people were lawyers I'm talking about 'cause they knew what every black precinct in Memphis [Tennessee], in Shelby County [Tennessee] had done.  And they asked us--well particular the lawyers more so than me, just the--folks who think better than me.  And Odell Horton was a young man, a young lawyer who had just come to town up here from Bolivar, Tennessee.  And he just seemed to be honest and straightforward, we didn't know anything about--he wasn't even in the movement.  He wasn't even in the, there when were out there fighting.  I don't know if he were even here then.  But they recommended him to, I guess it Bobby Kennedy, or whoever the power that be in Washington [D.C.], whoever swung the deal.  I'm sure it was the president had a lot to--president always have a lot to do with everything.  But we never looked for anything for ourselves.  Vasco [Smith's husband, Vasco Smith, Jr.] was making a good living, they all were making good livings.  Our records would--we--that became my social life; the movement became my social life.  I didn't join bridge clubs or stuff like, not that I--I just didn't have time, and we loved to play bridge, we loved to play bridge.  I forgotten now, but we didn't play it in jail so (laughter) I, I--but your whole life changes.  You have to get involved or--you can't do it on the fringes, and, and I'm still passionate about it.
Story_ID: 625077
Speaker 1: Are you still consulted by people that are involved in politics here in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh, yeah.  They want my support or want to put my name on the stationery.  And I don't know if they ask me what to do, but  I won't tell them,  I mean I'd tell them.  But you still, you--there's nothing wrong with the new but you got to keep something old.
Speaker 1: When, what do you see as the--what do you see had, that has to be done in the future to, to consolidate, I guess the community here in Memphis?
Speaker 2: To consolidate?
Speaker 1: Yeah to consolidate or make a more effective (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They gotta change the law.  When you consolidate, you mean politically?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know there's a big move 'cause the, the county [Shelby County, Tennessee]--see I think it's pretty unfair because we could get a majority vote, the citizens of the county and the city put together.  But you'll never get a majority vote of the county, that's where all the people who had wanted to escape desegregation went to the county.  And they're so scared their schools would be consolidated, even in this consolidated, consolidation effort they have now, schools aren't involved.  And Willie [W.W. Herenton] worked on that so long that they just hated him by time he--(laughter).  But consolidation is what we needed, that makes sense.  Why we need two school systems, now they talking about putting, I forgot now I read the last, how many people--god, they gonna go crazy down there.  Thirteen almost too many, they shouldn't have anything.  And a lot of black folks don't want it because they scared they may lose their little power, they might not get elected to the county commission [Shelby County Board of Commissioners] or the city council [Memphis City Council], whatever they on.  Or the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] or whatever.  So they, those kind of things are more important than--them than the whole community.  But we have so many needs.  It's, it's pitiful.
Story_ID: 625078
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would, you would do differently if you go, could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: I don't think I'd do diff- do differently.  One thing, Smitty [Smith's son, Vasco Smith III] was a baby when I was out in the streets.  But fortunately he had two grandmammas and a granddaddy here; we had good babysitters.  I would probably give him more time than I did 'cause mo- he'd say, "Mommy, who gonna babysit me tonight?"  (Laughter) You know I can remember those little eyes.  But we never neglected him; he was in good hands.  But you can't take away that from children.  I don't think I would've sent five or six year olds when started with the first grade.  See ain't no, we didn't have no books, we were just going from our guts.  Well that made sense, because by time they get to high school they hardened and those kids, Smitty was the first little kid, he didn't go the first year.  He wasn't old enough he went there starting the first, but he started the second, the second year.  But that's the kind of load to put on five and six year old children.  But they could bear it you know in retrospect again better than--they can get kind of tough when they get to high school.  If we're gonna start at a point, start it all together probably, but the court said everybody have that, had part in it you know.  We didn't make all the determinations.  But I, I don't have any, those are the little concerns, they're not really regrets 'cause Smitty is a solid young man.  He's you know I never knew he'd come back to Memphis [Tennessee], he doesn't like Memphis, he was practicing dentistry in Washington [D.C.].  And when he announced at his daddy's [Vasco Smith, Jr.] funeral that he's coming out and take care of me, it was a surprise to me and everybody (laughter).  And, and he's taking good care of me, he really is.  But no, I don't have any regrets.  I don't have any regrets about any particular individual, any particular movement because we went after one by one, one by one.  And, and, and studied the issues, worked out our strategies as well as we could.  We used direct action, we, we used political action.  We used legal action, we used economic sanctions.  I thought there are five I think I just named four, and we combined them.  We didn't have, we didn't have you know any bombings or--we killed Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] of course, we killed Dr. King and a lot of these folks don't want to take responsibility.  And I remind them every time I get a chance: you can't change history, we did it.  I got a little part in it too, we did it.  But it's been a good life, it really has been a good life.  And I've gotten so much out of it.
Story_ID: 625079
Speaker 1: Now once again if you look back over everything you've done to this point what, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  Well let me put it, let me not answer that question because in my book ['Maxine Smith's Unwilling Pupils: Lessons Learned in Memphis's Civil Rights Classroom,' Sherry L. Hoppe and Bruce W. Speck], I don't know why I don't have a book, y'all get my book off of eBay or somewhere (laughter).  And it has a lot--I think one of my greatest accomplishments was fighting to get Willie Herenton [W.W. Herenton] superintendent of schools [Memphis City Schools; Shelby County School District].  Not--doesn't have that much to do with Willie, he was the right man, he was a good man to be there.  But we got rid of the notion that a black person cannot be the top dog; that was what was so important to me, so important to me.  Because from that we have a county mayor, black county mayor, black city mayor, superintendent of schools, a chairman of these various commissions.  Blacks just everywhere, we have better job opportunities, we still ain't up there; we still ain't up nowhere where we ought to be.  'Cause a lot of instances we don't have the completely dedicated people helping to make the decisions, particular in political places.  You know we had a whole lot of our politicians go to jail, they just getting out, right here in Memphis [Tennessee], in Shelby County [Tennessee].  So we've slipped somewhere, we've lost our kids, some--not all of them I think most of our kids are good.  Most of our kids are good, but some of them got lost by the way and, and this is why I hang out there now 'cause we got to find a way to save them; we got a find a way to save them.
Story_ID: 625080
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you about the civil rights museum at the Lorraine--that's something I didn't mention 'cause you're on the board of the Civil Rights Museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee].  But tell me how you got involved in that and what the museum's about.
Speaker 2: Let me see '91 [1991], oh you're approaching now the twentieth year, I think we had our--you ready, are we rolling?
Speaker 1: Yeah we're rolling.
Speaker 2: Civil rights museum is now--well, in, next year will be our twentieth year, and we're in the midst of a big fundraising effort to do a big renovation.  To make sure some of the little--it's quite a story in Memphis [Tennessee], I don't, you've probably found it 'cause you talked to so many Memphians.  But it's a museum for the whole movement, not just, just Memphis.  So we, we, we are in the midst of, of this big--.  But it took a long time, I think we had our formal opening in '91 [1991].  And we tried, since Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed here, well the balcony spot where he was assassinated is quite a prominent place in, in that museum.
Speaker 1: Now this is in the old Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee], I thought I'd just--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) say that, so make sure everybody--anybody watching knows what--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, Lorraine Motel, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about.
Speaker 2: And it still--we're never gonna destroy that structure as it is, we'll always be able to know that was the Lorraine hotel, and that room was Dr. King's.  But some, a group of people it seems to be Jesse Turner [Jesse H. Turner, Sr.], somebody from the union, AFSCME [American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Local 1733], or probably Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] asked us to serve on a, to form a, a board, which became a board, a founding board, I was included in that number.  I know it was Tri-State Bank [Memphis, Tennessee] that Jesse Turner was president.  His son, Jesse, Jr. [Jesse H. Turner, Jr.] is president there now.  And the labor union, they were about to auction that building, the Lorraine, off on the court hall, wherever, the court hall steps where, whatever.  And between the union and A.W. Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.], that's why I know he was the first black to go up there.  He was, he had a lot of influence with that state legislature [Tennessee General Assembly] because the state has really supported us in recent years.  But we had a hard time, (laughter) we had a hard time with, for a while we had some one or so black leaders and presidents that thought were shafting the cost--cause.  But we finally got--there was Chuck Scruggs [Charles Scruggs], I don't know if you met Chuck here, they call him Mr. Chucky [Mr. Chuck] he's on the--he was head of a radio station, WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee].  He was a friend, that's another--it's--so many (unclear) in each other.  I think Chuck was the first black president or head of the radio station.  He's retired from radio now, but he's on TV, he's got a, he's Mr. Chucky on TV to little children now.  But he literally organized us around almost a hat, passing the hat to get some money to get this museum where it will be a real monument in our city, and I think it's become that now.
Story_ID: 625081
Speaker 1: We had almost no corporate support, and now we couldn't stay in existence without corporate support.  So it's not only in Memphis [Tennessee], but from around the country.  'Cause you don't make that much money out of, out of memberships, and people just don't join things.  Not that much money out of admissions; you really need a solid base of corporate supporters.  And oftentimes there have been people--see white folks run it, you know.  If they give money they don't run it.  We have a good board, Benny Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was president of the board, and we've--Jesse [Jesse H. Turner, Jr.] replaced our, our, our vice chair, our vice president--chair, chair, was chairman of the board.  He's a fine young man, he's one of the vice president--he's a black man, president of, of--vice president of First Tennessee Bank [sic. Tri-State Bank, Memphis, Tennessee].  But we keep a well balanced board.  The president--the chairman of our executive committee is white.  One of the biggest donors, one of the kindest, a person who has stayed with that museum [National Civil Rights Museum, Memphis, Tennessee] and put so much of his family foundation and whatnot in the alcove.  We have FedEx here, we have Holiday Inns, it was--Holiday Inn was founded here as such, Holiday Inn has gone to other--.  But we have corporate people who are happy--we have foundations here, Assisi [Assisi Foundation of Memphis, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee] and other foundations.  So it has come from, as I said, passing the hat.  I forgotten this I was at a board meeting last, executive board meeting last week.  Just what our, we looked at last month's income and we had a several hundred thousand dollars surplus, we--that's rare.  Believe that's not a lot of money when we trying to do a $20 million renovation, but we plan, we hope and it's coming that way.  And for the past two weeks, I've been down at a program where I had to speak, I was on a panel.  And I'm just so happy to see the, the--you can hardly get through there to get up to the meeting room; it's growing.  And its, it's just a multiracial thing.  And we wanted it to, to be a real educational, have a real educational focus.  We have a department that focuses on education and history all that.  We have an excellent staff, excellent president, the, the--that runs it, not the elected officer.  But it's come a mighty long way for us and we have built the, have you ever been? If you've been--we built the, the, the new wing across from the old, old part where the balcony is.  I get very excited about that museum, because I think it can do more for Memphis.  And I get the feeling when I'm there, and I mentioned how I felt at that first--and not with all the marches on Washington [D.C.], the repeats and everything.  Well, none is like the eighty- '83 [1983] one [March on Washington].  But you get that same feeling in that museum 'cause it's completely multiracial, multicult- cultural.  And you can hardly get through there without sobbing a bit to yourself.  'Cause we hope it makes you remember and that's why we've got to push the educational aspect.  And we want to use, use that as a learning (unclear) for our community.  We have people coming from all over the Mid-South, you know bringing children from school districts from all around here: Mississippi, Arkansas, Missouri, you know anywhere they can drive here pretty comfortable with a bunch of children.  And we have people coming from all over the world and they're very, very motivated once they leave, leave the museum.  And if you've had the experience you have an idea of what I mean.
Story_ID: 625082
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you another question, I wanted you to really talk about the legacy of your hus- your husband, Vasco Smith [Vasco Smith, Jr.] for a minute before I ask you my last question.
Speaker 2: Oh, Vasco, he was the first black person in Memphis [Tennessee] and Shelby County [Tennessee] elected in an art--at large position, one of the commissioners [on the Shelby County Board of Commissioners] or whatever they called them then, the, the members, they might've been squires I think they called them then.  Something happened, he died and Vasco was elected to fill his position.  But it was a countywide election, and they had to have the election, I don't know how we got the nerve to get out there and run, I had just been elected to the school board [Board of Education of Memphis City Schools; Shelby County Board of Education] couple of years ahead of him.  But he made it, they came out far.  But one thing they didn't have runoffs, and people, for a vacated spot will run.  He probably had eight opponents or some number of opponents, but still, they usually fix it so no one black is gonna win.  They didn't have time to do much about it (laughter).  So he won and he was very vocal member, very vocal.  And he remembers his mother [Florence Smith] was a laborer, a, a maid or something in the MED, which was the public hospital.  And like you know she was treated just like any maid anywhere, and probably worse in the city hospital.  And he was determined, there had been fights over getting the MED, they didn't know it was called, it was called General Hospital [E.H. Crump Hospital; Regional One Health, Memphis, Tennessee]--I was born there.  I don't know what it was called when I was born.  But getting a decent hospital for poor people to go to.  'Cause I mean he had scars, had scars on his legs where he was scalded with hot water.  And how did he go to a doctor, they just wrapped gauze around it and almost ate--I mean he just knew poor people didn't have entry to good medical service.  So that was, he did a lot of good things on that, but that was his shining accomplishment about that.  When he got sick, he'd go to the MED.  The MED is a fine hospital, we finally got the MED to tricker- well not trickery, but some of his fellow commissioners by that time would promise to vote with him.  Let him down, and he had to get the votes in strange places.  One thing, I think Steve Cohen was on that commission and he was one that voted with him of course, you expect Steve to.  But he had a hard time getting it and, which is so surprising 'cause they didn't like him on issues.  He would stop the budget, vote to raise it by a penny, a dollar, some billion dollars, but the school budget anything.  He was just cantankerous and mean and hold up the million--and they didn't like him too well.  But he came out.  They voted unanimously just this year to name the Shelby County administrative building the Vasco A. Smith, Jr. Administrative Building [Vasco A. Smith, Jr. Administration Building], which is unheard of in Memphis, Tennessee.  Especially for that kind of Negro (laughter).  So he, he, he was a great man, he was a great husband.  And he left his legacy, he used to stand in the, we had--this was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] we called it labor development center where we were trying to get jobs in stores, shopping centers where blacks couldn't do nothing but bag groceries.  Sometimes he'd be the last man that's sitting on one of them little cars, he'd love those little cars out there, with his picket sign trying to break, you know we all helped and I remember Election Day, I think that's the election when Russ got beat, (laughter) Russ Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] got beat.  Well he, down there he got put in jail and I had to stop what I was doing and try--on that Election Day to go get him out of jail.  But he was tenacious, he was honest, he was knowledgeable, and he was, he was a good public servant.  And finally his colleagues recognized it.  He was a likeable person now, full of jive and everything (laughter), loved jazz, loved living.
Story_ID: 625083
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Gosh, we've talked about some--well you give me your last question, I can't think now.
Speaker 1: Okay we've got to get the book ['Maxine Smith's Unwilling Pupils: Lessons Learned in Memphis's Civil Rights Classroom,' Sherry L. Hoppe and Bruce W. Speck] too but the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who gave of--much of herself as possible because of my love for my people.  I would be meaningless without my people.  They gave so much to me.  Why, in 1955, I was twenty-five years old, those old men that I say sitting in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], in another year or so they looked at me as their leader.  Why?  I adored them, they saw--what I'm saying is my exposure to some of these great people, just a privilege of being three years in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] with Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Of knowing Thurgood Marshall; of, of kissing Medgar Evers just before he went to his death.  Of, of all the giants that I had a chance because my people pushed me.  They will go nameless; they won't be on HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].  And they are indeed history makers.  But I want people to always know that I gave it all I had while I tried to do the right thing.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess those last words are what, what I feel deeply.
