Story_ID: 654455
Speaker 1: So my name is [HistoryMaker] Randall Pinkston.  You've met--I'm your interviewer.  You've met the wonderful, magnificent, brilliant Mr. Scott Stearns, our videographer.  And we've told you about The HistoryMakers.  So to begin our interview, real simple, Dr. Smith, we would like for you to give us your first, give us your name and the spelling of your name.
Speaker 2: Robert Smith [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith], R-O-B-E-R-T, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 20, 1936; Terry, Mississippi, in the county of Hinds [Hinds County].
Story_ID: 654456
Speaker 1: We'd like to first talk about your parents and your grandparents.  Your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was John Smith [Joe Smith].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do favorites.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, Scott [Scott Stearns]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Favorites?
Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot about that, yeah.  Thank you.  Before we talk about your fa- your father--thank you.  We have to do this little funny thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what is your favorite food?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) My favorite foods, one of my favorite foods is really many things, collard greens and potatoes and (laughter) okra, peas, peanuts.
Speaker 2: But just, if you had to pick one.
Speaker 1: Probably my most favorite food, well, my favorite breakfast food really is grits and eggs.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Favorite color?
Speaker 1: Favorite color is blue and red.
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination is perhaps New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Favorite season?
Speaker 1: Favorite season is summer.
Speaker 2: And your favorite saying?
Speaker 1: My favorite saying is: keep it simple.
Story_ID: 654457
Speaker 1: Now back to your father.  Your father's name is?
Speaker 2: John Smith [Joe Smith].
Speaker 1: Do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do know his date of birth.  I don't remember it right off hand.  It's 1897 [sic. March 1, 1896].
Speaker 1: And do you know where?
Speaker 2: Terry [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: What about his parents, your paternal grandmother [Millie Smith] and grandfather, who were they?
Speaker 2: And my grandfather on my dad's side was named John Smith, and I don't have his date of birth.  He was born in Charleston, Mississippi.  He was born shortly after slavery and as the story goes, learned how to read and write and got into a fight with his boss.   And his boss shot at him, and he ran through the woods and thought he was getting on a freight train headed north, and it was actually headed south.  And he got off cold and hungry in Terry.  And that's where my father's parents originated.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather, John Smith, do you know what kind of work he was doing in Charleston before he had to leave?
Speaker 2: He was, he was a plant- he was born on a plantation in Charleston.
Speaker 1: So he was a farmer?
Speaker 2: Farmer, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he, so he mistakenly arrives in Terry.
Speaker 2: Mistakenly arrives in Terry, thought he was on a train headed north, but the train was actually headed south.  He was running away from his boss man in Charleston.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he, how old he was and how he managed to survive in those early days?
Speaker 2: Don't know exact, exact age.  You know, I could probably figure it out at some point.  But he was approximate- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who helped him out?
Speaker 2: He got, he got odd jobs, he says, working and started saving money and bought some land, yeah, bought some land in the 1800s.  And that land has remained in the family since that time.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather, who arrived penniless with nothing but the clothes on his back--
Speaker 2: Nothing but the clothes on his back, exactly.
Speaker 1: --managed to save enough money to buy some land.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: How--do you know how many acres he bought?
Speaker 2: At that point, it was between two and three hundred.
Speaker 1: What kind of work was he doing to save up enough money to buy that much land (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was a very, he was a very smart man.  He was a very gifted man.  In fact, it's amazing.  He was able to do, apparently do odd jobs for white people--it was the only people who had money--and was able to get a farm and build a two story house that looked like the plantation house that he left in (laughter), that he left in, in Charleston.
Speaker 1: So he was a skilled craftsman.
Speaker 2: Skilled craftsman.  I wish you could have seen his house, yeah.
Speaker 1: You remember it?
Speaker 2: Of course, with the great room and the (laughter) kitchen that was built off from the house so that in case of a fire, two story house with a winding staircase (laughter), complete self-sufficient house with--in fact, he had--I hate to call it--sharecroppers.  The only difference between his sharecroppers and the one that he left is that they became family friends as we grew up, but grits mill, molasses mill, the whole, you know, big store room with cured meat all the year around--my grandfather on my father's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grandfather on your father's side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 654458
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your grandmother on your father's side, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Millie.
Speaker 1: Millie.  Do you know her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Banks Smith.
Speaker 1: Millie Banks--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm sorry.  That's my other--her name was--cut that, please.
Speaker 1: No, that's okay.  Don't worry, don't worry about that.  We don't have to have that.  So Millie Smith (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can give it to you.
Speaker 1: And do you know how he met or how old they were?
Speaker 2: I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: How many children they had--other--so your father [Joe Smith] had siblings, did he?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father had siblings.  My father had nine siblings.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where was he in the, in the list?
Speaker 2: He was, he was number one.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and they were all born in Terry [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: All born in Terry.
Speaker 1: Now you indicated that your grandfather [John Smith] had learned how to read and--
Speaker 2: And write.
Speaker 1: --and write--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and compute.  Do you know how your grand- who taught him?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.  I really don't know how that happened.  But he learned how to read and write and is reflected by his accomplishments that he did because he came to Terry and was able to assemble and become--in his own right, have a self--I call it a self-sustaining farm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what about your--his wife, Millie Smith, your grandmother?  Do you know anything about her education?
Speaker 2: They were all grade school people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she did have some school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some education, right.
Speaker 1: And you don't know what year she was born, or do you?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just curious, do you have, or does anyone in your family have, any writings from your grandfather or papers or letters or documents or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were still alive when you were a little boy?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 654459
Speaker 1: Did they [Smith's paternal grandparents, Millie Smith and John Smith] ever talk about their lives when they were young in Mississippi during Reconstruction?  Because they were alive during Reconstruction I would assume, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did they, what do you remember them telling you about those years?
Speaker 2: Well, they talked about same thing that was imparted to my father [Joe Smith] and that was the struggle and--of poor people.  And they talked about lynchings and beatings and how people took advantage of poor people through the plantation system.  And in fact, my father was instrumental in helping--well, my father was instrumental in helping a lot of other poor people there because he had transport- always, as far as I can remember, had transportation and helped other people to work on our farm to get money to go north on one hand or to save money to build them, to get land and to build them a house.  At that point, that group of people build--felt that a man, when he gets married, ought to have a house.  And they would use--go out in the woods and haul lumber to the sawmill and get lumber hewed out and prepare it to help people, one person at a time, to build a house.  You know, that occurred with some of my older brothers, my uncles.
Speaker 1: But be- before we get to them, I'm try- trying to do a little (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --chronology--chronological order here before we leave your grandparents.  So you say your father was the oldest.  And, so his younger siblings, do you know what--how many boys, how many girls?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were, there were three girls, and the rest were boys.
Speaker 1: And did they go to college?  Did any of them go to college?
Speaker 2: No, none of them went to college.
Story_ID: 654460
Speaker 1: Now let's move over to your mother.  Her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Wilma.
Speaker 1: Maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Porter.
Speaker 1: P-O-R-T-E-R?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, Wilma Porter Smith.  Do you know her birth date or her birth year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can give you that, obviously.  She died 18--1985.  And she was--died on her eightieth birth- not her eightieth birthday, but she was coming up on eighty years old when she died (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So 1905 [sic. 1907].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Terry [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: And do you know her parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her parents, her father was named George Porter [George Porter, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her mom?
Speaker 2: Her mom was Matilda.
Speaker 1: Matilda.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Binghams Porter.
Speaker 1: Matilda Binghams Porter [sic. Lilly Bingham Porter].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And were they all farmers?
Speaker 2: They were all farmers.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether her parents owned their land?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they owned their land.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much?
Speaker 2: It was a hundred, over a hundred acres, somewhere between 102, a hundred acres.  And most of that land is still in the family since the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Do you know how grand- your grandfather, George Porter, acquired that property?
Speaker 2: A similar fashion.
Speaker 1: To your--
Speaker 2: The other--
Speaker 1: --grandfa- father, George (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --John Smith?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Do you know where--was Grandfather George Porter born in Terry also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about schooling?  Just grade school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Grade schools.
Speaker 1: Grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many siblings did your mother have?
Speaker 2: My mother had six siblings.
Speaker 1: And girls, boys?
Speaker 2: She had three brothers and three sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your mother also was grade school educated?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: My mother, actually had started--she was in high school at Jackson State [Jackson College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] getting ready to go to college (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And met my daddy [Joe Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was intending to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, if I'm not mistaken, you could teach school with a high school diploma.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Did she do any teaching?  Do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she never did any teaching.
Speaker 1: She never did.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So she met your dad and that was it.
Speaker 2: That was it.
Story_ID: 654461
Speaker 1: Now did your dad [Joe Smith] get his own farm, or did he farm on his, on your grandfather's property?
Speaker 2: He farmed on my grandfather's property; and then, and bought additional land.
Speaker 1: So the two to three hundred acres in the Smith family expanded to what, four or five hundred?
Speaker 2: Initially, to around three hundred.
Speaker 1: Initially to around--okay.  Now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have twelve siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Girls, boys?
Speaker 2: Two girls and ten boys.
Speaker 1: And where are you in the list?
Speaker 2: I'm half, I'm the--
Speaker 1: In the middle?
Speaker 2: --middle.
Speaker 1: You're the middle child.
Speaker 2: Middle child.  No, no, no, I'm second from the last.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're second from the last, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're all--
Speaker 2: There's a set of twins in there too.
Speaker 1: So you're almost the baby.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Almost the baby.
Speaker 2: They call us--called me a knee baby.  No, no, no, I'm the--yeah, I'm the second from the last.
Speaker 1: And what's a knee baby?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess that's the last one--
Speaker 1: Oh, to sit on the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --on the knee.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now describe for me the house that you grew up in.  How many rooms?  Did it have a porch?  De- describe the house.
Speaker 2: I--my house is still living.  The house where I was born is still living.  In fact, we had a porch that stretched the whole porch with a swing (laughter).  Had a oak tree (laughter).  And I grew up in (unclear), a seven room house.
Speaker 1: Was this in the rural or in--
Speaker 2: In the rural.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seven room house with two stories?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --single story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was this some--your father built this house?
Speaker 2: My father built that house.
Speaker 1: You have indoor plumbing, indoor toilet?
Speaker 2: Not initially.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: My father--that was one of the things that made my father a community leader.  We were fortunate in growing, to grow up in a community where there were black farmers who owned their own land.  And it's amazing, back that time, usually services like electricity and all those kinds of things stopped.
Speaker 1: When it got to the--
Speaker 2: Black community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black community.
Speaker 2: And my father, along with some other people, took the lead in getting electricity extended to that black area of the community when I was I guess in grade school [Terry Grove School, Terry, Mississippi].  And later on, was--put a pump in and was able to put in what we call a septic tank (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: A septic tank, um-hm.
Speaker 2: A septic tank, back then.  And also (clears throat) took the lead in getting telephones and all that stuff, way, way back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For, for the community.
Speaker 2: For the community.
Story_ID: 654462
Speaker 1: Now inside your home, was there a piano?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You took music?
Speaker 2: I took music, yes.
Speaker 1: And your siblings also took music?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, just?
Speaker 2: The music, I--that came with me.
Speaker 1: That came with you?
Speaker 2: That came with me.  Well, my uncle, who worked for the Illinois railroad, he was a postman for the Illinois railroad (clears throat).  And my, and his wife gave me a small book called 'Famous Black Americans' [ph.].  At that time, it was only about twenty or twenty-five black Americans, the usual, Booker T. Washington, that bunch of people (laughter), Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], Dean Dixon.  And the person--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dean Dixon.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: (Cough) Dean Dixon was the first black to direct a major philharmonic orchestra--
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: --the New York [New York Philharmonic] and the Philadelphia philharmonic orchestra [Philadelphia Orchestra].  And the person that I identified with was Dean Dixon (laughter).  And so I went out and started crying and yelling to my parents [Wilma Porter Smith and Joe Smith] to buy me a piano.  And they, first they was, you know, they kind of cast it to the side.  But I had a principal who was Booker T. Washington trained, called William Henry Garrett [ph.], that my parents respected a great deal because he was community minded, Booker T. Washington educated, Booker T. Washington all the way down the line (laughter), who believed in discipline and education and helping kids.  And he was--he played the piano, all that kind of stuff.  And he says, "Go buy that boy a piano," and my daddy respecting Mr. Garrett, bought me a piano.
Story_ID: 654463
Speaker 1: That was not an inexpensive item, so your dad must have been rather well off?
Speaker 2: No, my daddy wasn't well off, but he was a man who worked all day and half the night too, and I mean that.  He was, he operated, too, a self-contained farm.  But his principal income was what we called a livestock buy at that time.
Speaker 1: A what?
Speaker 2: A livestock dealer, a livestock buyer.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He bought herds of cattle.  Many times poor black people, and many times white people, couldn't weather cattle through the winter, couldn't feed them.  And many times, unfortunately, he would go out and buy cattle like that and bring them to the farm and feed them up and then had a sale twice a week.  And also people who had the real farms were white people.  And sometimes back then he would go out and buy several thousand dollars' worth of cattle.  In fact, that also made me decide that I want to be a physician because many times we had to be out in a pasture early in the morning for my mother [Wilma Porter Smith] would always insist that we could never be late for school.  And we'd be in the pasture.  And he would--my daddy could go out in the pasture and kick a cow, a bull and tell them whether he was a good bull or a bad bull (laughter), or if somebody wanted a good milk cow or if he wanted to give the cow to--for good stocker cow, they would call it or a good breeder cow.  Oh, he could tell you, he could look at a cow and tell whether the cow would breed well.
Speaker 1: Why did you all have to go out early with him?
Speaker 2: We'd have to go out early because many times these people had to go to work.
Speaker 1: Oh, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And in the springtime, you ever heard of dew, what they called dew?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the morning dew.
Speaker 2: The morning dew.  (Laughter) You would be wet.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You have to come home and change clothes and had to be at the school door by eight o'clock (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your mother sent you with him because he had to drop you all off at school?
Speaker 2: No.  He would have to go--see, we'd have to go with him as he went out to buy this herd of cattle or a pig or a cow or a chicken (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But why?
Speaker 2: That was his living.
Speaker 1: I know, but why did you all have to go?
Speaker 2: Well, he wanted us to go because we, you know, we may have to help load them up--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --and bring them back to our farm, you see.
Speaker 1: So you were his helpers.
Speaker 2: We was his helpers, and in particular, at that time, I could figure out things well.  He'd tell me, he'd say, "Robert [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith], put twenty down here," and you know, and I've have to--and he could, he could look at a cow or an animal walking around, and he could tell the weight, all that, age, weight, poundage, whether it was a good milk cow or a good heifer cow or a good whatever.  And he apparently never steered people wrong because at that time people was plowing mules.  And there was good plowing mules, and there was mules that wouldn't plow.  Or take a horse, there were good hor- riding horses, ponies.
Speaker 1: Any idea where your father learned all of this?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It was a gift.  And I'm telling you, even to today, I have had people to come to see me and tell me, says, "Well, daddy" or, "Doc, if you know humans a tenth or a quarter as well as your daddy knew animals, then I'd like to try you as a doctor."
Speaker 1: Really, to (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  And I'm saying to you, people didn't have any money, but he never cheated anybody.  You know, he just dealt fairly one at a time with everybody he met.
Speaker 1: And he had black clients and white clients (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And white clients.  And people called him Mr. Joe [Joe Smith].
Speaker 1: So you're in Terry, Mississippi, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: And did you hear what I said?
Speaker 1: Yes, I heard that, Mr. Joe.
Speaker 2: And people called him Mr. Joe.
Speaker 1: Did the white people call him Mr. Joe?
Speaker 2: No, but black people did.
Speaker 1: But black people did, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 654464
Speaker 1: So you're in Terry, Mississippi in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], and you're in Mississippi.  So tell me about your interactions or your family's interactions with the white community.  Where there any problems?  Let me just cut to the chase.
Speaker 2: Well, (clears throat) my father [Joe Smith] protected us from the white community.  Like, when we went to the store, we went to the store to buy something, and we had the money (laughter) and we left the store.  We never went to a side door for anything.  My fortune--daddy was fortunate enough to buy in quantity, in bulk, and to feed a large family.  And my mother [Wilma Porter Smith] loved to cook.  And, so we went to the movies in Jackson [Mississippi], went to Farish Street.
Speaker 1: Alamo?
Speaker 2: The Alamo [Alamo Theatre, Jackson, Mississippi] and the Booker-T [Booker-T Theatre, Jackson, Mississippi] (laughter), you know, every Saturday.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--someone else told me about the Booker-T.  It had closed down by the time I came along (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: And there was a Amite Theatre [Jackson, Mississippi], too, right?
Speaker 2: It was an Amite Theatre too, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we principally went to the Booker-T and the Alamo.
Speaker 1: In the black business district.
Speaker 2: In the black business district because, you know, we had a cousin that ran the front desk at the Alamo.  And when she'd see us coming, daddy would give us fifty cent (laughter) and my dad, and my daddy--when she'd see us coming, and she'd watch and see if Mr. Lehman [Arthur Lehman], the Jew that owned it, was--had his back turned.  And we was under the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Under the turnstile.
Speaker 2: --under the turnstile.
Speaker 1: I remember that turnstile, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that made a difference between a good Saturday and a bad Saturday 'cause--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) 'Cause you could use the fifty cents to buy some popcorn.
Speaker 2: It meant popcorn, a hot dog (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hot dogs.
Speaker 2: --and a drink and some (unclear), you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your growing up was a pleasant time with no--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --no, no, no issues.
Speaker 2: And then when we, when we got through with the movies, then we walked down to, down Farish Street to (clears throat) to Pascagoula [Street].  It was called the City Grocery [Capital City Grocery Company, Jackson, Mississippi] then.  It's where the, it's where the center is sitting now, the--right there on the corner.  And my daddy would be parked.  And we came home.
Story_ID: 654465
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you this.  In your house, say it's a Sunday.  What are some sights and sounds or smells that you might experience in your house?
Speaker 2: Baked chicken, baked chickens and dressing and a pot full of greens (laughter) and peas.  My house on Sunday was like a, like a cafeteria.  My mother [Wilma Porter Smith] would start cooking every week on Friday.  She (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On Friday?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She cooked pies and cake and all the desserts on the weekend and cooked breakfast on Sunday morning, got us out to Sunday school.  And then she'd finish the cooking, and we would have enough food to serve not only all of us, we had a dining room kitchen and a kitchen table and invited the preacher many times.  And then our extended family and fam- we would serve from on--at--my mother would serve food from after church until dark--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --until it was time to go back to church.
Speaker 1: So there's--there are eleven, including your parents, in your family, eleven people in your family.
Speaker 2: Well, it was eleven people in my family, but when I grew up there was no more than six of us at home at the same time.
Speaker 1: Oh, because your older siblings were gone.
Speaker 2: Gone, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I see, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: The first half of my siblings could actually be my parents.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: In fact, that's what made for my success.  My older brothers and sisters helped us.  It was tragic for my mother in a sense that they would all come down from Jackson [Mississippi], not all, but the three or four who had lived in Jackson with their families, they came down every Sunday (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your mother had to cook for everybody (laughter).
Speaker 2: And my mother had to cook for everybody (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had a, we had a banquet every Sunday.
Speaker 1: --did--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did any of your siblings help your mom?
Speaker 2: Well, my mama didn't want for much.  She had--
Speaker 1: She didn't want anybody in her kitchen.
Speaker 2: She had only one daughter-in-law that she would allow in her kitchen, and that was one called Verlie [ph.].  And I don't know what that was about.
Speaker 1: Only one.
Speaker 2: Only one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about your sisters?  Were they allowed in the kitchen?
Speaker 2: My sister, Liz [Liz Smith (ph.)], did a little bit.  But my mother encouraged everybody to sit down, and she did the serving.
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to cook?
Speaker 2: I learned how to cook.  My mother taught three of us how to cook.  She taught three of us.
Speaker 1: Did you ask her, or did she say come here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she said, "You--three of y'all need to know how to cook."  And she says, "A man need to know how to iron his own shirt," yeah (laughter).  That was just her philosophy.
Story_ID: 654466
Speaker 1: We can stay on your family for a while 'cause it's fascinating.  But let me move to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I'm gonna tell you, I can't, I can't tell you anything.  We had struggles in our family, as most families do.  But growing up with older sisters and brothers was fun.  It was always somewhere to go.  You know, my sisters all wanted to adopt me.  In fact, I grew up on Isaiah Montgomery [Street] because of my sister.  She lived on Isaiah Montgomery--
Speaker 1: In Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: --in Jackson (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you split your time between Terry [Mississippi] and Jackson.
Speaker 2: That's exactly.
Speaker 1: So you were close to the College Park pool [Jackson, Mississippi].  I don't know.  Was there a pool there then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, Col- College Park pool (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: And the auditorium with the concerts.
Speaker 2: Auditorium, and she didn't have children.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: And I was an only child in her house (laughter) with--
Speaker 1: So you got everything you wanted, huh?
Speaker 2: --with a case of Coca-Cola sitting in the corner (laughter).
Speaker 1: Didn't have to ask (laughter).
Speaker 2: Didn't have to ask (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know all that sugar wasn't good for you.  Just kidding (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654467
Speaker 1: --Dr. Smith [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith], what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended a school called Terry Grove in Terry [Terry Grove School].
Speaker 1: Terry Grove in Terry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Terry, Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was an all-black school.
Speaker 2: All-black school.
Speaker 1: Was this first through sixth grades?
Speaker 2: First through, first through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Face--first through eighth grade.  Do you, do you, do you remember who you, who your principal was or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  My principal was W.--William Henry Garrett [ph.].  In fact, that was another smart move my daddy [Joe Smith] made.  There was a school called Mount Eva [ph.], which was in a mile walking distance of my house.  It was a Rosenwald school.  It was a two room schoolhouse.  And my daddy and another family that he married into, called the Owens [ph.] family, decided to move us to Terry because they had a principal there named William Henry Garrett that had gone to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Trained by Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Trained by Booker T. Washington.  And it was a four room schoolhouse (laughter).  And it's still, and it's been converted to a house now that still exists.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the Rosenwald, that it was a Rosenwald school.  Could you just briefly described what the Rosenwald schools were because they were all over the South for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at that time, Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], as we called it, was the largest retailer, similar to what, Walton's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.].
Speaker 2: --Walmarts are today.  And Sears and Roebuck family founded a foundation called Rosenwald Foundation [Julius Rosenwald Fund] that went across the South providing at least some modicum of education that states like Mississippi did not do.  And it was particularly important, the Rosenwald Foundation.  And they build these two room schoolhouses in rural areas all over the South.
Speaker 1: Because the, neither the state nor the county nor the localities were providing public schools for black kids.
Speaker 2: Was providing public schools for black kids.
Speaker 1: Now did the state at least pay the salaries of the teachers?
Speaker 2: I--they were--it was so minimal because now--my [paternal] grandfather [John Smith], because he had this big house, pl- plantation type house, used to provide housing for some of the teachers.  They didn't have cars.  In fact, my father felt way back, the way to success was not through education necessarily but through private enterprise because teachers had to borrow money from him (laughter) to survive from one year to another.  These people was making a few hundred dollars a month.  Most of them didn't have cars.  In fact, most public school teachers were not able to buy cars in Mississippi until the '60s [1960s], most, most of them.  Did you hear what I said?
Speaker 1: Yes, most of them were not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them.
Speaker 1: --able to buy cars--
Speaker 2: To buy cars.
Speaker 1: --until the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Until the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know that to be a fact.  My mother, who taught school in Yazoo County [Mississippi], was one of those who couldn't buy a car until the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Until the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And the salaries were unequal.  The black teachers got less money than the--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  That didn't happen until the '40s [1940s], when Gladys Noel Bates filed a suit [Gladys Noel Bates v. State of Mississippi].  In fact, I call her mother Aunt Sue (laughter) because of when I came back to Jackson [Mississippi], she was still a civil rights activist.  And my associate was her uncle, her nephew.  And she used to invite me in and feed me and made me call her Aunt Sue.
Speaker 1: You mentioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gladys Noel Bates, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you mentioned Gladys Noel Bates, and for our people who are doing just transcription and for people who might watch your interview later, she was an African American woman in Mississippi who was a teacher who filed a lawsuit against the state to equalize the pay for all teachers.
Speaker 2: For all teachers, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And then she had to leave the state.
Speaker 2: Well, she was fired (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she left the, she was--
Speaker 2: She was fired.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She was fired, harassed and couldn't make a living in Mississippi.  And she and her husband [John M. Bates] moved to Denver, Colorado.  But that was the beginning of teachers beginning to make some semblance of a salary that was livable, but it was still unequal to white teachers.
Speaker 1: And the other f- factor with that is that the pension systems were also different.
Speaker 2: For a long time there was no pension system.  When a black teacher retired, people brought sacks of potatoes and peas and chickens and stuff like that.  And they taught until they couldn't do anything else because there was no pension system.
Story_ID: 654468
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject in school, that's interesting (laughter).  My favorite subject in school was really history, really, probably.
Speaker 1: When did you become interested in medicine?
Speaker 2: I became interested in medicine in grade school [Terry Grove School, Terry, Mississippi] because my--I brought--made my folks [Wilma Porter Smith and Joe Smith] by me a piano, and they were paying for me for piano lessons three times a week.  And--
Speaker 1: How much, how much were those lessons?
Speaker 2: I don't recall (laughter) that.
Speaker 1: Fifty cents, a dollar?
Speaker 2: Something.  But whatever it was, we had, they had to pay.  They was paying for me piano lessons.  And I had friends who--and I'll never forget it, 1945, could come off the, off the cray--playground, and we'd have the radio playing, "Caldonia, Caldonia," (laughter)--
Speaker 1: "What makes your big"--
Speaker 2: --"big head so hard" ['Caldonia'] (laughter).  And they could hear it and pick up the tune.  And I was paying my lessons, paying for my lessons, and I could never do that.  And I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait.  So your, so your friends could sit on the piano and pick out the tune but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you couldn't.
Speaker 2: I couldn't.
Speaker 1: And they were, you were taking lessons--
Speaker 2: And I was taking lessons.
Speaker 1: --and they weren't.
Speaker 2: And they wasn't (laughter).  And, so I don't remember my age, but I couldn't've been, I should've had no more than seven or eight or ten.  I could sit there and play classical piano.  In fact, people encouraged me to stay on the piano because, you know, at the end of the year, there was, even back then there was a recital (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Recital.
Speaker 2: But the last recital I participated in, I--it--I worked on the recital from Thank- from Christmas to the end of the year.  And I said never, never (laughter), never, never.  So in grade school, I started saying the other person, one of those other people in that book was Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew].
Speaker 1: The book of famous Negroes.
Speaker 2: Of famous Negroes, of famous black Americans.  I then decided that I was gonna be like Charles Drew.
Story_ID: 654469
Speaker 1: So you went from Dean Dixon the con- the conductor.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) To Dean Dixon to Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew].
Speaker 1: To Charles Drew.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was it?  You just liked the way they looked (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, but there was just the influence.  Now what made me do that, I don't know.  But it also made me a little different because some of my family and some of the students told me, "You don't know what you want to do."  So, you know, that's kind of crazy, a country boy from Terry, Mississippi, in grade school [Terry Grove School] saying he want to be a physician.  And (laughter) are you following me?  And certainly there was no black physicians around.  But I can't say that I wasn't exposed to a physician because it happened to have been two things.  I had a white Jewish physician, who was a bird hunter who wanted to come down and hunt birds on my property's land.  And my daddy [Joe Smith], being the bigot he was, he would ask my daddy to go out in the woods with him, and my daddy would say, "Well, take that boy," (laughter), you know.  And he took me (laughter) and I would start asking him questions and we would start interacting with these different questions.  And he, and then sometimes on these bird hunts he would bring me material.  And he, when he retired, he gave a set of medical books.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably ten.
Speaker 1: So you were first exposed to medicine by a white Jewish doctor--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who was a bird hunter on your daddy's land (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dad's pro- Daddy's property, yeah.
Speaker 1: How improbable is that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was (laughter) not that improbable, but that's the (laughter), that's the circumstances.
Story_ID: 654470
Speaker 1: Who provided you with medical care--
Speaker 2: I was gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you had to--
Speaker 2: --I was gonna say--my daddy, as I told you, was a resource person.  And he was a resource person for getting medical care out of Crystal Springs [Mississippi].  There were a couple of doctors in Crystal Springs, but he used one called Dr. Eubanks [Oscar G. Eubanks].  Dr. Eubanks was a white physician that, all my daddy had to do was call him 'cause my daddy was--even when the other persons may not have any money, he was, he would tell Dr. Eubanks to come to our house.  And he would lead Dr. Eubanks to wherever he needed to go, many times to--
Speaker 1: To help people.
Speaker 2: --to help people.  In fact, I remember one time when I got sick.  I got sick.  I was telling you about my mother [Wilma Porter Smith] and these banquets.  She had prepared one of these banquets that involved making ice cream.  And she'd make that custard.  And this custard had set out too long.  And on this particular Monday, everybody was working, but I was left playing with my daddy's oldest grandchild, my old- daddy's oldest grandchild and I were about the same age.  And mother cooked what we called the noon meal at that time and was trying to make us wait 'til everybody else came for the noon meal.  And we insisted on having some of the ice cream.  We'd sit there and (laughter) froze--turn the freezer like the (unclear), you know.  Usually, all the custard would be used up on Sunday.  But this particular Sunday there was some extra custard.  That stuff was apparently full of salmonella 'cause by the time everybody else came to dinner, we was having nausea and vomiting and about ready to die.  And my daddy ran and called Dr. Eubanks, and he came out and laughed at my daddy and said, "Daddy--Joe [Joe Smith], what you trying to do, kill them children?"  (Laughter) And--
Speaker 1: Was Dr. Eubanks black?
Speaker 2: Dr. Eubanks was white.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was white, okay, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dr. Eubanks was white.  And he (laughter), and he came for something, some mag citrate [magnesium citrate].  But anyway, we stopped vomiting (laughter), and of course, my mama knew not to feed that ice cream to the rest of the family (laughter).  This was Monday now, see.  (Laughter) That custard had set out.
Speaker 1: For a minute.  So you had exposure to two doctors.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did becoming ill make you want to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Well, it reinforced my desire to be a doctor and helping people, because now that's one of the things that I've always wanted to do.  I got that from my daddy and my granddaddy.
Story_ID: 654471
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Went to high school at Utica Junior College [Hinds Community College].
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had a high school there then, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, then they had--it was called Hinds County Agricultural High School [Utica Institute-Hinds County Agricultural High School, Colored, Utica, Mississippi] at that time.  And, now this is a very interesting story too.  A man named Shine Davis [Herman H. Davis] from Utica convinced the county in 1948 that they should purchase a struggling school called Utica Institute that had been founded by William H. Holtzclaw.  It was a struggling school that they had relegated off to one of the poorest areas in the county, very westernmost tip of southern Hinds County [Mississippi], Utica, six miles south of the City of Utica.  And up until that point, for rural Hinds County kids like me, there was no high school.  If you wanted to go to high school, you had to leave home and go to U- Lanier [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi].  Kids who had gone to high school from Terry [Mississippi], when I came along, either went to Lanier or went down to Brookhaven [Mississippi], to Alexander High [Alexander High School]--
Speaker 1: So you really had to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or went over--
Speaker 1: --move from home and live with someone near the school 'cause you couldn't commute from Terry to Lanier every day, could you?
Speaker 2: Well, you could if you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was--
Speaker 2: --transportation--
Speaker 1: --tation--
Speaker 2: --but most people didn't.
Speaker 1: People didn't.
Speaker 2: So when the county bought--
Speaker 1: Utica.
Speaker 2: --Utica Institute, it became Hinds County AHS.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, and I was bused from the east side of the county, in Terry, forty-five miles to the west side of the county, through country roads.  I had to get up at four o'clock in the morning and walk about two miles to a central dropout point if my daddy [Joe Smith] wasn't home, you know, in his profession.  He tried to be home if it was raining--and be at a bus stop at 5:30 and take a two and half mile bus trip across the county.
Speaker 1: I'm just curious.  Was there a closer white high school?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were passing three white high schools in--
Speaker 2: Three white high schools.  And--
Speaker 1: --in high--
Speaker 2: --and of course--see, the concept at that time was separate but equal.
Speaker 1: Right, which was basically separate and unequal.
Speaker 2: Separate but unequal, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I assume that science courses were probably your strength in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I got exposed to a guy called W.D. Moore, who had been Tougaloo trained, who was my chemistry teacher.  But, and this was one of the first times that I was exposed to great teachers in the, in the arts, history, English, that had gone to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] and Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], at AHS.
Story_ID: 654472
Speaker 1: So you stay there until your twelfth grade--you graduate.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm--
Speaker 2: Graduate and fortunately at the top of my class.
Speaker 1: So this would be late '40s [1940s], 18--
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], 1953.
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], nine- 1953.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were subject to the draft.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did--were--
Speaker 2: That came later.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, but you had to register at eighteen.
Speaker 2: Had to register at the--eighteen.
Speaker 1: Eighteen, dun, dun, dun, dun, da, dah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had to register in '55 [1955].  No.  Yeah?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you, so you got out of high school [Utica Institute-Hinds County Agricultural High School, Colored, Utica, Mississippi] before you're eighteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got out of high school before I was eighteen, yeah.  I got out of high school way before I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: How did you do that?
Speaker 2: Double promotions.
Speaker 1: How many?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) At least two.  I was--as you can see, I had what they would--if I had come along now they would put me on this, whatever this drug is for.
Speaker 1: Ritalin.
Speaker 2: Ritalin (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're trying to say that you were undiagnosed ADHD?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was undiagnosed, exactly (laughter).  I was di- that is exactly.  And--
Speaker 1: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Speaker 2: And one of the reasons that I believe in discipline.  And you know what my treatment was?
Speaker 1: What was your treatment?
Speaker 2: My treatment was, "Robert [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith], sit down."
Speaker 1: And if you didn't?
Speaker 2: If I didn't, I was afraid that they'd tell my mama [Wilma Porter Smith] (laughter).  That's what the treatment was.  Did you hear what I said?  Know what the treatment was?  What?
Speaker 1: Tell your mama.
Speaker 2: Robert, sit down.  And finally, my teachers was compassionate people, and when they couldn't do anything with me, they would pass me on to another grade for somebody else to deal with (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did they use corporal punishment?
Speaker 2: And of course--I'm trying to tell you.  My daddy [Joe Smith] (laughter) never hit me, but my mama would try.  And I didn't want my mama to hit me.  My mama got me once.  She got me once mistakenly.  She--
Speaker 1: Mistakenly?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My daddy and parents had always taught us never--to mind your own business.  And we were taught with--and I had an incident in grade school [Terry Grove School, Terry, Mississippi] where the principal that they appreciated and regarded, Mr. Garrett [William Henry Garrett (ph.)], had told us that we were never to fight along the way and we don't--you know, told us the proper manners and going when we go through town and all that.  And one afternoon we were walking home, tired and hungry.  And some white man--and I had a book satchel--gave--told us that we could pick up some turnip roots.  And two girls picked up some turnip roots and put them in my (laughter) book satchel.  And one ate more than one turnip root above the other one, and it was one left.  And they got to pay--pulling hair over the turnip roots (laughter).  And when we got back to school the next day, big old boy called J.C. Shakespeare says, "Ms. Meda [ph.], there was a fight along the road yesterday."  "Who saw it?"  "Robert."  I said, "No, I didn't see it.  No, I didn't see it."  And she came over and strapped me with a gin belt (laughter).  And I jumped up like I had a spring in my butt and ran and told Mr. Garrett.  "Mr. Garrett, So and So and So and So was fighting yesterday along the road."  And he promptly pulled out his strap and gave these two girls a strapping.  My oldest brother, who was in his room, beat me home that day and told my mother that I had voluntarily given to Mr. Garrett this story about these two girls fighting.  And she waited 'til I got down to my union suit (laughter).  And I was trying to run.  And I jumped up in the bed (laughter).  And the, and the bed back then, it wasn't inner spring.  It was a spring mattress on the--and I--dumped me between the bed and the wall (laughter).  And then, of course, "I have told you that you mind your own business; that you don't go around tending other folk's business."
Speaker 1: So she didn't want you squealing on the girls.
Speaker 2: She didn't want me squealing on these girls (laughter).  And that's the only whipping that I can have.  In fact, whenever I would be taken to jail in the Civil Rights Movement, that was the only thing that I would tell the policemen, "You can take me to jail but don't hit me."  And nobody hit me.
Story_ID: 654473
Speaker 1: What colleges did you apply to?
Speaker 2: I didn't apply to but one college.  And this is, again, I've been very fortunate in my life from grade school [Terry Grove School, Terry, Mississippi] to high school [Utica Institute-Hinds County Agricultural High School, Colored, Utica, Mississippi].  My principals were Alcornites and because they knew that I wanted to become a physician, advised me to go to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] (laughter) because at that point, Tougaloo had been the only surviving institution in Mississippi that was training physicians--preparing students for college.  Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] had an excellent record of training physicians, of training student to go into medicine.  But in 1953, Alcorn's president, I think his name was White [sic. Jesse R. Otis], came out for change and the educational program, the ed- educational program or the scientific program of Alcorn went south.  And--
Speaker 1: He eliminated the scientific program?
Speaker 2: He didn't eliminate it.  (Laughter) But in essence he eliminated it because people who had science training, and particularly black people, who were hard to come by, and they left.  They left the state.
Speaker 1: What did he want to do?  What did the president want to turn the school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The pres- the president spoke out for change and was fired.
Speaker 1: Change in terms of--
Speaker 2: In social change--
Speaker 1: Social change--
Speaker 2: --in Mississ--
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Civil rights and--
Speaker 2: Things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was fired.
Speaker 2: And he was fired.
Speaker 1: And when he was fired, the science faculty left.
Speaker 2: Many of the science faculty left and didn't return.
Speaker 1: And that was the school, that was a land grant college, really.
Speaker 2: That was a land grant college--
Speaker 1: Land (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that had an excellent reputation for training physicians.
Speaker 1: And Jack--
Speaker 2: So the only--Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] was a teachers college.  So the only--
Speaker 1: And Valley [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] didn't exist at that point.
Speaker 2: Valley didn't exist.  So the major institution that had a reputation for training physicians at that time was Tougaloo.  And I didn't have a lot of money to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I was not a Fiskite, not a Morehousite [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  These were other historical black institutions [HBCUs] that had a record for training black physicians.  So Tougaloo was like a gift from heaven for me and my daddy [Joe Smith] 'cause it, you know, I'd--I was living in Jackson [Mississippi], spending time with my sister.  You following me?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it became an institution where I could train to become a physician and economically feasible for me to go.
Story_ID: 654474
Speaker 1: So now this was what, 19--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so you enter college [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] when you're sixteen?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Sixteen.  And what major did you select?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately (laughter), I selected chemistry, which was--I ain't going to call it a mistake.  But my major professor at that time was a guy called Dr. Brady [St. Elmo Brady].  Dr. Brady is given a reputation for being the first black in America to get a Ph.D. in chemistry, had been a former head of chemistry at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  He advised me that you would be trained--taught all the biological sciences that you needed and that you ought to take a major in chemistry.  And he had done that because his son had gone to medical school early like me and had a tragic outcome.  And he felt that by majoring in chemistry, he saw something else on the wall, that it would open up oppo- other opportunities in research science for good chemistry majors and encouraged a lot of us in that class to take chemistry.  And, so I took chemistry as a major and biology as a minor and at the same time was working a forty hour job a week.
Speaker 1: Working?  Where (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, working.
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: Cooking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Downtown (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, how were you taking a full load as a science major and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took a full load, took a full load as a science major and worked every day.
Speaker 1: So you took the--did you take in the Tougaloo bus [Tougaloo, Mississippi], or you had your own car?
Speaker 2: Took the bus.
Speaker 1: That blue and red bus.
Speaker 2: That blue and red bus and worked, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of grades were you getting?
Speaker 2: I got enough to get into medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] (laughter).  And I got enough to, I got enough to, to ace the ACT, I mean the medical aptitude test.
Speaker 1: The M- the MCAT?
Speaker 2: The MCAT, yeah.
Speaker 1: You aced the MCAT?
Speaker 2: I aced the MCAT.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, that was the--
Speaker 1: Are you Men--
Speaker 2: --that was the, that was the thing that got me into medical school.
Speaker 1: Are you Mensa?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I don't know what--
Speaker 1: How--
Speaker 2: I didn't, we didn't know what Mensa was back then (laughter).
Speaker 1: You ever test yourself to see if you are?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But--no, I don't even--you know, just, I--
Speaker 1: If you aced--
Speaker 2: I told you I was--
Speaker 1: --if you aced the MCAT you must have been.
Speaker 2: I told you I was, I told you I was manic and didn't mind working.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654475
Speaker 1: So was Dr. Shirley there then at Tou- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Shirley--
Speaker 1: --at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Shirley was two--I think at least two years ahead of me.  In fact, I looked up to people like Dr. Shirley.  Dr. Shirley was--he and, he was dating a gal called Olish--Ollye something [Ollye Brown Shirley].  But they were older than me.  Students like--let me--this is very important.  But guy--'cause guys like Edgar Smith, who went on to be a, went on to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] after Tougaloo and became a research chemist and a professor of chemists and provost [sic.] at UMass [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], and people like Aaron Shirley, we were all in pre-health together at Tougaloo but older, I call smarter.  And I looked up to people like that because I was young and wanted to lay the, you know, have a little lady walking around with me on my hand, on my arm (laughter).  You follow me?  And (laughter), and they all belonged to a fraternity called Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] (laughter).  And, so these were people that I looked up to.
Speaker 1: Joyce--no, no, Ladner [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] wasn't there at that point (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No, (unclear) she came--
Speaker 2: See, Ladner didn't come until my years.
Speaker 1: --years late- yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Years later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) Ladner came after I came back as a physician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the most difficult part of your college sojourn?
Speaker 2: Again, I can't remember--
Speaker 1: Any difficulties.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: You just lived, you just lived a charmed life, didn't you?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't charmed other than--like I said before, it was fun.  It was really a challenge.  And people helped me.  I mean, I can't say that anywhere I've been that I didn't find people that tried to help me.  And--
Speaker 1: Who paid the tuition?
Speaker 2: My family and myself.
Speaker 1: Did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Again, again, I was the kind of person who didn't ask for things.  My daddy [Joe Smith] taught me not to beg.  And we paid.
Speaker 1: So you may have been able to get a scholarship but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I probably could have.
Speaker 1: --but you didn't ask for one?
Speaker 2: I never asked for one.
Story_ID: 654476
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Graduated from Tougaloo in '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: And then you went to medical school?
Speaker 2: Went to medical school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now at some point, '57 [1957], so by now you are twenty years old--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --subject to the draft.
Speaker 2: I deal with the draft when I get out of medical school.  That's when they, that's when they--
Speaker 1: That's when they got you, huh?
Speaker 2: That's when they tried to get me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tried to get you okay.  Okay, so where did you apply to medical school?
Speaker 2: I applied to medical school--three schools, Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Why University of Minnesota?
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest sister's husband, the one I was telling you about that had the house on Isaiah Montgomery [Isaiah Montgomery Street, Jackson, Mississippi], had, and they had one daughter.  Her husband was one of those long, tall, handsome black men that belonged to the brotherhood, the co--porters--
Speaker 1: Sleeping (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sleeping car porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters].
Speaker 1: --car porters, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And he was a scholarship to Minnesota to work for the Great Northern [Great Northern Railway] (laughter).  And either 1939 or 1940, 1939 or '40 [1940], that's when he left here, left Mississippi going to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  In fact, they moved to Minneapolis when there were only five thousand blacks in the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota].  And they had one daughter.  And in, and in '45 [1945], that other sister who left here--we went out on a journey to find them and took our first train--car trip.  Her husband was coming out of the service.  And we drove, her and my father [Joe Smith] and I, drove to Minneapolis.  And I--the first thing that was very fascinating is when we crossed the Ohio River we got out and applauded (laughter), spent one night in Chicago [Illinois].  And no, we didn't want to stay in Chicago in a tenement near State Street.  We could hear the rain, the rail train all night and got up the next morning and went on, drove on into Minneapolis to find my sister living at 3513 4th Avenue South, only black in a white community, with nice postage stamps yard.  In fact, I can never forget.  My sister, my sister, the other sister, got out and started crying because she didn't believe that this other sister was living (laughter) in this all-white neighborhood (laughter) when we arrived.
Speaker 1: So you applied to medical school in Minnesota be--
Speaker 2: And so what I was trying to tell you is, my sister's doctor was a black doctor called Dr. Brown [William Brown, Sr.], who had gone to the University of Minnesota.  And she introduced me to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had some contacts at the University of Minnesota and encouraged me, because of my interactions and contacts there, that I should apply to the University of Minnesota.  But because (clears throat) as a high school student, I had joined the 4-H club and later, the New Farmers of America and had become a national officer in the New Farmers of America when I was in high school [Utica Institute-Hinds County Agricultural High School, Colored, Utica, Mississippi].  And we had our national meeting in Washington [D.C.] when--before Washington desegregated, and we had to live at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  We was housed at Howard.  And we had to live at Howard because this was before de- desegregation of Washington.  This apparently was '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Right.  But getting--I just--
Speaker 2: But what I was trying to say to you is, having lived at Howard, I wanted to study at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you applied to University of Minnesota.
Speaker 2: I applied--those are the three schools I applied to.
Speaker 1: And you applied there because your sister's doctor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Liz [Liz Smith (ph.)] had gone to the--
Speaker 1: --had--
Speaker 2: --University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Were you accepted at all three?
Speaker 2: I stopped the process.  I was accepted on the early decision process at Meharry, and I was accepted in October.  And my acceptance to Howard came the 1st of December of applying year, and I didn't, and I shut it down right then.
Speaker 1: So, and, so you selected Howard because you had lived on the campus when you were with the Future Farmers [sic.]--
Speaker 2: New Farmers--
Speaker 1: New Farmers of America.
Speaker 2: Future Farmers [Future Farmers of America; National FFA Organization] is a white counterpart.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Those were the days.
Speaker 2: Those were the days.
Speaker 1: Those were the days.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654477
Speaker 1: So you're at Howard University [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  Who are some of your classmates enter--who entered medical school with you?
Speaker 2: Well, one that I admire and appreciate, here again, he had been a navigator and a fellow by the name of Timothy Stephens [Timothy L. Stephens, Jr.].  He was from O- Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: A navigator in?
Speaker 2: In the Korean War.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: You follow me?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Had flown in the Korean War.  And again, he helped me so much because we were grouped by alphabets.  And he was a man that was older than me, had a family, married to a physician who was teaching in the medical school and would take my side when--in the bullying (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who was bullying you?
Speaker 2: Who you, who you think?  I was fresh out of Mississippi.  In fact, I was supposed to be the only person in my class that had a Mississippi connection.  And I later learned, during the four years I spent there, and after, that there was at least three or four of us had Mississippi connections.
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you the youngest person to enter that, that class?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't like to use the word youngest and the first and all of that.  I was one of the youngest.  In fact, I was one of the, one of the youngest to graduate in a sense that, my birthday comes, six months later, they had a rule not giving you your certificate.
Speaker 1: Because you're too young to get a medical degree?
Speaker 2: My birthday came six months earlier.  If I had come six months before I wouldn't have been able to get a degree.  They had some kind of rule where you, you know, you can't get a degree before you--until you're twenty-four or something, or twenty-five.
Speaker 1: And you were twenty-four when you got your degree.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Why is that you don't like to use the term youngest and all, first and all that?
Speaker 2: It's so relative.  And it's so relative.  It's just relative because just like those people that I was--that was playing the piano, I saw people on--I played with kids in Terry [Mississippi] that didn't make it for social reasons, for one reason or the other, that I thought were smarter than me, was more gifted than I was.  And I found that throughout my whole career.
Speaker 1: That people's opportunities had nothing to do with their abilities.
Speaker 2: Had nothing to do with their abilities.  But it was the social determinants of who--of, of growing up.
Speaker 1: Who your parents are.
Speaker 2: Their parents and in some ways, things that you see or hear on the right and things that you see on the left, social issues that have determining their outcomes.  Like, I grew up believing that, you know, all men have sinned.  And this is a right kind of thing that people say, "Well, don't do this."  I grew up in that environment.  But God knows, unfortunately, sometimes what people do can interfere.  But on the other hand (shakes head), we're all the same.
Story_ID: 654478
Speaker 1: I just remembered something that I forgot to ask you about your college years.  While you were at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], the murder of Emmett Till occurred.  I'm sure you are well aware of that.  Do you remember how that affected you and others on the campus at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It happens in August.  In fact, I was in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, for the summer.
Speaker 2: I was in Chicago for the summer.  I always went to Chicago to work in the summer.  In fact, that's the way I helped pay for my medical education.  I worked, I was a steak broiler in one of the major, one of the major steakhouses downtown called Diamond, George Diamond [George Diamond Steakhouse].
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.  And my brother had given me a camera that he brought from Korea.  And when his body came to 39th [sic.] and State [Street] to Bishop Robert's Temple [Roberts Temple Church of God in Christ, Chicago, Illinois], and his mother [Mamie Till Mobley] insisted on a casket, I got in line and joined that crowd to go down and see.
Speaker 1: Emmett Till's body.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you took your camera with you?
Speaker 2: I took my camera.  I lost those pictures, but I have actual photos of those that I took myself.
Speaker 1: In addition to the one that was on the cover of Jet.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you remember about that, Dr. Smith [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith]--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --that experience--what you were feeling, what you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are experiences that you don't want to talk about because of so many things, you know, that--you know, coming out of Mississippi, you're embarrassed for the state on one hand, I mean, just totally embarrassed.  You're--you felt sympathy with the boy who lost his life on another.  You can't, (laughter) you do side with the, with the family on another.  And then you saw the struggle of poor black people who had poured into Chicago and had so many other social issues involved.  So it was just a, just--
Speaker 1: I'm wondering because of what happened to that young man in your home state--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you have any thoughts about, like, maybe leaving Mississippi for good because of that?
Speaker 2: Never felt like leaving Mississippi.  Yeah, I never felt like leaving Mississippi.  I mean, I never had that feeling.  In fact, those kinds of issues made me feel--felt more dedicated to change Mississippi (pause), no question about it.
Speaker 1: And there was no anger?
Speaker 2: Embarrassment, more embarrassment than anger--
Speaker 1: I can't tell if your eyes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --are watering because of emotion or because of the lights.  What is it?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: As you think about that time period (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like I say before I don't like to deal with those issues.  I've tried to avoid those issues, in a sense that it brings up, you know, it brings up so much, in terms of the pain and suffering and anguish that I have seen on one hand throughout a lifetime and yet at the same time have participated in so much joy and (laughter) have had such a wonderful experience dealing with people of all colors and all races and of all socioeconomic status.  And, you know, and, so it just brings out a deep emotion sometimes.
Story_ID: 654479
Speaker 1: Back to Howard med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  Did you find that your undergraduate education prepared you for what you had to face in medical school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] did a good job getting you ready?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You know, I never had any problems, you know.
Speaker 1: Where did you do your internship?
Speaker 2: I did my internship at Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County], in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Did--now did you have to apply to several hospitals, or did you just apply to Cook County?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Back at that time, I had mentioned that to him earlier, see.
Speaker 1: Mentioned it to who?
Speaker 2: I had mentioned it to Scott [Scott Stearns] earlier here, your videographer.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been in and out of Chicago for all of my life and got exposed to Cook County Hospital as a boy, a big old Greek temple.  And I wanted to (laughter) do my postgraduate training in--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I wanted to do my postgraduate training at Cook County.  And--
Speaker 1: Any difficulty getting accepted into the internship?
Speaker 2: No.  At that time, I came with good recommendations.  But the important thing is I was going to do training in OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology], and Cook County had never trained an American black.  They had only trained one African black, a young, a man by the name of Udecko [ph.].  And I, and I wanted to do a good job in my internship so that I'd be invited back to get a residency in OB/GYN and was.
Speaker 1: So they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --trained you as an O- so you were the first--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --you don't like to use the term first, but you were the first OB/GYN intern.
Speaker 2: I was the first OB-Jo that was accepted--American trained OB/GYN doctor that was accepted into Cook County to--and that's where the draft came in.  That was 1961.
Story_ID: 654480
Speaker 1: What happened?  That's when you got the call from your draft board to come on in?
Speaker 2: My (laughter), my draft board told me that the Berlin crisis had come up, and they would, and Mississippi was asked to supply twelve physicians for the draft for the Berlin crisis.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) There was a draft of something like 250 doll- fifty dollar--fifty physicians for the country, and here Mississippi wasn't training one black doctor a year.  And they came and drafted me to go into the Berlin crisis.
Speaker 1: Wait, wait.  You said Mississippi wasn't train- oh, because no blacks could go to med school to Mississippi.
Speaker 2: No blacks could go to med school in Mississippi.  And at that point, there were years in which Mississippi was not training one doctor a year.  I'm talking about accepted in Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] or Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh, anywhere in the country.
Speaker 2: Anywhere in the country.
Speaker 1: That's the other thing too.  Since Mississippi did not allow blacks to attend the medical school [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi], wasn't the state obligated to pay your tuition to medical school?
Speaker 2: Well (clears throat), they gave you a, they gave you--you know, from the southern compromise (clears throat)--Mississippi, of course, joined the sou- southern compromise.
Speaker 1: What was the southern compromise?
Speaker 2: The southern compromise was they allocated some monies to anybody who wanted to go to graduate school, to keep them applying from a state supported school.
Speaker 1: A segregated state supported school.
Speaker 2: Segregated state supported school--could apply for this grant to go to medical school.  They gave me the equivalent of twelve hundred dollars a year, which did not pay my tuition, that which did not pay my travel.
Speaker 1: Let alone tuition.
Speaker 2: Let alone tuition.  In fact, I traveled home--
Speaker 1: Why was it only twelve hundred dollars?  Because that's what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it amounted to twelve--five thousand dollars for four years, so you figure it out.
Speaker 1: That wasn't even enough to go to medical school to Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Well, it was--
Speaker 1: --if you had been, if they had allowed you to go.
Speaker 2: It was five thousand dollars.  That's what the total grant was, with a stipulation.  And I'm saying it didn't pay my travel.
Speaker 1: I hear you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was the stipulation?
Speaker 2: That you needed to come back to the state to pay that off.
Story_ID: 654481
Speaker 1: So they tapped you for the draft.
Speaker 2: They tapped me for the draft.
Speaker 1: And you went in.
Speaker 2: Well, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I came, I left.  I didn't pursue my residency at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is while you were at Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: This is while I was at Cook County.
Speaker 1: As an intern?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, old patriotic Bob [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert L. Smith] came back to Mississippi ready to go into the, ready to go into the Berlin crisis.  When I got back, you know, I was educated about the information that I have just given you, to learn that there was, you know, several dozen physicians like me at the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Oxford, Mississippi].  And that was discrimination too.
Speaker 1: Several dozen white physicians.
Speaker 2: White physicians at U--
Speaker 1: With your same qualifications.
Speaker 2: With my same qualifications.
Speaker 1: And, so what did you do?
Speaker 2: So (laughter), that, you know, that--I'm data collecting now.  I'm back now in '62 [1962], at the heat of the movement.  Medgar Evers is having his mass meetings.  And I started going to mass meetings here in Jackson [Mississippi] conducted--I didn't have anything to do.  At that point, I was fortunate enough at least to be living in a house that had some air conditioning in it for a while with my sister (laughter).
Speaker 1: On Isaiah Montg--
Speaker 2: No.  On Rose Street.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is another sister.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, you know, the other sister lived on Rose Street.  And, but it was, it was just--well, I ain't gonna say it was something nice to do, but initially, I was just to, you know, visitor.  I rejoined.  When I was in college, I belonged to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and the choir.  Somebody showed me a college yearbook, and I was, I was part of the NAACP, so I just rejoined up.
Speaker 1: And you're on Rose Street, so you're a block and a half from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the--
Speaker 1: --from the headquarters where they had the meetings.
Speaker 2: Where they had the meetings, okay.  And at the same time, Dr. Bidel--somebody approached me and told me that Tougaloo, that Dr. Britton [Albert B. Britton, Jr.], who was--had been the college physician, just too busy to come to the college every day and asked me if I would come to the college.  And I was just, just delighted, man.  Can you imagine?  Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] wants me to come up and see some students (laughter).  Can you just imagine that, how much, how big that made my chest?  Young physician, you know, twenty-five years old, want to go--I just couldn't believe it (laughter), that they wanted me to do that.  In the meantime now, the draft has said the Berlin crisis went up and down like that.  And they had put my draft off until January 1963.  So I'm doing nothing, nothing to do, and I can't go back--actually, I can go back to my residency, but obviously they wouldn't take me back with my draft still pending, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because the residency was gonna be more than two years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  I think it was that time--it was either a three or four year residency, okay.  So then (clears throat) this fact finding led me to looking for work, looking for something to do.  And someone told me that Cecil Jaquith [Cecil Jaquith, Sr.], who was considered a liberal, a Mississippi liberal at that time, asked me, offered me a job working in a segregated hospital up at the state hospital [Mississippi State Hospital, Whitfield, Mississippi].  And I was delighted to go to work, making maybe five thousand dollars a year.  I don't know.  It was--money wasn't that important to me at that time.  All I wanted to do was go to work and see some patients.  It was somewhere between four and five thousand dollars a year, but it was enough to put some gas in my car.  I didn't have rent (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're living with your sister (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Living with my sister--liv- living at home, living at the same family house.
Speaker 1: Oh, you moved back to Terry [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Liv- living in the fame--the same family house that I grew up in, so I was at home.
Speaker 1: And your mom [Wilma Porter Smith]--
Speaker 2: Mom--
Speaker 1: --cooking your food every day (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mama cooking.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, you were--
Speaker 2: I wasn't buy, and I wasn't buying no groceries (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were at Fat City (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She fed me good, my mom (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're going--
Story_ID: 654482
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're going to the mass meetings.  Now had you--
Speaker 2: I was going to the mass meetings, going to the make, to make it short, I was going to mass meetings, working for the state and at that time, the sovereignty commission [Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission] was working.
Speaker 1: The Miss- explain briefly the sovereignty commission.
Speaker 2: The sovereignty commission, it was a paid agency.  It was a KGB.
Speaker 1: Of the, of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Of Mississippi.  It was a paid agency to spy on people who attended mass meetings or any kind of--
Speaker 1: Civil rights--
Speaker 2: --activity.  In fact, the position of the state at that time was intussusception nullification.  (Makes noise) That's what it meant.  You got it?
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So here I am now, I got a job, going to mass meetings at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  And after I was going to Tougaloo, started going to Tougaloo about a month on my time, volunteering my time, I got picked up by the policeman, who drove me to Mississippi State Hospital [Whitfield, Mississippi] and told my--you know, "Here's your boy."
Speaker 1: Hold on a second.  You're volunteering your time doing what with respect to the mass meeting?
Speaker 2: No, I was volunteering my time at Tougaloo as a, as a college physician.
Speaker 1: As a college physician.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, yeah, nothing to do with the mass meeting, just volunteering at Tougaloo.
Speaker 2: I was volunteering at Tougaloo.
Speaker 1: Although Tougaloo was supporting the movement--
Speaker 2: Tougaloo was supporting the movement.  And I was attending the movement, but I was also working for the state.
Speaker 1: And, so the cop picks you--where were you when the policeman picked you up?
Speaker 2: Policeman picked me up at the gate at Tougaloo.
Speaker 1: So you walk out of the school--
Speaker 2: I drove out of the school one--
Speaker 1: And they pull you over.
Speaker 2: Pull me over and say, "Get out of your car boy, and let's go."
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea what was happening?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Heavens no!
Speaker 1: Did--what was your conversation with them?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, "Where are you gonna take me?  Where I'm going?"  It was all harassment.
Speaker 1: And you're sitting in the, in the back of the car.
Speaker 2: To Whitfield [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: But you didn't know you were going to Whitfield.
Speaker 2: At first.
Speaker 1: So with the image and the memory of Emmett Till in your mind, what did you think bef- before you knew where they were taking you, what did you think?
Speaker 2: I can't remember thinking about death at that time 'cause I was in a patrol car.  I was in a patrol car.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: But I'm just saying, I was in a patrol car, but I was in a Mississippi highway patrol car [Mississippi Highway Safety Patrol].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  When we know that some of those law enforcement officers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I'm just--
Speaker 1: --took that uniform off--
Speaker 2: --giving you my--
Speaker 1: --and put the other--
Speaker 2: I'm giv- I'm giving you--
Speaker 1: You a sense at that time, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm giving you my actual experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, of course.
Speaker 2: And, so I was delivered to my boss [Cecil Jaquith, Sr.], that you have a young man working for you who is at Tougaloo and going to mass meetings.
Speaker 1: That's what the cops told--so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Basically that's the message.
Speaker 1: So this, so what you're really saying is that the sovereignty commission had been--
Speaker 2: Taking tag numbers.
Speaker 1: And trailing you.
Speaker 2: Trailing me.
Speaker 1: Which is how the cops knew to pick you up.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) cops sent to pick me up.
Speaker 1: Because the sovereignty commission worked in ka- in close concert with the White Citizens' Council, law enforcement agencies, government agencies, boards of education, boards of supervisors and under the table with the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So it was all one--
Speaker 2: One--
Speaker 1: --co- coordinated, concerted, repression operation--
Speaker 2: That's exactly.
Speaker 1: --against black people or people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --who supported black people.
Speaker 2: Or people who supported black people (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 654483
Speaker 1: So I will ask you again.  So, now you are a direct victim of that.  What were you thinking about staying here and confronting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Again--
Speaker 1: --that thing?
Speaker 2: -it made, it in- it made--created interest in me.  It gave me a purpose for being here.  It changed my whole life around.
Speaker 1: Did you keep your job at the state hospital [Mississippi State Hospital, Whitfield, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well, for a while.  I was counseled by Jaquith [Cecil Jaquith, Sr.]--
Speaker 1: Your boss.
Speaker 2: --my boss--that it was, that the--and I told him that it was on my own time and that I wanted to be helpful to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  And he says, "I understand," and advised me that I needed to move along at that--
Speaker 1: Find another job?
Speaker 2: You know, go back into--you know, to move along.  I mean, he was very cordial.  I can't say that there were not people like Cecil Jaquith that had a professional conversation with me and went through some of the same issues that we are talking about and what had gone on.  He talked to me and explained to me what was going on and told me, with that first encounter, that if they didn't bother him anymore, that I could continue.  And of course, I continued.  He liked my work.  I was doing good work.
Speaker 1: So when he said move along, he didn't mean move away, move out of the job?
Speaker 2: Well, he told me that basically, like, I would counsel any other young professional, that, you know, I will help you get another position somewhere else out of state.  But if they don't bother me, if they don't pressure me anymore, you can continue to work.
Story_ID: 654484
Speaker 1: --Work at the state hospital [Mississippi State Hospital, Whitfield, Mississippi] after the police reported that you were involved in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now tell me about how you became more involved in the Civil Rights Movement afterwards.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: So from going to the, to the mass meetings, what was your next move?
Speaker 2: My next move, of course, to continue to go to the mass meetings and the big importance of going to the mass meeting, more important and going to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  In addition to wanting to practice medicine, I needed to support a struggling institution that the state was doing everything that it could do to disrupt its charter, to disrupt its finances and to disrupt its faculty.
Speaker 1: The state was engaged in tactics against Tougaloo?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Give me an example, please.
Speaker 2: From its alumni, the alumni wrote a check for twenty-five dollars, and that's what we was giving.  That was reported.  And many teachers was fired from their jobs from writing checks to Tougaloo or was reprimanded for writing checks to Tougaloo, as writing a check to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time.
Speaker 1: So if for example--well, my mother was a, was an alumnus of Tougaloo.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And if she hadn't been making a contribution as an alumnus of Tougaloo--but she was a school teacher.  That check would be seen as supporting civil rights.
Speaker 2: Many times her banker, who may have belonged to the citizen council [White Citizens' Council], would report that check to her school superintendent.
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: And these people, and I have examples of that, to the extent where fac- for graduates of Tougaloo.  And it still lingers, were afraid to go through that Tougaloo gate.  They were afraid.
Speaker 1: Because their license plates would be noted.
Speaker 2: Noted.  Now, you know, this ain't, this ain't fake news.  This is news that people like I lived through, and people responded to it.  I'm talking about people who was working for the state, you know working in some kind of public job for a livelihood.
Story_ID: 654485
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you met Medgar Evers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I met Medgar Evers in college, yeah.  See, that was another thing.  We had some what we call social science forums.  And man by the name of Ernst Borinski and his good friend--
Speaker 1: Sociologist, Ernst Borinski.
Speaker 2: Sociologist, a German refugee.  He was one of those German refugees who found refuge in black colleges [HBCUs] during the Nazi period, came to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] and made friends with J.D. [ph.], with Dr. Brady [St. Elmo Brady], two great intellectuals.  And they (laughter) brought students into science and exposed them to the social aspects of living.  And I fell in love with what went on in the social science programs.  And those people like Aaron Henry, Medgar Evers, Dr. McCoy [A.H. McCoy], liberal whites like Hazel Brannon Smith, Hodding Carter [Hodding Carter III], Oliver Henry [sic.], and national and international figures was invited into those forums.
Speaker 1: So Hazel Brannon Smith was the editor of--
Speaker 2: The Lexington paper [The Lexington Advertiser].
Speaker 1: And Hodding Carter, Delta Democrat Times (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Times and--
Speaker 1: And O--
Speaker 2: --Oliver Emmerich [J. Oliver Emmerich], McComb [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: McComb paper [Enterprise-Journal].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they where white--
Speaker 2: White--
Speaker 1: --newspaper publisher.
Speaker 2: White newspaper publishers, yes.
Speaker 1: So Medgar came to the campus as part of one of those forums?
Speaker 2: Medgar was in and out of the campus many times.
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about meeting him, about his style, about his passion for civil rights?
Speaker 2: You know, Medgar was one of those prince.  When I say prince, I call prince in a sense that prince, he had a mission.  He had virtues of integrity and wisdom and knowledge, who was dedicated to and loved his state.  And he was dedicated and of course did give his life for that.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But do you remember any conversations that you had with him or something that he may have said to you specifically?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, his conversations that he had was around those same issues, that we're going to make the [U.S.] Constitution, we're going to make the Bill of Rights become a reality, and that Mississippi should not, no, be any different from any other state.  But the only difference about Medgar is that he (clears throat), he was able to live such a princely life.  'Til his personal life--they were never able to bring him down and was able to forge dead ahead until eventually they didn't feel that anything would stop him, save for a bullet that he got.
Story_ID: 654486
Speaker 1: Was he encouraging you to register?  Well, you were too young to register then.
Speaker 2: Well, now he didn't have--there was things that Medgar [Medgar Evers] didn't have to encourage me to.  My father [Joe Smith], (laughter) before he would make Santa Claus come to you, would pay his poll tax and register to vote.
Speaker 1: Your father was a registered voter?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father was a registered voter.
Speaker 1: In the 1940s in Mississ- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As far back as I can remember.
Speaker 1: And your mom [Wilma Porter Smith]?
Speaker 2: My mom--
Speaker 1: She was also a registered voter?
Speaker 2: --registered voter.
Speaker 1: So it--now this is the second time I've heard this, because Dr. People [sic. HistoryMaker John A. Peoples, Jr.] said the same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was possible for black people to register to vote in Mississippi before the movement.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, but it was only a handful and people who presented themselves in a certain way--I hate to say that, in a certain way--and who insisted on registering to vote.  When I first came back to register to vote, oh, man, there are so many stories I can tell you.  A little thin white boy, looked like he weighed about 120 pounds--what I did when I was finishing high school [Utica Institute-Hinds County Agricultural High School, Colored, Utica, Mississippi]--gave me the Constitution (laughter).  That was one of the things that I did first week back, reg- reregistered to vote.  And he'd handed me the Constitution.  And I just simply took the damn book and say (gesture), and pushed it back across the table to him.  And I said, "Now where the hell the paper is that I need to register to vote?"  And then he gave me the daggone paper, and I registered to vote and gone, five--
Speaker 1: So he pushes the Constitution to you for what?
Speaker 2: He gave me a copy of the daggone Mississippi Constitution to interpret.
Speaker 1: They were still doing that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I came back, he gave me a copy of the Mississippi Constitution, but it's--it looked book 'bout like that (gesture).  And I just simply pushed it back (gesture), and unfortunately, I didn't intend for it to fall on the floor.
Speaker 1: Scott [Scott Stearns], could you go get his phone please?
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's his phone.
Speaker 2: It'll stop in a minute.  But there were certain things that I just did not tolerate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You follow me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 654487
Speaker 1: So you're back in Mississippi in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962]?  Sixty-two [1962]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: --right?  And, so Medgar's [Medgar Evers] still alive, 'cause he was, he was assassinated in '63 [1963].  So there was a boycott organized against merchants on Capitol Street.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yes, of course.
Speaker 1: Which I think was discussed in the mass meeting.
Speaker 2: All of that was discussed in the mass meetings, and all of that was well planned (clears throat), you know, and articulated by Medgar.  And he would come to the mass meetings and talk about it, you know, their strategies and many times what their plans were.
Speaker 1: Who--
Speaker 2: And it--
Speaker 1: Who--as you recall it, were these mass meetings, like, mostly populated by the students from Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] or the community?  What's your recollection?
Speaker 2: Most of them was populated by local people, you know.  And he moved them around from church to church.  They would allow him in all churches.  They'd allow him to participate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in my church, for example, Mount Helm [Mount Helm Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi], did not allow any mass meetings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Reverend Brown [Thomas B. Brown] supported them, but the board were--was afraid of the church being bombed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah there were, you know, there were, a handful of churches, such as, such as a downtown church (clears throat) that--
Speaker 1: Clark Street [Greater Clark Street Missionary Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Clark Street, up Farish Street [Farish Street Baptist Church, Jackson, Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: Farish Street.
Speaker 2: --and to some extent, Central [Central United Methodist Church, Jackson, Mississippi].  Central played a very important role in allowing me to bring the doctors in that formed the Medical Committee for Human Rights.  That's where I (unclear) to doctors that fairly changed--helped change American medicine--
Speaker 1: We're going to get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was at Central.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was under Reverend Taylor.
Speaker 2: Under Reverend Taylor.
Speaker 1: Reverend Wendell P. Taylor.
Speaker 2: That's exactly (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 654488
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], you're still in Chicago [Illinois] in '61 [1961], right?
Speaker 2: Right, still in Chicago.
Speaker 1: In '61 [1961], and that's when the Freedom Riders started coming.
Speaker 2: Could you--go ahead, but could you cut this 'cause I have some chronology here on my own that you may want to look at my--
Speaker 1: I have to use this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in '62 [1962] is Meredith [James Meredith] going into the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Right, I was here for that.
Speaker 1: You were here for that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--you didn't go to Oxford [Mississippi] though?
Speaker 2: No, I did not go to Oxford.  I didn't go to Oxford until later but was a part of that group working with Robert L.T. Smith that tried to support that effort to the best of our knowledge.  One of the principal people here was a young man by the name of Robert L.T. Smith, Jr. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grocery store owner.
Speaker 2: Grocery store owner.
Speaker 1: And he was a businessman who risked his business, really, didn't he?
Speaker 2: Risked his business, you know, in addition to supporting--
Speaker 1: His life.
Speaker 2: His life and supporting, you know (clears throat), Meredith's effort was just the tip of the iceberg of many of the efforts that he supported and would have given Meredith or anybody who was willing to do what Meredith did (laughter) or anything--he was just proud that he had the courage and the nerve and integrity to do it.
Speaker 1: What kind of--do you know the kind of support?  Was it financial support that Smith--
Speaker 2: Financial support and providing him the support when he'd come to Jackson [Mississippi].  When he came with the federal marshals and needed places to stop and eat and mingle with other folk, nobody was more willing or was the top of the list.  Obviously there was many families who supported that movement, but the Smith family was top of the list in doing that.
Speaker 1: And total aside, his son [sic.] later became the first African American district attorney in Hinds County [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Grandson [Robert Shuler Smith].
Speaker 1: Grandson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Grandson.
Speaker 2: No, not first.
Speaker 1: What--he wasn't the first?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) we have to be careful using those words, first (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, stop the first business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, fine.  Thank you (makes noise).
Story_ID: 654489
Speaker 1: Now '62 [1962], you are now working at the state hospital?
Speaker 2: I was working at the state hospital.  I worked at the state hospital from '62 [1962] 'til '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, the following year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, following year with continued harassments and efforts to stop.
Speaker 1: And you continued to volunteer at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: And continued to volunteer at Tougaloo.
Speaker 1: Now '63 [1963] is a horrible year, when--
Speaker 2: Tougaloo--'63 [1963] is a horrible year.
Speaker 1: Medgar [Medgar Evers] is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --assassinated.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]--
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) never--'62 [1962]--'63 [1963], I went by the home of Isaiah Sanders, who invited me to have a repast that they loved to do for civil rights workers and other people supporting the movement, to a repast with Medgar.  And they called me back that morning before day.  I was at Mississippi State Hospital [Whitfield, Mississippi] that morning, that morning before day when they called me and told me that Medgar had been shot.
Speaker 1: Wait.  So Mr. Sanders called you--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Sanders [Thelma Sanders] called me.
Speaker 1: Mrs. Sanders called you for the repast after he--
Speaker 2: No, before.
Speaker 1: Before?
Speaker 2: Before the mass meeting that night.  I did not go to the actual mass meeting, but I went to a repast with Medgar bef- at Dr. and Mrs. Isaiah Sanders' house the final night before--
Speaker 1: He was killed.
Speaker 2: --'fore he was killed.
Speaker 1: So you have the food.  Then he goes to the mass meeting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Meeting.
Speaker 1: He gets the shirts that had the stencils on them, "Jim Crow Must Go."  I think that's what they said.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he goes home and he's killed.
Speaker 2: He go- and he--
Speaker 1: And, so you were among the last people to see him of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: Do you recall the conversation that he had that night?
Speaker 2: Nothing in particular, you know, nothing that had not gone on all the time and be careful.  We all knew that the barometer of his assassination, a predicted assassination, had gone up.  He knew it.
Speaker 1: Was that something that was discussed that night?  No?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember it being discussed that night, but it had been discussed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Me- Medgar was a very informal person.  You know, you could meet him at a place called Stell's [ph.].  You could meet him at the Four O'clock Tea Room [Jackson, Mississippi] or whatever, Stevens Kitchen [sic. Stevens Rose Room, Jackson, Mississippi] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stevens, Stevens Kitchen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was an open person about anything you want to talk about--
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: --a man who's well rounded.
Speaker 1: Your sister lived on that street--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --near the Sanders.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Do you remember whether the Sanders' son was present that night?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: He would have been twelve years old then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't recall.  I remember--you know, I got there late, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--we later became friends.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I haven't heard from him recently.
Speaker 2: But this lady was a great cook.  Dr. Sanders enjoyed--he was a great patriarch who supported.  And she like (laughter) my mother [Wilma Porter Smith], brought people together around food (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I- Isaiah Sanders, Sr. was former- well, he was an educator and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --former principal of Lanier [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 654490
Speaker 1: Tell me about the impact of Medgar's [Medgar Evers] assassination on you and your focus, what--just, just recall that.
Speaker 2: That, again--that, again, was just a horrific experience, culminating in demonstrations in the street, on Rose and later his funeral.  And of course, I attended his funeral.  And Mrs. Sanders [Thelma Sanders] and I and a group, not again thinking about the impact of our lives, joined that march and walked hand in hand from Rose Street, from Lynch Street [John R. Lynch Street] to Capitol Street.  And I was, we was dared to come across Capitol Street.  And thank god John Doar and his group parted the waters and let us proceed up through, up Capitol, up Farish Street to Collins and Frazier Funeral Home [sic. Frazier and Collins Funeral Home; Collins Funeral Home, Inc., Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: So you marched from Rose Street--
Speaker 2: I marched from Capitol, from--it was the Lynch Street Masonic Temple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Temple.
Speaker 2: --all the way from up what then was Terry Road [Jackson Terry Road; Terry Road], all the way up to--down Pascagoula [Street] to Farish Street and from Farish Street--
Speaker 1: Across Capitol Street.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's where the stop was.  We weren't--
Speaker 1: So you're across Capitol Street.  You didn't act--
Speaker 2: We weren't supposed to cross Capitol Street.
Speaker 1: To cross Capitol Street--
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: --but you did.
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: Thanks to John Doar, D-O-A-R, who had been appointed by--
Speaker 2: Appointed--
Speaker 1: --Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] to be his ombudsman for civil rights issues.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: But we were supposed to be more down like dogs when we crossed, when we crossed.
Speaker 1: So what exactly did John Doar do?
Speaker 2: He came out from somewhere and--
Speaker 1: So did he have federal marshals with him or something?
Speaker 2: Had federal marshals with him.
Speaker 1: And the, and the new, and the city police--
Speaker 2: City police--
Speaker 1: --is just--
Speaker 2: --who was parked on, they was parked on rooftops and everything at Capitol and at Capitol and Farish to post a blocker, so we crossed Capitol.
Speaker 1: And they moved aside?
Speaker 2: Moved aside.
Speaker 1: Now explain to me why the white power structure was so adamant about you not marching on Capitol Street but merely crossing it en route to the funeral home [Frazier and Collins Funeral Home; Collins Funeral Home, Inc., Jackson, Mississippi]?  What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --what was, what was the thinking?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a symbol of, just a symbol of white oppression.  We're in charge.  That's the only thing that I can see, is a symbol of white oppression, that we were not supposed to be--we were not supposed to Capitol, cross Capitol Street.  That was a great street.
Speaker 1: In the shadow of the old--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --state capitol.
Speaker 2: Shadow of the old state--a symbol of white power.
Story_ID: 654491
Speaker 1: In that same year, you become president--is that right?  Do you bec- do you become chief executive officer of Mississippi Family Health [Mississippi Family Health Center, Ltd.; Central Mississippi Health Services, Inc., Jackson, Mississippi] in '63 [1963]?  Couldn't have been, no, no.  What happened in, what did, what did you do in '63 [1963] after Medgar's [Medgar Evers] death?  Were--did you participate in more marches, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --direct action yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the most important march I participated in after Medgar's death, still angry and upset--we wanted--there's two medical associations in this country, the American Medical Association, which control the American medicine from the front door to the back door.  It determine everything, the number of students who could go into any of the medical schools.  It sanctioned discrimination of black patient and black physicians.  It had political power from the White House all the way down to the back street.  And in 1895, it's one of the oldest black professional association in this country.  And the National Medical Association was born that spoke for the black physicians.  It was a counterpart to AMA.  In fact, the first president of the NMA physician here was a--of the National Medical Association was a physician who, from Vicksburg [Mississippi], who was flogged and dragged in the street of Vicksburg in 1895.  And, so--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I think his name was Foote [sic. Robert F. Boyd].  And, so I was a leader in the Jackson Medical Society, which is a component society, the state component society of the National Medical Association, similar to Central Medical Soc- Society [Central Medical Society; Mississippi State Medical Association], which is a component society of the AMA.  We wanted the black medical association to stand up and demonstrate at the American Medical Association, which was meeting two weeks later in Atlantic City [New Jersey] on the boardwalk.  And leadership of the National Medical Association felt that we--they'd lose 50(c)(1) [sic.] status.
Speaker 1: 501(c)(3)?
Speaker 2: That's exactly.  So I started corresponding through Dr. Britton [Albert B. Britton, Jr.] with Dr. John L.S. Holloman [John L.S. Holloman, Jr.], who is a leader and on the board of the National Medical Association.  And we agreed that at the opening session of the National Medical Association--of the AMA medical association, who was meeting two weeks after Medgar's assassination, that we would present a position to them, a petition asking the American Medical Association to come out unequivocally against discrimination on the black physician and the black patient.
Speaker 1: No more colored waiting rooms, for example.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No more being turned away from certain hospitals--
Speaker 2: That's exactly.
Speaker 1: --for example.
Speaker 2: Right, that's exactly.  And even though in Mississippi, as an example, there were hospitals built with Hill-Burton money [Hospital Construction and Survey Act of 1946]--
Speaker 1: Federal dollars.
Speaker 2: Federal dollars, that didn't even be--admit black patients at all.
Speaker 1: Let alone giving black physicians privileges.
Speaker 2: Let alone giving black physicians privileges or giving the black patient an opportunity to be served in the emergency room as inpatients.
Story_ID: 654492
Speaker 1: Some people were afraid that the National Medical Association, the black medical association, would lose its tax exempt status if you took this petition to the American Medical Association.
Speaker 2: If the, if NMA took that position--
Speaker 1: If NMA took--
Speaker 2: --took that activist position.
Speaker 1: Oh, took the po- took the position.
Speaker 2: See--yeah.  Well, not took the position.  Now make that very clear.  The net, the NMA was similar to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  They had, up until that time, had been in a negotiating role with NMA.  There was a group that was led by Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] that had tried that group.  I don't want to give you a misname, but it's well known.  They had tried to negotiate or make inroads with the A- AMA for years and was never able to make inroads.  It was more or less a negotiating thing.  And AMA, at that time, had admitted a few cherry picked physicians in major cities like Chicago [Illinois] and New York [New York] to membership.
Speaker 1: A few black--
Speaker 2: Cherry picked physicians.  But in places like Mississippi and across the South, no black physicians had ever been admitted to full membership.  Got it?  So then, again, expecting to go to jail, we was rushed out of the House of Delegates, and we proceeded to picket on the boardwalk in 1963.  And this, of course, went viral.  With the cooperation of Physicians for Social Responsibility and other liberal groups, many physicians at the AMA joined us in picketing the AMA.
Speaker 1: So some of the AMA members came out and joined the NMA on the picket line.
Speaker 2: That's correct, on the picket line.  And--
Speaker 1: Now what happened to your petition to the AMA?
Speaker 2: We left it.
Speaker 1: Did they--
Speaker 2: But we couldn't present it.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: We was, we was rushed out of the House of Delegates.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did not get a chance to formally present it.  You were rushed out before--you were--what, guards, security guards?
Speaker 2: Security guards.
Speaker 1: When they saw y'all coming in they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, I expected to be arrested.  I had some traveler's checks in my pocket.
Speaker 1: Just in case, huh?
Speaker 2: Just in case (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where was this convention?
Speaker 2: Atlantic City [New Jersey]--
Speaker 1: Atlantic--
Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Atlantic City.  And, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were on national news I suppose.
Speaker 2: National news and front page, in front page New York Times news [The New York Times], front page.
Story_ID: 654493
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now the following year was the, was what they call the summer of voter registration, the student project.
Speaker 2: Well, anyway, out of that--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  Excuse me, yes.
Speaker 2: --you know, out of that came what we called the Medical Committee for Civil Rights.  That's what we called ourselves.  We flew the banner of the Medical Committee for Civil Rights.
Speaker 1: Was that the beginning of that organization and--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the beginning of that organization, Medical Committee for Civil Rights.
Speaker 1: MC--
Speaker 2: Medical Committee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Committee for civil rights, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  That was the beginning of that organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Then--
Speaker 1: --there's a--is that the same as the Medical Committee for Human Rights?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, then--yes.  The Medical Committee for Human Rights was made up of med- members of the Medical Committee for Civil Rights.  And that occurred before the summer project started in 1964.  Many of those same physicians, many of those same physicians who joined us in the protest of the Medical Committee for Civil Rights later came south to my office at 1312 Lynch Street [John R. Lynch Street].  They sent a physician up from the North called Leslie Falk [Leslie A. Falk].  And they met at my office at 1312 Lynch Street with two local physicians, Dr. A.B. Britton [Albert B. Britton, Jr.] and Dr. James Anderson.  And I called it forming the southern wing, or at least the southern wing, if not, the Medical Committee for Human Rights.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now the Medical Committee for Human Rights, that was formed in the North.
Speaker 2: That group of physicians came out of the North.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they came out of the North.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Medical Committee for Civil Rights was a combination of northern and southern mostly black doctors.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: The medical--
Speaker 1: Civil rights.
Speaker 2: --the Medical Committee for Civil Rights (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Civil rights--
Speaker 2: --was the ad hoc group that Mike Holloman [sic. John L.S. Holloman, Jr.] and one other physician and I started to (unclear)--
Speaker 1: To present--
Speaker 2: --to present that petition to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was made up of a lot, a number of physicians of the North, particularly of the New York area.
