Story_ID: 60221
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm Interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our Videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, will you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Hana Stith, Hana is H-A-N-A, and Stith S-T-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: All right. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay and can you give us your date of birth?
Speaker 1: Yes, August 25th, 1928.  I was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm a native of Fort Wayne.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  All right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: Well at presently I'm retired.  But in my, in my first life, I was a teacher and I taught school, elementary educator for 36 years.  And I am presently retired.  But this is my second life.  And in my second life, I am co-founder of the African/African-American Historical Society.  We founded that in 1998 in Fort Wayne, Indiana.  And I founded the African/African-American Historical Museum, Society Museum.  And we opened on February the 1st in the Year 2000.  So I am presently Chairperson of the Historical Society and Curator of the museum.
Speaker 2: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is July the 29th, 2002.
Speaker 2: And where are we?
Speaker 1: We're in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and we are interviewing in our African/African-American Historical Museum.  I'd like to explain to you the name of our museum.  A lady said to me you have two Africans.  Yes, we have African and that is for people who are Africans who are untouched with anything else.  They are pure people from Africa.  And then African hyphen American represents us because we are African Americans.  So that's why we have the African slash African hyphen American.  The name of our organization as well as our museum.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Before-- [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: How do you spell the African/African-American Museum?
Speaker 2: We spell it A-F-R-I-C-A-N, slash A-F-R-I-C-A-N, hyphen A-M-E-R-I-C-A-N.
Story_ID: 60222
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me--before we get into depth, there are four, five "People" Magazine-ish type questions we are compelled to ask.  And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fried chicken.  I, I really--that's if you know, just take one.  That would be my favorite food would be fried chicken.  I have another one to go along with that.  And that would be cabbage or collard greens and cornbread.  Those would be my favorite foods.
Speaker 1: That makes your, your favorite meal.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite meal and, and I like a salad of course, and usually mashed potatoes and gravy or corn.  But truly African American food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes I have a favorite color, it's green.  At one time every room in my house was painted green.  Not exactly the same color green, but a different shade of green.  And for all my life I liked green.  And I live with it and wear it and I think it's a beautiful color.
Speaker 1: All right, and do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a favorite time of the year.  I like Fall.  I think it's a beautiful time of year.  I, I think it's so nice because it just seems like I don't know, it's just a beautiful time.  The, the leaves turn different colors and the leaves fall and I just think it's a beautiful time of the year.  And it's harvest and pumpkins and you can decorate things very nicely.  And I like the colors.  And I just think that that's a beautiful time of the year.  Cause I think as a child, there are things that happen to you as a child that influence your adult life and the things that you like best.  And I remember as a child we'd gather and have wiener roasts.  We'd tell ghost stories.  And it was just a wonderful time.  So I think that's been very impressionable to me and that's why I've always enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well not really.  I like to travel.  However, the, the traveling that I would like would be out west because I think it's so beautiful out there, you know in Arizona and Colorado and we have traveled out that way by car.  It's a beautiful trip.  We've gone that way twice.  And we've been to, you know to Arizona and to the Grand Canyon.  And you know it's so very pretty out there.  And I, I think that it makes you feel closer to, to God because the beauty and the works that you see could have only been created by Him.  So I like out west real well.  As a matter of fact, in my younger years I would like to have relocated there and I didn't realize it until I was older and I visited there.  I said what a beautiful place to live.  But I do like out west.  I think we do have a beautiful country, period.  And we've gone down--California and the Oregon coast, and it is just a wonderful feeling and I think it puts you nearer to, to nature and, and to God.  And it's real serene.  I really enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do have a favorite saying.  And there's, there's a poem and it--I do have the poem and I wished you had, you know told me earlier.  I would have had it in my hands cause I always carry it with me.  But it is that--it has to do with "I shall pass this way but once and you know for those that I can help, I help, I do it now for I shall never pass this way again." [Quaker proverb]  So that's one of my favorite sayings.  And another one of my favorite sayings is that "it's very important to know your roots" and I think by knowing your roots, it helps to hold you, like a tree, steadfast in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I like that also.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 60223
Speaker 1: We're rolling again and I wanted to ask you Ms. Stith, about your parents.  Could you give us their names and spell their names for us and their dates of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name was Viola Bryant, well her maiden name was Mew, but her name was Viola Bryant Jones.  And my mother was born in 1899 in Brunson, South Carolina.  And my father, his name was Miles Bryant, and he was 15 years older than my mother, so that means that he should have born--been born around--something in the 1880's.  And he was also born in Hampton County, South Carolina.  My father was 15 years older than my mother.  And they married when she was 15 years old.  And my father was approximately 31 years old at that time.  And they were married for seven, almost eight years before they had any children.
Speaker 1: Do--did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes, they met at church.  They, they were Methodist people.  And in South Carolina they had what they called big meetings, and the people would gather at the churches and bring all of their food.  And, you know picnic together.  And my mother met my father that way, through picnicking at the church.  And that's, that's how she met my dad.  And so they were married.  And they were married almost eight years before they had any children.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And they lived in South Carolina for a number of years.  And my father had a brother that had migrated to Indiana.  And he had gone to a training school for blacks in Mobile, Alabama as a carpenter.  And he came to Fort Wayne, my uncle came to Fort Wayne.  And the brothers later joined him.  And my father was one of the brothers that came.  And then my mother came.  And that was around the 1916, '17 [1917], '18 [1918], around that time is when they came to Fort Wayne.  And my father was a carpenter, and he also did construction work.  And all the Bryant brothers were carpenters and that was--my father was a Bryant brother.  And they did carpenter work.  And my one uncle worked at a place called the Old Rolling Mill.  And he was a carpenter at the Rolling Mill and spent his entire life working at the Rolling Mill as a carpenter, even during the Depression years.  So my mom and my dad had my sister, who was born in 1923.  Then I have a brother who was born in 1926, and I was born in 1928.  My father died in 1930, and I was just a--he was died in May of 1930 and I was not quite two years old when my father died.
Speaker 1: What did he die of?
Speaker 2: He died of heart failure.  And you know that's kidney problems along with liver problems and the collection of water in your body.  And they--it was called Dropsy in those days.  And he died in 1930, in May.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was about 50 years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was 50.  He was in his forties, about 47 years old I think when he died.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 60224
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Viola Bryant Jones] or your father [Miles Bryant] have stories about their ancestors in [South] Carolina or, or any other place that you can tell?
Speaker 2: Well my--I looked up my father's family.  And it was in the 1880 census, because I think it was the 1890 census, I really need to check that, that there is--there's no census or it had been destroyed.  But I looked up the 1880 census and my grandmother and my grandfather were, were farmers.  And they had three children at that time, that was before my father was born.  They had three children at that time.  And it said that you know they were uneducated people.  My grandmother could not read and write, but my grandfather could read a little and he could write a little, and they were tenant farmers.  And they had three children, and that was in the 18--I think it was in the 1880 census.  But my father had not been born yet.  But I know that my grandmother and my grandfather, they had nine children, and they had six boys and three girls.  And some did not live to be adults.  But my father--I never knew him to really, you know, be able to talk to him or anything like that.  But I did have an uncle who was sort of like a surrogate father.  He was sort of--came in.  Because in those days, and especially in my family, the brothers were very close.  And they would help each other.  So at my father's death, my mom says that on my father's deathbed, he had asked his brothers to help to raise the children because my father was the youngest brother and he had the youngest children.  And at that particular time, I was the Bryant child.  And the other uncles agreed that they would do the very best they could to help raise us because my father knew that he was going to die.  And so that was his death wish, that his children be, you know, looked after by their brothers.  And, and that happened all during our lives.  We had the very best uncle, this one in particular, that anybody could ever have because not only did he bring groceries to us, but we didn't have a car and he would take us to church and take us to Sunday school and things like that.  He was a very, very fine uncle.  And of course my mother married, remarried in 1932 she remarried.  And she had two children by her second husband.  But in--and her second husband died also after she had been married to him for not quite three years, the second husband died.  And but nevertheless, my uncle, my father's brother still, you know, did for our family and spent a lot of time with the children.
Story_ID: 60225
Speaker 1: And I had a very, very happy childhood.  Very, extremely happy childhood because people were so kind to us and so kind to my mother [Viola Bryant Jones].  And you know as children growing up, we really never wanted for anything.  And I think your childhood has a lot to do with your adulthood.  And I knew a lot of love, a lot of kindness, and just a beautiful life as a child.  We lived in a place, it was called the Apple Orchard.  Our house was surrounded back by apple trees and we had cousins that lived across the street and we were just sort of like a clan.  And it was just a beautiful life.  My mother went to work as a maid in a hotel.  Mom only made eight dollars a week, but she was a good mother in raising her children.  She brought home newspapers from the hotel every day so we were taught, you know that we had to read these newspapers.  So we learned to read and we learned to write.  And we were never hungry.  We were on Relief for just a very short period of time.  And we could get canned goods and bread and things like that and food stamps, but after a while my mother found a job and she told them that she no longer needed assistance because she had a job; she could work.  And incidentally, my stepfather died in about 1936 and my mother had had two children by my stepfather.  And the one brother was about three years old at that time, and we had another brother that was nine months old.  And the brother that was nine months old and my stepfather died six hours apart.  My stepfather died with tuberculosis, and our little baby was nine months old at that time and he died with meningitis of the spine.  But you know, and they had a double funeral.  And we always remember, you know, my stepfather in the casket and in front of him was our brother in another casket.  But in spite of the fact that it was such a tragic thing to happen, we figured that God knew best and he knew what my mother would be able to provide for and she was a very strong lady.  And because my stepfather had tuberculosis, and you know in those days tuberculosis ran rampant among the black race.  And my mother contracted tuberculosis also.  And later on my mother had to go to the sanitorium.  She was in the sanitorium for a year, and my oldest sister was able to take over the duties of the household and take care of us while my mom was in the sanitorium.  And still our family came together.  First cousins, uncles, just provided so well for the children and they even took us out, cause my brother and I were too young to go in to actually see my mom.  So we could go to the sanitorium and we would play outsider her window.  And it was just a very wonderful thing that happened.  My mother did recuperate from tuberculosis, which was very unusual in those days.  And they had a method by which they called it the fluoroscope, which mean that they would go in and x-ray the lung.  And there was only one lung that was damaged from tuberculosis, one diseased lung.  So they punctured that lung and took all of the air out of it, so it could rest.  And by the treatments that she got, the lung was able--had healed.  And they blew it back up and put the air in it and my mother was healed with--from tuberculosis in a period of a year.  And then she worked out there as sort of like a nurse for another year she worked there at the sanitorium.  But she was a good, strong woman.  And then she came back and my mom worked as maid at a hotel.  And you know that was--she do the--she did that for a long period of time.  And then eventually she stopped doing that and she started doing day work because it paid more money.  And she would clean homes and things like that.  She was a, a very, very fine, outstanding lady and provided very well for her family.  So we grew up very happy children.  And even though my mother had married a second time and we did have another brother with this other marriage, he was always our brother and there's never been any distinction with him not being, you know, our just, our--another--our real, real brother.  So he has been and he's a very fine young man too.  So he went along with our family and my father's family, they--he was one of those persons also.  So we had a very nice life.
Story_ID: 60226
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what--can, can you tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  You've told me about some of them already.  But all--also I'd like to know what, what, what, what things characterized you as a child that would distinguish you from other children when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well I think really what, what distinguished me from other children is that I had a, a first cousin who was my uncle's daughter.  We graduated from college and she was the first person in our family to graduate from college.  She graduated from Wilberforce [Wilberforce University in Wilberforce, Ohio].  And she was very brilliant.  And I think that she was a real big influence on all of our lives because she--they sort of nurtured, nurtured--my, my father's--all of the children, they really nurtured them.  By that I mean if we had any problems in school, my mom would always, you know she'd come and she'd help the children.  And I not only that, my uncle would take us to Sunday School every Sunday and she was like our Sunday School teacher.  And when we had programs and plays, and in Fort Wayne [Indiana] there were not too many black people.  And our center of activity was our churches.  And she would always give us parts in plays and we were actually pushed and encouraged to excel and to do well in school.  Not only to do well in school, but encouraged to do well in anything that we did, we were pushed to be the very best.  She never--at that particular time she was not married, my uncle had two, three daughters.  And they worked and bought us clothes and dressed us well and pushed my father's children.  They were just good to us, along with my uncle.  And every Saturday night I spent with my uncle and his family.  And the, the smell that is so prominent, or so embedded in my mind is every Sunday morning we would wake up about 8:00, sometimes 7:30, and we would all go down to the kitchen and we would have prayer.  And every Sunday morning they had rice and gravy and cube steak and toast and coffee.  And I shall never forget that aroma of that steak and smothered onions that I would wake up to every Sunday morning.  And that's what we would have for breakfast.  But before breakfast, we would always pray, and I always remember my uncle's prayer.  And he would speak of sin and you know how God hated sin and he was cutting sin like a two edged sword.  And in my mind I could picture God standing up with this sword just cutting the sin from left to right with his two edged sword.  And then after prayer we would always have this delicious toast, this delicious heavy meal, which was our Sunday breakfast.  And my uncle would pick up the other children and take us all to church and Sunday School.  I remember that aroma very, very well.  And I also remember that gypsies used to come around and they would sell some kind of an incense and it was sort of like a, a bar.  And you would put it in your dresser drawers and the fragrance would go all through your clothing.  And I remember that fragrance, and it was sort of like a cologne that was called Arabian Nights and Evening in Paris.  And I will always remember those aromas.  And my mom would buy that and put in her dresser drawer so her dresser drawers would always smell real nice.  I had such a delightful childhood, and I remember those things.  And we lived across the street from a park, it was our very own park.  It was called Booker T. Washington Park.  And in the Summertime we always had our chores and responsibilities and our jobs to do.  And after we did our jobs, we could go to the park to play.  And it was a very, very, very nice childhood.  So those are some of the things that I remember.  Cousins much older than we, were influencing and helping us to, you know to elevate ourselves in life, to get an education, to be the best that we could be, to excel in school.  And we were actually pushed and motivated.
Speaker 1: What was your, your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: My uncle's name was Gus Bryant, was Augustus Bryant.
Speaker 1: And what was your, your cousin's name that went to Wilberforce?
Speaker 2: The cousin that went to Wilberforce, her name was Josie, Josie Lee Michelle.  It's, it's Bryant then but it's Michelle now.  And she graduated cum laude from Wilberforce in 1932.  And I was just you know a very young child when she graduated from Wilberforce.  And she was not able to get a job.  Well she was gonna go to Ohio State [University in Columbus] and work on her master's because she'd gotten her degree in biology.  And when she came to Fort Wayne, she was not able to get a job teaching or in education.  So she worked at a large department store, working in the China Department and running an elevator in Fort Wayne called Wolf and Dessauers.  Her two sisters had not been college educated, but they were raised by my uncle who was very strict, and very, you know very stern with, with his children.  He was a wonderful man.
Story_ID: 60227
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now where did you go to school here in Fort Wayne [Indiana] and how did you, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I went to Justin Study School from kindergarten through sixth grade.  I--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Justin, J-U-S-T-I-N, and the initial is N.  Justin N. and Study is S-T-U-D-Y.  I went to Justin Study from kindergarten through sixth grade.  I was pushed to excel in school, which I did.  And I have my school records, which have been misplaced, from kindergarten through sixth grade.  And when I was tested there, I had a C Mental Rating.  But I never made anything lower than a B.  I was an A, practically a A student all through grade school, with a couple B's.  I'd only ever gotten one C and that was in--well it was in conduct because of talking in third grade.  But I always excelled.
Speaker 1: You liked to talk when you--
Speaker 2: Yes, talking to my girlfriend in third grade.  We sat next to each other.
Speaker 1: [Unclear] like to talk and I--I think before we started you talking, you were talking about how you like talk.
Speaker 2: This is right.
Speaker 1: And when was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause I remember I got in trouble in third grade about that talking.  But anyhow that was the only C that I've ever gotten school.  And then my grades were just, just about all A's.  And then I was retested in third grade and my Mental Rating was a B.  But in spite of Mental Rating being a B--
Speaker 1: Now what is, excuse me, but what is a Mental Rating, what is that?  That's--
Speaker 2: Your, your Mental Rating is your intelligence level.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause I've heard of IQ [Intelligence Quotient].
Speaker 2: Yeah, your intelligence.
Speaker 1: IQ test, but a Mental Rating is a, is a type of an IQ test?
Speaker 2: IQ test comes with, with different numbers you know, maybe you test 140, you're a genius and things like that.  Your IQ.  So we converted it in Fort Wayne, they converted that score to a Mental Rating.  And so my, my Mental Rating was a B.  And I had excelled all through school because even when--third grade and fourth grade they had Be Kind to Animal Week.  And they would have certain students from every school speak and represent--there was a Custer Donovan (ph.0 who was in charge of Humane Society.  And he would take the best students from the schools and we would go to different schools and speak.  And I would--I was always chosen to give a poem and always traveled with him.  And also I represented our school.  We had spelling contests at that time.  And I was the best speller in our school.  And I represented our school, we were on radio.  And I, I was the best speller and I was chosen to represent Study School.  And I was always pushed and encouraged to be the best that I could be.  And that's exactly what, what my life was.  You know and I've always felt real good about myself because I was taught to feel real good about myself.  And I remember I went to Washington, it was then our, our junior high school.  After we left Study, went to junior high school which was seventh and eighth grade.  I had excelled in the seventh and eighth grade at Washington School.  My seventh and eighth grade music and speech teacher is still alive, and I'm in an organization with her at the present time, we're on the local education board.  And she's very old and everything, but I, I'm still, you know a friend of hers.  And even in seventh and eighth grades I excelled.  And I won speech contests with--I gave a speech on Toussaint Louverture, you know he's the one who freed Haiti.  I gave a speech on Toussaint Louverture and I won the best speaker in the entire school in the eighth grade.  And she gave me a book, "Treasure Island".  I even still have my third grade reader, I loved it so very much and the poems that were in it.  So I guess I kind of lived a little bit different life than the average person.  My mom's kids, cause we were always encouraged.  And we were really loved and we knew that we were loved.
Story_ID: 60228
Speaker 1: We had just been discussing school, but could, could you--could we go back and maybe talk about where you lived and what the black community was like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I lived in a place called Westfield [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  And Westfield, a lot of people refer to as the sticks.  So that was, you know, out west.  And it was just like a, a different part of Fort Wayne [Indiana].  And I lived in a place called the Apple Orchard because we had you know, quite a bit of land with our houses.  And our house on--sort of like behind our house was this apple orchard.  And so people would just say you live in the apple orchard.  And, and I did.  And it was out called Westfield.  And the part of town where most of the black people called the--they called it you know, they were in town.  And there were not too many black people in Fort Wayne at all at that time.  I imagine there were about 2,500 black people in Fort Wayne in my growing up years.  And everybody knew everybody else.  And we would be able to come across town, we'd have to come on the streetcar for our recreation.  We had a recreation center out in Westfield, which was a branch of the Westfield, of the Wheatley Center [Phyllis Wheatley Community Center] that was on Douglas Street across from the building that we're now in.  It was 421 East Douglas Street.  But we would come across town for activities on the streetcar.  Or if someone had a car, then we would come in the car.  But our main activity was churches.  Fort Wayne was highly segregated.  There were no signs, but we could not sit any place that we wanted to sit in the movies.  We could not eat in any of the restaurants downtown.  We could sit any place we wanted on the streetcar.  But there were very few places to go and there were very few things to do.  We had our own black restaurants.  We had our black businesses like dry cleaners, hauling that would haul.  We had an exterminating company and we had the nicest restaurant when I grew up in Fort Wayne was called the Chicken Shack.  It was owned by a black man, operated by all black people, but it was open to the entire community and whites would come also to the Chicken Shack.  As a matter of fact when I was a teenager, I worked there as a waitress on Friday and Saturday nights.  And our greatest clientele, they were white people.  And we opened like 6:00 in the evening, and we stayed open as long as people came, three, four and 5:00 in the mornings.  We sold 300--if we sold under three--well say if we sold under 100 chickens, or 100 chickens and they were in quarters, we would be paid three dollars a night as waitresses.  But if we sold over 100, then we received four dollars a night, but we had very nice tips at the Chicken Shack.  But Fort Wayne was highly segregated.  No blacks could stay in any of the hotels downtown.  You could not eat in any of the restaurants downtown.  And it was really a segregated community.  So blacks had more things of their own because it was so highly segregated.  We couldn't even eat at a lunch counter, sit down lunch counter, in the store downtown.  In the large, you know drug store or ten cent store downtown.  So there was a lot of segregation here when I grew up.  And in schools, there was no segregation because you went to your neighborhood schools, but the neighborhoods were segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that pretty much took care of--
Speaker 2: That pretty much took care of that.  But all of the schools were integrated.
Story_ID: 60229
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now tell me about high school.  Now when you--what--before we leave grade school, are there any particular teachers in grade school you ident--identified that were, that were helpful to you and help, helping guide you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In grade school I had always been--well sort of like teacher's pet I guess.  And I always had real, real nice teachers.  And I have pictures of all of my teachers that I've gone back to the school and gotten the school records and remember.  And they were all very good to me.  I had a, a kindergarten teacher who liked me real well and from day one I kind of think if you, you get off to a real good start.  Her name was Ms. McCarthy and she was--those, in those days teachers were not married.  And I had nice teachers.  This third grade teacher that I got a C in conduct from, her name was Ms. Beanwigg and she was very young and very new.  And--
Speaker 1: Beanwigg?
Speaker 2: Beanwigg was her name.  I remember all my teachers.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  B-E-A-N, Beanwigg, W-I-G-G.  And she was extremely--she was very new, very young teacher.  But you know she was just a little bit different.  And then that was at Justin N. Study [Elementary] School.  And then I especially liked my sixth grade teacher.  My sixth grade teacher was--my fifth grade teacher, excuse me, her name was Ms. Kenny.  And she would even take me to her house on Saturday afternoon or Friday afternoons.  And she was very kind to me too.  And I, I think--and I liked her.  I had my very first man teacher, and I always remember him too, for math.  And his name was Mr. Myers, Dale Myers.  And he was my math teacher and he was not a good teacher.  And he never, you know, was really energetic or taught us how to do fractions, and that caused me trouble when I got on a little bit more to junior high school.  But I remember him too.  And my other man teacher was a Mr. Burke, sixth grade teacher was very nice.  But I re--remember my teachers, especially in elementary school who were very kind to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 60230
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Central High School.  And I had good teachers at Central High School also.  But they did not take too much interest in black students like you know guiding you to take college prep courses and things like that.  You just kind of had to do that on your own.  The dean never talked to us.  They did not think that blacks were sort of like college material.  And so we had to sort of like take college prep and guide on our own the courses that we really wanted to take.  So high school was not too friendly to black students.  But you know we could take college prep and I did take college prep courses.  We were not encouraged, but most of the black kids took general courses, you know that was just enough to get through, or they took courses where it was sort of like you did manual training stuff.  But the dean never counseled us and we were not allowed to, you know we were not cheerleaders.  We were not welcomed at the school dances, now that was in the '40's [1940s].  We were not welcomed at the school dances and things like that, just quite a bit of prejudice in, in high school against black students.
Story_ID: 60231
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have to provide an alternative social life for yourselves?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.  We never--I never went to school, a high school dance in my life.  And most of our activities came to the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center.  They provided the activities and the organizations for the black kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about the Phyllis Wheatley Center.
Speaker 2: The Phyllis Wheatley Center was founded in Fort Wayne [Indiana] in 1920.  And of course you know it was a great migration from the south to the north, and the people who came--the Phyllis Wheatley Center was there to help them find employment, to help them find housing, for their social life and their organizations and their clubs.  And most of the black activities were centered around the Phyllis Wheatley Center, as well as our black churches.  Because outside of that, it was a total segregated community.  We had dances that were by black people only.  And we had a lot of, you know, activities that were church oriented, or the Phyllis Wheatley Center oriented.  And that's what our life was because Fort Wayne was not a friendly place to black people.  The courts, the judges, the police, they were not friendly to us at all at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so the Wheatley Center was sort of like a settlement house or, or what the Urban League was first designed to do to--
Speaker 2: Well the Phyllis, the Phyllis Wheatley Center went into-- later, the Urban League went into the Phyllis Wheatley Center.  Because you know it was just like for recreation, for, for social life and things like that.  And it would help to train you to do well on your job, and for job placement as well.  That's what the Phyllis Wheatley Center did.  And that was also what the Fort Wayne Urban League did.  So the Urban League was a more modern updated who had educated people to run.  The people who ran the Phyllis Wheatley Center were always not degreed in, in that particular area like for whatever it was.  But those people from the Urban League, they were degreed, they were college people in whatever field that was that they were affiliated with.  So that Phyllis Wheatley Center died out, and the Fort Wayne Urban League came into being, so that was the difference.
Speaker 1: Mmm-hmm
Story_ID: 60232
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so well when you were in high school [Central High School in Fort Wayne, Indiana], did you--were you, were you patterning yourself after your cousin [Josie Lee Michelle]?  And did you think you'd go to Wilberforce [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] one day?
Speaker 2: Well I was always patterned after, after my cousin because of strong family ties and you know they were there forever.  And I, I knew that I was gonna go to Wilberforce because she had gone to Wilberforce.  And then I won a scholarship to Wilberforce University.  It was through our church organization, the lay organization.  In those days we had a lot of speeches and competitive competition.  And I was with the Fourth District of the A.M.E. [African American Episcopal] Church.  And it was a lay organization that encouraged young people to, to speak and to speak well.  And we had certain topics that we spoke on.  And mine was "I am an American Negro".  And I spoke all over--went as far as Iowa traveling for conference and conventions with our church and our youth organizations.  And I won, I was the best speaker in the entire district.  And I was always pushed to win, to be the best, to do great things.  And you know it was just a part of me.  And the same cousin who was really my mentor, she's still alive today and she's ninety-one, pushed and motivated me.  So I won a scholarship to Wilberforce University.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's how I got to Wilberforce University.
Story_ID: 60233
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Central High school in Fort Wayne, Indiana] I think if I'm not mistaken, the, the high school basketball team did, did, did pretty well or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, in my--when I was--in 1942 I entered high school.  So '42 [1942]/'43 [1943], we won state, I was just a freshman.  And we won state in, in that, that year.  And I remember there was a--we were celebrating that we had won, you know state, and there was a, a school dance.  And black kids went to the dance and we were not really welcomed at the dance, and there was some problems.  And they asked the black children to leave.  So we left.
Speaker 1: Now I think black basketball players were instrumental in the--
Speaker 2: Winning.
Speaker 1: --championship, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in winning the state because some of the basketball players--we have that picture here.  There were, there were two outstanding black guys that played on that team, one was Jim Blanks and the other was Raymond Chambers.  There were not a whole lot of black guys on the team that won state, but they were outstanding players, those that did play.  And we have that in our museum when they won state
Story_ID: 60234
Speaker 1: In 1946, we were runners up in, in basketball.  And so anyhow but just like I said, we were never welcomed at the school dances, even though we did have outstanding black guys.  We had no black cheerleaders or anything like that.  And let's say in our graduating class of 1946 there were approximately 360-some students, and twenty-six of those students were African Americans.  So we were in a minority at the school at that time also.  But my high school years were not really exciting.  We just went and chose the courses that we wanted to choose and did the very best we could do with never any encouragement from any of, of you know the dean of the school or anything like that.  So I graduated in 1946 from Central High School.
Story_ID: 60235
Speaker 1: And I'd won a scholarship to Wilberforce University [in Wilberforce, Ohio].  And I went to Wilberforce University, and while I was at Wilberforce, they lost their accreditation.  And that was a definite division of the state and the church.  At that particular time we had Carnegie Library and I remember the state even took all of the books out of the library, it was a terrible experience.
Speaker 2: Maybe just go through this a little slower cause you, you were there at a critical--
Speaker 1: Very critical time
Speaker 2: Here's an A.M.E. school, Wilberforce University, the oldest black university in the United States.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Founded in 1856 and what happened?  I mean what was the loss of accreditation about?  I mean what, what happened?
Speaker 1: Well there was, there was problems with, with the college.  And the problems--I, I think it had to do with President [Charles Harris] Wesley was the President of the College at that time and--
Speaker 2: [Unclear].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Bishop Ransom was over the church.  And I really and truly think there was a conflict be--between the two.  And there were some reports that had been made against the church side, and you know, and I guess the people came that give the accreditation.  And there was some dispute or some problems that came up at that particular time and we lost the accreditation for, for the college.
Speaker 2: Now that meant that the--at that time, the state of Ohio had entered into some kind of a partnership with Wilberforce?
Speaker 1: Of course they did.  See and the ravine divided the state and, and the state and the church.  But much of our business was done on the state side, like the Bursar Office, you know and our main offices and things like that.  We still transacted our business through the state.  But then--and, and the kids that were enrolled with the state, they would have classes on the church side and we'd have classes on the state side.  But when this problem did come, it was the church side that lost their accreditation.  And there was a division.  And so that was a very, very important time so far as history was concerned because it took many years, or some years to, to gain that accreditation back.  And--
Speaker 2: The, the state side became Central State [University].
Speaker 1: The state side became Central State, that's right because before it was Wilberforce.  And the state side became Central State.  And then we were Wilberforce University.  So that, that's what, you know when the split came.  So you know I was there at the time that it happened.
Speaker 2: Did you think you might not graduate or something?  Or--
Speaker 1: Well I knew the college lost their accreditation so I, I refused to go back to a school that was unaccredited.  So a lot of places would not have accepted your--would not have accepted your credentials at that time, you know if you had done that.  So what happened is that I had dropped out of school completely.
Story_ID: 60236
Speaker 1: And I went to New York City.  And so I, I was in New York City and I met my husband [Harold Stith] in New York City.  And then--
Speaker 2: Did you have relatives in New York City?
Speaker 1: Yes, I had relatives in New York City, I had relatives in New York City.  And I went to New York City and I wanted to go to the American Negro Theater.  And I hung around a little bit, but I actually got a job in New York.  And I worked in New York and I had met my husband.  And later on we married, and I was married in New York in 1948.
Speaker 2: Did you meet him in the theater?
Speaker 1: No I did not.  My husband lived a couple doors from my cousin on 123rd Street.  And I had--I worked at a supermarket, my first job was at a supermarket in New York called Weisbecker's on 125th Street [Charles Weisbecker Market].  And I did love New York, and I did you know, stay with my cousin there.
Speaker 2: Is this in Harlem [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 1: This is in Harlem, this is the heart of Harlem.  I lived between 7th and 8th on 123rd Street, and had to go past my husband's family's home, and that's how I met him.  And I worked there in the supermarket.  I sold produce and I sold pastry.  It was a very exciting place to work, I met a lot of Father Divine's people and got acquainted with his cult [International Peace Mission movement].  And then I got a job working in a belt factory.  I worked in the garment industry.  Got a job working at stereo--I worked for Chock full o'Nuts.  I had a very exciting life in New York, very exciting life.
Speaker 2: Was that in Harlem?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Chock full o'Nuts--
Speaker 1: Yes, Chock full o'Nuts, I worked at Chock full o'Nuts on the corner of Eighth Avenue and 34th Street across from Macy's, dearly loved New York.  Had a very exciting life in New York City.  And I worked finally at--on Wall Street in a place called Stereo Supply.  And I worked in stereos, which is the--made slides and things like that for a very small business there, the only employee that worked there.  And then later I married my husband, we got married in 1948.  And I lived in New York for two years.  My husband was a former professional fighter.  And that's--he was a professional fighter when I met him.  And he had quite a few professional fights.  And he injured a finger, a faucet broke off, the handle broke off and destroyed the ligament and he lost control of his thumb.  So he could no longer be a professional fighter.  He worked at the post office for a while, and then he went to New York School of Technology.  And he was enrolled in electrical engineering.  Studied electrical engineering.  And then we came to Fort Wayne [Indiana] on a vacation.  Course we were happy in New York, but we were quite poor too.  And life was exciting and you know you're having a good time and you're newly married, so life is just great.  Had to pawn my watch sometimes to pay our rent.  We lived in New York City on 152nd and St. Nicholas Place.  And later we moved to Brooklyn [New York City, New York], and we stayed on the third floor of a house owned by the Ajayes, who were the parents of Franklyn Adeni Ajaye who's a comedian.  Yeah, we took care of him when he was a baby.  And just really enjoyed ourselves.  We didn't have very much, but we sure were happy.  And then we came to New York on--came to Fort Wayne on a vacation one year in 1950 and my husband said hey, this is the place to be, there's jobs here.  I'm going to stay.  And he refused to go back to New York.  So I had to go back to New York.  He found himself a job at General Electric.  I went back to New York and quit my job.  We had a little bit of furniture and I got what little things we did have together and shipped them to Fort Wayne.  So in August of 1950, we moved lock, stock and barrel to Fort Wayne, which was my hometown, which I did not want to move back to.  But we were just able to survive in New York, and we're very happy that we did relocate in 1950 back to Fort Wayne.
Story_ID: 60237
Speaker 1: I have a question, a couple questions here.  You mentioned American Negro Theater.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this was--became later on the Negro Ensemble Company.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And it was a, you know, WPA [Works Project Administration] project I believe.  And we-[HM] Ossie Davis and [HM] Ruby Dee.
Speaker 2: Ruby Dee.
Speaker 1: Started with that very same company around the same time.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That was around 1943, '44 [1944], '45 [1945] or so they were there.  So I don't--I mean did, did you, did you run--run into either of them?
Speaker 2: No, I, I saw--it was--was that Anna Lucasta.  I think Ruby Dee played in Anna Lucasta, and that was one of the very first plays, and I was in New York at that time.  And that, you know but I never did really become active, or get to be a, a real good part of it.  So they were there at that time.
Speaker 1: At Wilberforce [University in Ohio], Wilberforce has--I know you, before you went to Wilberforce, you had a tradition of being involved in elocution contests and that sort of thing.  And Wilberforce, you know the--one of the greatest heroines of Wilberforce is Hallie Q. Brown, who was an elocutionist, you know of worldwide fame and did, did, did they talk about her a lot at Wilberforce when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You were encouraged to pursue that?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  She's a very famous person when I was at Wilberforce.  Very, very famous on that campus and you know her name was--I think there were some things there that were even named after her.
Speaker 1: Yea, the library.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very outstanding, yeah we, we knew quite a bit about her.  So you know Wilberforce was just the place we--I tell you Leontyne Price was there when I was there too because I was a freshman, we both lived in Shorter Hall.  And I lived on the third floor in Shorter Hall and she lived on the fourth floor in Shorter Hall.  And you know we had chapel.  We had to go to chapel.  And Leontyne would always sing.  We'd say "No, not her again."  And so--anyhow, that was Leontyne, she was on the fourth floor and I was on the third floor at Shorter Hall, and we were there at the same time, so you know--
Speaker 1: There wasn't a lot of appreciation for operatic singing.
Speaker 2: It was not.  No, no, no, no, it was not a lot of appreciation for her at that time, so, but Wilberforce.  You know I'm just real sorry that they lost their accreditation and everything because they've produced some very great people and it's very important--oldest black college in the United States.  So I'm real proud even now to be a part of it because I'm still a part of it.
Story_ID: 60238
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when, when you came back to Fort Wayne [Indiana], did you--I guess you had, had to re-pursue your degree.
Speaker 2: Well what happened when I came back to Fort Wayne, I worked at GE [General Electric] also.  Worked at GE and then my husband [Harold Stith] I, we were able to save enough money, we bought a house right across the street from this building where I am a year and a half later.  And we were just very proud, we had our home and everything.  And you know we really got on our feet.  And I worked at General Electric for five years and then I, I, I got pregnant.  And so when--after I got pregnant, I got pregnant in 1955 and a, a child in 1956.  So after my child was born, my husband said to me, "You're not going back to work in a factory."  And he encouraged me then to go back to college.  So I went back to college at the age of 27 years old, I'd been out of college for ten years.  I mean I'd been out of school since I was 17 years old, and I went back to college at the age of 27 and I went to St. Francis University [University of Saint Francis in Fort Wayne, Indiana] with a brand new baby practically.  And we had a lady to come in to take care of the baby for us.  And I went to college full time.  And while at St. Francis, you know they were real nice, they accepted my credits from Wilberforce University.
Speaker 1: Now is St. Francis here in--
Speaker 2: St. Francis, that's St. Francis College at that time and I was the only black student fully enrolled at St. Francis at that time.
Speaker 1: It's here in Fort Wayne.
Speaker 2: It's here in Fort Wayne, right.  So it's a Catholic college, and I went back to the college.  And they accepted my credits from Wilberforce University.  So I went into elementary education.  Wilberforce, I was in pre-law, I was going towards a law degree.  So at St. Francis College, I pursued elementary education.  So I had no electives because they'd already accepted my credits from Wilberforce.  And I graduated from St. Francis with honors.  I was taken into their National Honor Society.  In three years I graduated.  And 1960, that was exactly ten years later than I should have come out of school.  But because I'd had the, the baby and everything, my husband said that's what you needed to go into.  And he worked two jobs to support us, so I was able to go back to school full time and to pay a lady to come in to keep my daughter.  And then I put my daughter in nursery school when she was two years and one month old.  And she went to, to nursery school every day until you know, she was nine years old.  Cause I--after I graduated with my bachelor's, I pursued my master's degree.  And I received my master's degree and I took most of my subjects in the summer time, so I still kept her in--at nursery school.  So anyhow I graduated, received my master's and a bachelor's in 1960 and my master's in 1965 from St. Francis.  And I went back to school, always went back to school, to keep current with you know, the new trends and what was happening.  So I was forever going back to school.  And I enjoyed that and I was hired in 1960 for Fort Wayne Community Schools, and I was the first black teacher at a school called McCulloch [Elementary School].  And I went there in 1960 hired as a second grade teacher.  And that started my teaching career in 1960.
Story_ID: 60239
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your, your career teaching in the pub--public schools of Fort Wayne [Indiana].  I mean what were they like and, and what was, what was public education like for black people when you started in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1960.  Well they had not hired their first black teacher until 1952.  And her name was Gloria Morton Finney and they hired her for second grade at Hanna School.  We had inner city schools at that time.  And our inner city schools was Hanna, that was an elementary school.  And we had Harmer [Grade School], that was an elementary school, and we had McCulloch [Elementary School], that was an elementary school, and we had James [A.] Smart [School].  And James Smart did go up to the eighth grade.  Those were the inner city schools.  And they had a lot of black students in those schools because they were in the inner city.  And they would hire--our black teachers were placed in the inner city schools.  Of course that's where I wanted to be because I figured that I was able to help, you know our, our students more.  And it was tough.  We had mostly--when I was hired at McCulloch School as the very first black teacher in 1960, 75 percent of the students were black.  And they had never had a black teacher there.  They had a black janitor.  But I, I felt as though then I could see the, the teachers were, you know, they, they were there but I, I--some of them were very dedicated.  You can't ever say that they were not dedicated because a lot of those teachers were really dedicated.  But we had a lot of discipline problems and the teachers were not able to handle the discipline problems in many instances.  And later on we did manage to acquire at least--we had nine black teachers at McCulloch School with a predominantly black school.  And it was in 1965 that our first black principal came in, and that was Dr. [Levan] Scott.  And he was able to really turn things around.  By being a black man, he more or less went into things that were of interest to black children.  He insisted that we visit all the homes and know the parents.  We had outreach programs that we brought the parents into the school to make them more active in the PTA [Parents and Teachers Association] because that's where you know our problems would begin was in the home.  So he did reach out to touch the parents in the homes.  And we just had wonderful things happening in our school at that particular time.  And he was our principal there for five years.  We were the first school to have black history programs.  And it was just a, a wonderful school.  He was a man who--he just was quiet, but he made certain demands on his teachers.  Like we had to visit the homes, we had to know the parents.  We had a lot of demands were placed upon us and we had to teach black history.
Story_ID: 60240
Speaker 1: Now, now how was that done?  How did you visit the homes?  I mean I know teaching school takes a lot of time, preparing lesson plans and all that.  But what, what part--what--when would you visit the parents?
Speaker 2: You would make arrangements to visit the parents on your own after school.  There was no free time granted, you had to visit them on Saturdays, on Sundays or after school.  It was on your own.  But you had to contact every student and every parent.  And he [McCulloch Elementary School principal Dr. Levan Scott] wanted us to go into the home so we could see what the home was like.  And we did manage to visit every home.  Some--they--you know we were interviewed on the porch.  We were not maybe welcomed into the home, but we did visit every home.  And we had a beautiful relationship.  He started a gospel choir.  And we were the first to have a gospel choir where he acquired robes from fraternities.  And our children had robes and they would give performances at other schools and for other occasions, of black music, gospel, spiritual.  He tried to revive and to preserve the tradition and the culture of a people, which he did very well.  And it was because of him and our starting to celebrate Black History Month, that it did catch on and it did go through Fort Wayne Community Schools [Indiana] eventually.  All the schools, or most of the schools did celebrate Black History Week, then it was Black History Month, and that's it caught a hold in Fort Wayne.
Story_ID: 60241
Speaker 1: But the schools were, you know according to the neighborhood [in Fort Wayne, Indiana] as you lived in, as I said previously.  Those were the schools that you attended.  And it was not until later on when we had the PQE and the integration of the schools in Fort Wayne, the real integration of the schools in Fort Wayne.  But before that, we had most of the black teachers in the black schools in the inner city.  But when the schools were desegregated, first our high schools were desegregated, and then you know secondary education.  And then it came on down into the elementary schools, and they were desegregated with a plan called PQE.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: PQE is Parents for Quality Education.  And so you know that was it, that was the initials for that.  It came into being and that is when Fort Wayne really integrated their schools.  And our children were--they came and immediately and tore down all the inner city schools so they would not have to bus white children into the inner city schools.  And they were torn down.  Very, very well built buildings were torn down.  So all our children are bussed out and nobody--well we had started a magnet school program also.  And we do have a couple of magnet schools that are just the best.  And they are--the one is Weisser Park, and the white kids are bussed into that magnet school cause they have a lot of money and outstanding program.  And then we also have Memorial Park where kids are bussed into.  But other than that, the black children are bussed out to the schools.  We only have a couple schools maybe that are walk-in.  But they had a PQE settlement and 25 percent of all the schools are supposed to be minority students, and 75 percent are supposed to be majority students.
Speaker 2: And that policy's still in place?
Speaker 1: That policy is still in place.  Like if you have a class of twenty-eight, you can count, you'll have seven minority students in that class.
Speaker 2: Do--in your opinion, does this help black students or hinder black students, or, or is it someplace in the middle?
Speaker 1: Well I kind of think that it all depends on the individual school and the individual circumstances.  But I've always felt as though black children were not fully accepted in the outlying schools.  And if there were behavior problems, the kids were just kind of ignored or placed, you know in a special place to do menial work.  And I've not really and truly agreed with the total integration that they do have because I think that in many of the schools, the black children are not welcome.  You know, "You really don't belong here, you're bussed in, this is our school."  But it's the black children that are mostly bussed, and not the white children that are bussed.  And--
Speaker 2: Makes them a fish out of water--
Speaker 1: That's right.  And I've never really thought that it was an outstanding plan.  But it is what is in place, and this is what the parents have accepted, and this is what we're doing today.  And our children are being bused out.
Speaker 2: Now did, did black leadership here in Fort Wayne fight for that?
Speaker 1: Well black leadership did not oppose it.  As a matter of fact, they did agree with it.  Because black leadership at one time had wanted you know, Central High School to remain and students to be bused in to Central High School so it would be integrated.  But there was you know, a lot of boycotting and a lot of problems, and this is the plan that they did settle on.
Story_ID: 60242
Speaker 1: So I taught school in Fort Wayne Community Schools [Indiana] for 36 years.  Twenty two years was spent in the classroom, I taught from grades kindergarten, I mean excuse me, grades first through fourth, basically.  And then for 14 years I was--I taught remedial education, which called Title I, that was a government program where we worked with children who are mentally deficient in math and reading to bring them up to par.  So I worked with that program for 14 years.  So I retired in 1996 after having been with the school system for 36 years.  I've been recognized in the school system for being an outstanding teacher, received many awards and recognition, you know and I enjoyed my years.  And I worked at all inner city schools, predominantly inner city schools.  You know the one school that I worked at where we had predominantly white students was South Wayne [Elementary] School.  I retired from--I worked at Bunche [Elementary school] also which was a Montessori school and they had the Montessori method at that school, I worked there.  And that was integrated with so many black students.  And then I retired from a school called Adams [Elementary School], it was a walk-in school.  And we had predominantly black students in that school.  It was one of the few walk-in schools that was left because it had integrated itself through the neighborhood to meet, you know the quotas at that particular school.  And I retired from teaching in 1996.
Story_ID: 60243
Speaker 1: And I retired from teaching in 1996, but I had been working with Allen County Historical Society since 1975.  And when I started working with them in 1975, they had four decent pictures of blacks in their collection, and nothing else.  And I was fascinated by those four pictures because I knew many of the people that were on those pictures.  And it was people connected with the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center.  And also the Westfield Center.  And that's when I started working with the Allen County Historical Society was in 1975.  And we started trying to bring more blacks into the Historical Society Museum.  And I started--there was another gentleman and I and his name was Miles Edwards and myself, because we were educators and we were native Fort Wayne people.  And we started with oral interviews.  And that's what they had first put in the museum, Allen County Historical Museum, which is now called the History Center.  And we worked with them for a number of years trying to get more black history into the museum because they had none.  And we got a space maybe three feet by five feet for black history.  But I did not complain too much because they did not have enough room for many of their own displays.  So we at least got our foot in the door and we started working with that Historical Society.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then what evolved out of that was in 19, about 1995 there was a educational coordinator that came to Fort Wayne and her name was Ann Fairchild.  And she was really interested in organizing an African American Historical Society. So that is how we started with our African American Historical Society.  We were meeting and meeting and meeting.  And we did not organize as an African American Historical Society until 1998.  On May 17th we organized formally as an African American Historical Society.  And we organized out of the History Center in Fort Wayne on May 17, 1998 we became you know, formally organized.
Story_ID: 60244
Speaker 1: We [the African American Historical Society in Fort Wayne, Indiana] realized that we were not going to be able to do very much so far as a museum was concerned there.  And it had become quite fashionable to organize African American museums.  So then after we had organized as a society, we started working to organize our own museum.  And it's just amazing how fast we were able to organize.  From 1998 we were able to get all of our legal matters taken care of, our rules and regs [Regulations], our bylaws and all of our papers in order.  And there was a gentleman by the name of [Alfred] Al Brothers who is the Board of--who is presently the President of our Board, Chairperson of our Board of Directors.  And it was through him we were really able to get organized and he knew an attorney who donated his services free to get our rules and our regulations and our bylaws and all of our legal work done, he donated it to us.  And we became you know, a real legal organization.  Worked with us to get our 501(c)(3).  And by 1999 just a year later, we were fully organized and had our 501(c)(3) and we were a viable organization.  And we acquired this building and in less than a year we had to renovate this building.  We gave soul food dinners and raised money for renovations in this building.  We had to have a new roof put on it, and we had to do a lot of work in order to get in this building.  It was literally a neglected building.  And it belonged to the Ministerial Alliance.  And I went to the Ministerial Alliance and asked them for the use of the building and they gave us a five year lease on it.  And there was so much work to be done, and they were supposed to do the structural work.  They did not have the money to do the structural work.  So I went back to them and told them if we did the structural work, we would have to have a ten year lease on the building, rent free.  They gave us a ten year lease on this building rent free.  And that was in 1999 that we were granted the lease.  And we gutted this building through volunteers in the community, organizations helped us like East Wayne Street Center Community Development Grant.  They helped us and they put a new roof on this building.  There was also the Urban Enterprise Zone that helped us.  HANDS [Housing and Neighborhood Services] helped us, a neighborhood organization helped us.  Ream-Steckbeck [Paint Company] donated paint through a lot of organizations and people working with us.  We were able to get a new roof on the building.  We raised money to have the insides renovated through soul food dinners and things like that.  Worked very hard.  And we had this building renovated, we called it Phase One, and we moved into our building.  Phase I, and we were able to open.  Now we did not get our full lease until August of 1999.  So you know how fast we had to work and we had opened Phase One, which was the downstairs, on February the 1st, 2000 we opened Phase One of this building.
Story_ID: 60245
Speaker 1: Okay, now just for those--this building is a historic--it was the home of the--one time the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center, then the [Fort Wayne] Urban League.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's basically a Victorian style house, big house, right?
Speaker 2: This building was built in 1880, and it was a duplex, and there was a white family that lived in it and owned it.  And they lived in this building until the early 1940's [1940s].  And black people had began to move on this street because the first black man moved in this--on this street, Mr. [William] Warfield two doors from here.  He moved here in April of 1909.  And at that particular time, it was called Montgomery Street.  And he lived two doors from here in a twenty-one room house.  And at that particular time, blacks were not allowed to you know, live in any of our hotels or anything.  So Mr. Warfield was an entrepreneur, and he fixed his house up into a rooming house.  He had a contract with the Pennsylvania Railroad where the gentlemen who were working as dining car men could stop over and they would stay in his house.  And he had room and board he would give them, and he had a contract and he was paid by the Pennsylvania Railroad for the men he boarded in his house.  And that's the first black man to live on this street.  And this house was acquired in the early '40's [1940s].  Phyllis Wheatley Center that was across the street at 421 [East Douglas Avenue], purchased this building and moved in this building.  And they were housed here until about 1946, '47 [1947], from '42 [1942] for four years they owned the building.  And at that time, the work that was being done by the Phyllis Wheatley Center was becoming sort of antiquated.  And the new thing was the philosophy of the Urban League where they would train people for jobs, establish better relationships with the white community, and also find better housing, which work had been done with the Phyllis Wheatley Center.  And they were not into recreation like the Phyllis Wheatley Center was, so eventually this became the Fort Wayne Urban League.  And this building is a historical building in the black community in that it was the last home of the Phyllis Wheatley Center and the first home of the Fort Wayne Urban League.  And this building has been owned ever since by black people in the community.  After the Urban League was here and they owned it for about twenty years, they sold it to another black group, Mr. and Mrs. Howell.  And they had this sort of like--a house where you could come and have parties and have teas and host groups you could rent this as a center.  And it was a lovely home.  And it was available for teas and entertainment, formal entertainment and things like that.  And they owned this building.  And then it did not prove profitable to the Howells and they sold this building to the Ministerial Alliance.  The Ministerial Alliance came in it and they had it as a John Dixie Learning Center.
Speaker 1: So this is a black Ministerial Alliance?
Speaker 2: It's a black Ministerial Alliance.  And they had a group here where black children could come who were not doing well in school.  They would be tutored.  They would take them on field trips, it was really a nice organization that supported black children to help encourage them to do better in high school and elementary school.  And it was the John Dixie Learning Center, and it was a learning center where children were--they had actual classes that were held here and they were taught by, you know, teachers who worked here in the evenings and things like that.  But it was a learning center.  And that operated here for a number of years, the learning center.  And then after the learning center went out, it was occupied by a black newspaper.  And black newspaper was here for a number of years.  And then the black newspaper went belly up and they were not able to you know maintain the building or, or to even manage to pay their, their utilities here.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the paper?
Speaker 2: The black newspaper was--I have some of the papers.  I don't recall exactly what the name was, but I do have some of the papers that they had when they were here as, as a paper.  And so we were able to get possession of the, of the building on the heels of the black newspaper not being able to, you know to manage.
Story_ID: 60246
Speaker 1: So we [the African/African-American Historical Society] have the, the building.  We have, I do believe eventually that we will own the building, it will be our building.  And we're also trying to build--buy the three lots next door and to build--I have plans for a building to--10,000 square feet as well as a 6,000 square foot building.  But since we have been opened, we've had positive, just really positive remarks about our building.  We're the only African/African American--the premium African/African American Museum of this magnitude in the entire state of Indiana.  We are a home grown museum.  And this is a fourteen room building and we have ten exhibits in our building.  And we've been well patronized by the entire community and surrounding areas.  Our greatest people, our greatest clients are, are school groups.  And we book for school groups.  All of our tours are docent led and it takes from one hour and 15 to one hour and 20 minutes to go through our building.  It's definitely a place where you come to have a wonderful learning experience.  And it's just been a very popular place, not only as a museum, but it's become the information center of the, of the community also.  We work with the newspapers, we work with the other museums in this city.  We have an outreach program where we work with the colleges and the universities in the community.  We are called upon to visit places to take exhibits in surrounding areas.  We've gone to a little town called Huntington, Indiana where they have a convent for the nuns, we've been there for diversity days.  We have--with the high schools, shared in their diversity days.  They have a Civil War reenactment at Franke Park, we've participated in that.  We are working with the Lincoln Museum, the Fort Wayne Historical Center, which was formerly our Allen County Historical Museum.  We work with our arts, our history, our Art Museum in the city of Fort Wayne.  We work with Cinema Center.  We work with everybody, we're not just out here standing by ourselves.  And we've had upwards to 15,000 contacts with people in the museum or us going out to various organizations.  We're highly respected and we're very nicely supported physically and financially by the community and surrounding areas.  And we've become the place to what's happening in our Fort Wayne community.
Story_ID: 60247
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who are some of the outstanding--as we toured the museum, there's several outstanding personalities from the black community here at Fort Wayne [Indiana], many of whom have passed, are represented by a portion of the exhibit.  Could you talk about some of those?  Now William Warfield you talked about in the beginning.  I saw sheet music under his exhibit, was he a song writer as well as a entrepreneur?
Speaker 2: Mr. Warfield was an entrepreneur, yes he wrote music.  And he sold his music to different people for 25 and 35 dollars.  He was a musical writer and he wrote the song 'Memories.'  And not only did he write music, but he had the first black newspaper [The Vindicator] in Fort Wayne.  He wrote newspaper articles even for our local newspapers.  He was just an outstanding citizen in the community.  He was an educated man, he stressed education, he stressed culture and a lot of fine things in the community.  Mr. Warfield recorded his diaries from 1909, he has recorded what happened in Fort Wayne every day through 1936.  He died in August of 1936 and we have his last entries up until July, 1936.  There are two years of his diaries, 1907 and 1908 that are at the museum in Wilberforce [Ohio].  Those two years are there.  His granddaughter belonged to an African Historical Society in Columbus, Ohio and she had donated those books to that museum and they are there.  His first years of diaries.  We are presently in possession of 1909 through 1936, which is twenty-seven years.  And those diaries are being transposed for us by a lady who lives in Cromwell, Indiana.  She was a post--post office, she was the mistress of a post office in Cromwell.  And she is presently transposing those.  And we have up to about three years of Mr. Warfield's diaries already transposed, and they are so very interesting because he records what happens in Fort Wayne every day.  Who died, who married, who was arrested, what are the activities that went on are all documented.  So this is very unusual because we'll have twenty-seven years of history of what happened every day in Fort Wayne when we have those diaries transposed.  He tells about, he tells about the temperature.  He even tells about national events.  He has the day recorded in his diary, you know that the, the--the sinking of the Titanic, he has that even recorded and what a sad day it was and how many people lost their lives.  It's just phenomenal, the things that he has in his diary.  Great prize fighters who might have passed through Fort Wayne, or Jack Johnson, the day that he won this fight, the decision.  And another great prize fighter who had passed through Fort Wayne and he had died with tuberculosis consumption.  He's very factual.  And all of these things are really recorded and we're so happy that we have possession of these diaries.
Story_ID: 60248
Speaker 1: And I'd like to say also that we [the African/African-American Historical Society] have people upstairs which was our local museum, and we have started to have a local museum dedicated to people in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  But there were so many other interesting things and so many people who had laid the groundwork and our race as a whole.  We figured that we needed that on which to build our local people.  And we do have current events board upstairs.  Everybody in our museum is not dead.  And if you do anything current and you deserve recognition, well that's on our current events board.  And we tell people if there are things that should be there that we do not have, we can always find room to put those things there also.  We have Mr. [Robert] Wilkerson, our recognition to Mr. Wilkerson, who was the first Executive Director of the Fort Wayne Urban League.  And in our building, the offices were on one side, and in some of the rooms on the other side, Mr. Wilkerson and his family lived when they first opened this as a Fort Wayne Urban League in Fort Wayne.  And we have items, and one of the treasures that we have is Mr. Wilkerson's graduation picture from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] in 1929.  It's a large picture with a huge graduation class.  And you know those were the Depression years.  So that is quite a treasure, that picture is seventy-three years old.  And we also have a setting for Dr. [Levan] Scott, who was the first black principal in Fort Wayne Community Schools.  And we have his jacket and items that were donated to us by his family who were here when we opened our museum.  And there was a school that's dedicated and named after Dr. Scott.
Story_ID: 60249
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other per--personalities?  We just talked about the first Director of the Urban League [Robert Wilkerson] and there's--I, I remember there was a--some of the living people here in Fort Wayne.  There was the young lady who was in the "Lion King" and then Rod Woodson, the football player.  Just talk, talk about some of the other people that are part of the local history.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We [the African/African-American History Museum] have a--our current events board and we have for example on that current events board we have Rosetta Moses-Hill.  And she was chosen Journal Gazette "Citizen of the Year."  But she's such an outstanding lady because she gives of herself to help organizations that are struggling and she came to Fort Wayne [Indiana] with IBM.  But she's such a versatile lady that she fits in many places.  She worked with the local education fund, got that into a multi-million dollars and it's working with children, helping them to read.  And she's developed that program into a multi-million dollar program.  And she's just a very outstanding lady and works with people and organizations and you know goes to the limit.  You're gonna interview her later.  And then on that current events board we have Heather Headley, who graduated from our local high school in 1993, went to Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois].  She hit big time at Northwestern and was auditioned for 'The Lion King,' [the Broadway musical] and eventually she was auditioned to become the lead of 'Aida' on Broadway in New York [New York City, New York] and she won a Tony Award.  We have her pictures and her gown upstairs that was donated to us by her mother.  And she's just a outstanding young lady, a star, truly a star.  And then we have local people, other local people like valedictorians and salutatorians of our schools.  Our very first black valedictorian in 1941 because education is so very important that we stress education.  Our first black principal, [Dr.] Levan Scott, our first black guidance counselor, William Watson.  We have our first black teacher and on and on it goes.  Our first black superintendent, James Easton.  We have early entrepreneurs.  We recognize our oldest black business ongoing in Fort Wayne, 77 years old, Micheaux Funeral Home.  We have our first black policeman who started as a paddy wagon driver, Art Williams in 1917.  Oliver Lee, who was our second black policeman in 1919.  Samuel Stewart who was our third black policeman hired in 1925.  And the interesting thing about Samuel Stewart our third black policeman, is that he served longer ever than any policeman on the entire Police Department.  He was a policeman for 43 years on the Police Department.  Mr. Stewart was a gentleman who was well liked and respected by the entire community.  And as I said previously, 33, 43 years on the Fort Wayne Police Department, and no one has ever reached that record.  And incidentally, his son was our first black valedictorian of a local high school, and that was in 1941.
Story_ID: 60250
Speaker 1: We have our first black fireman, it was in 1961.  And the interesting thing about our first black fireman in 1961, was that the white firemen refused to let him work as a fireman and stay in the engine house in 1961.  And as a result of that, he was moved to the Fire Prevention Bureau, promoted to inspector so he could go home every night.  Now that was in 1961.  And about forty years later in the year 2000, we have a black Fire Chief.  So that's what I call progress.  We have the history of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which and also their charter, it was chartered in 1946 in Fort Wayne.  We have recognition of our first in many areas.  We have our first black doctors--a medical board to the first black doctor in Fort Wayne who was Dr. Conner.  And those who followed him.  We have a board with our entrepreneurs on it.  The first black self-made millionaire in Fort Wayne, Eugene Parker, he's a sport agent.  Also my husband is on that board, who was the first licensed master plumber in the city of Fort Wayne, perhaps the state of Indiana, to own and operate his own plumbing business, plumbing contractor.  We have the first black, first black lawyers, mother/daughter team.  Just a lot of things on that board.  And we also have posters from the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center.  And it's interesting, on those posters we have some breakfast dances.  It would start at 12:00 at night and you'd dance until maybe five or 6:00 in the morning, have breakfast and go home.  And the reason we had those breakfast dances was because we liked to have dances at nice places and there was place maybe called the Palm Terrace.  And the white people would have their dances from eight until 11 and then the places were cleaned up and we would go in and dance from 12 until daylight, and this was called breakfast dances.  We have posters from that.
Speaker 2: We also have--
Speaker 1: Did you ever get to a place when you could--
Speaker 2: When it was available.  This is right. We also have a board with articles of early black history in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  Black organizations, and we have organizations that go back to 1913.  And we have pictures of these organizations and newspaper clippings for the 1930's [1930s] and the 1920's [1920s].  And when they have the newspaper clippings, we were included in those.  They would always let you know that it was colored people, colored organization, negro or colored, the items.  Like they would have the Emma Alsip Group or Ms. Emma Alsip, a negro, or a colored person, would always follow the name.  We have a hat display, church hats by black people in our, our local archives that was donated to us by a lady who really was you know, a hat wearer.  You know the black ladies like these hats and we did that because there's a book that's called 'Crowns' on, on black ladies and their beautiful hats.  So that's what we have that display of.  We have you know some of the outstanding black people who've really done great things in Fort Wayne like our first black to belong to the, the--on the Board of Health.  And there's, there's many things in there involving our local people.
Story_ID: 60251
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now a state like Indiana which has a--kind of a reputation of being a--I don't know if you know it or not, being from here.  But Indiana has a reputation of being like a down south, up north state, or you know, being, like being--being in Indiana is like being in one of the real segregated states in the south for some reason.  That's what--how people in the rest of the Midwest view Indiana.  Is, is--do you find this to be a misrepresentation or to be basically true or what?
Speaker 2: I find that to be basically true because there are many, many, many towns in Indiana.  And out of the many, many towns in Indiana, there are only a few where they even have any black people living.  And you know that's like Gary, Indiana, and that's like Indianapolis [Indiana].  That's like Fort Wayne [Indiana], Elkhart [Indiana], Evansville [Indiana], maybe Terre Haute [Indiana].  But you do not find too many blacks in many, many towns in Indiana.  I had the statistics at one time that's been misfiled of the number of blacks that live in the many towns in Indiana and you'd be surprised at the many towns that there are no black people living at all.  And at one time there was a town they called Elmwood, Indiana, and they have a sign that says you know that they did not want any black people in the city limits after dark.  And you know I heard there were signs like you know, you know, "nigger read and run.  If you can't read, run anyhow".  Or "don't let the sun set on you here".  And that was quite prominent in Elmwood, Indiana, which is the home of Wendell Willkie who ran for Republican President in the '40's [1940s].  He ran against Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  And that was some of the things about his hometown.  And I know my brother, who was in the, the service and he was stationed at Kentucky, you know when they traveled to places in Indiana, they were not even allowed to stop and to eat at these restaurants.  And you do know that India had--Indiana had a 500 dollar fee that they placed on the heads of any blacks entering Fort Wayne, they--I mean the state of Indiana.  You had to have 500 dollars to pay.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: When, what time?
Speaker 2: That was about in the 1830's [1830s].  You had to pay an entry fee to come into the state of Indiana.  And there were Quakers who brought blacks to Indiana, and they would pay that fee for them, or there had to be somebody to vouch that they would not become indigent people and would behave themselves and not become burdens on the city in which they lived.
Story_ID: 60252
Speaker 1: And we were not welcomed at all.
Speaker 2: Is there like a, a capsule, real quick capsule history you can give me of how blacks got to Fort Wayne [Indiana]?  Have you encountered that, that, that story?
Speaker 1: Yes, black came to Fort Wayne through the fort.  You know with Anthony Wayne and the people that came to the fort in the 1700's [1700s], that's how the first blacks came to Fort Wayne, it was through the fort.
Speaker 2: Good old man Anthony Wayne.
Speaker 1: That's right.  They, they, they came, and the first black that we know of, he was here about--that, that took up residence here and he was a wagon and wheel maker, and that was in the 1800's [1800s], that took up residence.  And his name was Phillip [Framan]--the last name slips me.  But anyhow, he was here in the early 1800's [1800s] and he was a wagon--and, and a wheel maker.  So he was one of the first blacks that came to Fort Wayne, and that was through the fort, the soldiers.  And then we had another black who in the early 1800's was a town crier.  He was the first that was elected to a black po-position.  But truly were not welcome.  And then it was--even in the 1930's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], there was a law on, on the books that we could not live in the city limits.  We're not to be in the city limits after dark.  So there was a Judge [William] Briggs who saw that that law was actually removed.  It was not being practiced, but he saw it was--it was in the '30's [1930s] or the '40's [1940s] that he saw that this was removed from the, the books that blacks could stay in the city limits, within the city limits, after dark, and Fort Wayne could live within the city limits.  But basically the state of Indiana and--had always been a highly prejudiced company--a, a state, you know.  Ku Klux Klan operated here too.
Speaker 2: The governor was the Grand Dragon.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.  It's closely affiliated with the Ku Klux Klan.  So it was a very prejudiced state.  And as I said before, there are many cities, even in Fort Wayne, in the state of Indiana now where we know that we are not welcome.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so I just wanted to get that perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With this, this being the only--one, one of the few black museums, this and you got the Walker Center in Indianapolis [Indiana] and I guess--
Speaker 1: It's Madame Walker Theater in Indianapolis, and they do have a black museum at Crispus Attucks, there is one in their school which we did find out, in the Crispus Attucks School [now Crispus Attucks Medical Magnet High School].  But there is no black museum of this magnitude any place in the State of Indiana.
Story_ID: 60253
Speaker 1: What, with that being the case, what is the future of this, this museum [the African/African-American History Museum] as you see it right now?
Speaker 2: Well I think we've got a good foundation.  We have found out that there's a need for the museum, a dire need for the museum.  And now people are going you know with diversity, and there's diversity causes, diversity groups, and they're coming to this museum for information.  I think the future of this museum looks very good.  Now we know what happened on September the 11th [terrorist attacks in New York City on September 11, 2001] has dried up a lot of funds in the market, you know, place, there are not as, as many funds available.  But I feel as though this museum has a good future because it needs to be here and it's doing a beautiful work in the community.  In the future I'm hoping that we will be able to expand because we've already run out of room and if we do not expand, then we may you know, become stagnant.  So we need to expand.  There are three lots next door that we have inquired about purchasing.  We would have been able to purchase those lots had, you know, the Build Indiana Fund not dried up because of the indebtedness of the state.  And we are promised that at a later date we will have funding and we can purchase those lots.  They're 150 feet with a front, frontage, and the depth is also 150 feet.  I've already had plans drawn up for a 6,000 foot building, as well as a 10,000 square foot building.  And we would put a new building on that property when we're able to acquire it.  And the reason that we need to expand is because of the house that we're in at the present time, it was not built for a museum.  We need to expand and have a facility that is built, you know, with the heating controls, the moisture controls, and all the requirements so that we will be able to get traveling exhibits.  Traveling exhibits will require wall space of 2,500 to 5,000 square feet, which we do not have with the adequate controls for us to be able to get, you know these traveling displays.  And if we have that facility that we could house these, then we would be able to draw more interest and have a variety of displays.  We'd also be able to have displays that they have in storage at Smithsonian Institute that are no longer being able to be displayed.  There are many, many possibilities.  So with an expansion, then we will be able to expand.  And I figure that I wanted to get into this place so we could have a foundation, which we needed was a foundation on which to build.  And my, you know--as I see in the foreseeable future, is a great expansion and this museum really doing great things because there is a need.  We're, we're serving that need.  We have a history.  People are coming and I think that our history needs to be known.  So I think the future looks very bright for this museum.  However, we need a curator to come into the building who has more expertise.  We need a marketing person, we need a fundraiser.  Because as I told you, I'm an educator.  And all I needed to do was to get this on solid foot and a foundation where other people can come in and take over and make this thing really grow and we can reach our full potential.  Because it is needed, and the reason that we know that it is needed is because of the recognition that we have received, the respect, the positive comments that we have received, that there's a place for this museum in the community, and it needs to be.
Story_ID: 60254
Speaker 1: I've noticed--we were walking through, there are a lot of displays that offer--afford children an opportunity to do some hands-on interaction and so forth.  And impressed that there's a room upstairs with--it's a--where Harriet Tubman, you know, talks about the Underground Railroad.  And there are stumps for children to sit on.  There's a, an actress playing the part of Harriet Tubman can talk to them about that.  I mean this largely a result of your educational background and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  We have--we're connected with the Underground Railroad through the state of Indiana.  And we have what is called--through the whole state of Indiana, we have Indiana Freedom Trails. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: We have Indiana Freedom Trails.  And that is from the northern part of our state all the way down through the southern part of our state.  And we're together as an organ--as an organization.  And we had an Underground Railroad office upstairs in this building.  And we had displays of the Underground Railroad.  But the gentleman that was in charge of it, you know did not meet his full responsibilities to carry on the office the way that it should be.  So we decided to make it an actual experience of the Underground Railroad that Harriet could lecture to the children, and you know tell them about the trip they were going to take and some of the things that would--they would encounter.  But no matter what, there would never be any turning back.  And so that's what we have upstairs.  And we do have a lady that is Harriet Tubman, and we do have a tape that we can play for the children, which is not--she has--doesn't have it in operation at the time.  So we decided to do that so the children could experience an actual you know, trip on the Underground Railroad.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 60255
Speaker 1: Now you, you've been diligent and meticulous in plotting the course for this museum [the African/African-American Historical Museum in Fort Wayne, Indiana].  Now what, what do you think your legacy is going to be?  I know you've got some more years to, to deal with this, but what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I see my legacy as being the founder of this museum, which I am.  I see my legacy as being able to lay the foundation on which to build a greater and better museum.  I would like to bring in people that are really educated, they have all the expertise that I do not have in order to make this one of the greatest African American museums in the entire United States.  And I think that we can do that if we have you know, the marketing, if we have the people with the expertise like they did in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  They brought someone in with all kinds of expertise to really build and to make a great institution.  So I am here hoping that the foundation has been laid on which to build a much greater and a better museum.  I only hope that I, I will be here just a year, no more than a couple of years, that we can bring somebody in with the expertise that can really do great things.  So that's what I see as a foreseeable future.  I know that, you know many museums started in basements and things like that.  I hope one day that we will become a great, a great institution.  That we will be known not only you know throughout the nation, but throughout the world and people will come to see this museum where we can, you know, preserve and just be real proud of our culture and our history because I realize that if we as a race of people do not do it, it will not be done.  That's what I found to be the history.  And I realize I got started a little bit late.  We've lost a lot of our history.  But I'm proud that we were able to recapture what we could when we did.  And people in the community are continuously bringing in things to us.  So we will have exhibits that will be permanent, and we will have exhibits that will be changing.  The church exhibit we do have will be the next one that will be changing, and we're going to put an educational facility in there about early education with--I've already purchased a potbelly stove and sort of like an old schoolroom setting is what will go there and pictures of some of the great pioneer black educators.  We will also emphasize you know the, the Brown v. Board of Education, the '54 [1954] [United States Supreme Court] decision to integrate the schools, and the part Thurgood Marshall did play.  All of that will be encompassed in that particular room.  So we try to, you know change and make different things that will be of--but it must always be of high interest to our children and also to our adults because they think we as black people know your history, but you don't.  I went through the same system that our children went through and we were never taught any black history.  So therefore, this museum is a place where you can come and at least we can, you know, just whet your appetite and hope that you will thirst or become hungry to learn more about your own people because we've made many contributions, many, many contributions that have so conveniently been overlooked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are your family proud of you in this effort?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My family's extremely proud of me.  And they're very proud of me because this is, this is a labor of love, but it was something that needed to be done, something that had to be done, someone that was courageous enough to do it.  And I, I, I think the community as a whole, they're proud of what we have here in Fort Wayne.
Story_ID: 60256
Speaker 1: Is there, is there anything that you'd like to say that we haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: Well I don't think so because I think we've covered, you know, the territory pretty much.  But I think that it's very important for parents to really love their children, to show interest in their history and the history of our people.  And kind of motivate and to guide the children.  And I'm just very sorry to say that our greatest clientele has not been African American people.  Our greatest clientele have been others.  So yesterday we had a church to come through, but we would like to have more participation, you know from the churches and things like that.  So the only thing that I can say is I hope that this--people will catch on and our museum will continue to grow and to prosper.
Story_ID: 60257
Speaker 1: Now this is slightly different from the legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to be remembered as an educator.  I'd like to be remembered as an African American people that's truly interested in the history as well as the future of the, of our race.  And I'm hoping that we will never forget our past and our roots, appreciate those things and not figure "Hey, I've got it made."  Because as an African American person, you never have it made.  You know and I want us to work and to give to our fullest potential to be the best citizens, to strive to be the very best that we can be.  To remember the sacrifices that others that have gone before us have made for us to get where we are today.  And there have been some terrible sacrifices made in the black community for us to really become first class citizens.  And I, I just want our youth to know of it and to remember to appreciate and to act accordingly.  And I'm not exactly proud of you know the education, attitudes and what we see our youth doing today in the field of music, in the field of education, and to better their lives.  For example, we had a Bridge Program come in here from the college, you know, Bridge where you go from high school into college.
Speaker 1: Like Upward Bound.
Speaker 2: Upward Bound Program, and we had that group to meet here last week, and we had twenty-two students to come through.  Twenty one were girls, and one was a boy.  And that's not saying very much for our men whom we're hoping will become greatly educated, and to be able to carry on the work that needs to be carried on.
Story_ID: 60258
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my grandmother, whom I know very little about.  Her name was Hana Mew, and she was born about in the 1870's [1870s].
Speaker 2: How do you spell Mew?
Speaker 1: M-E-W.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On the left is a picture of my aunt whose name is Susie Billinger.  On the right is a picture of my mother Viola Jones.  My aunt lived in Savannah, Georgia.  But they were all born in Brunson, South Carolina.  And that picture was taken in 1967 in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 2: There is a picture of my mother and her brother.  Her brother is on the left and my mother is on the right.  And that picture was taken in Savannah, Georgia in 1972.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother's children.  On the left is my brother Dan and I am next to my brother Dan, and then next to me is my brother Miles and on the far right is my sister Wilma.  And that picture was taken at a party in my brother's yard about 1985.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me when I was in high school.  I worked for the school paper, which was called the Spotlight.  And I was a writer.  And I was interviewing Marion Brown, who was in the service at that time.  And he was in the entertainment part of the service.  And that picture was taken in 1943/'44 [1944].
Speaker 1: That's my graduation picture from high school.  That picture was taken in 1946.  On the left is my very best girlfriend, Jackie Patterson.  And there I am on the right.  And that was taken across from Central High School in the yard of St. Paul Church.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of our family reunion.  And that family reunion was held in 1951 in Rock Hill Park.  There are quite a few people there to name, but I'd like to go to the first row.  And on the far right of the first row-- [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That's a picture of our family reunion.  It was taken about 1951 in Rock Hill Park.  That's in Westfield [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  And I was born almost across the street from that particular park.  But on the very far right, that's a picture of me.  Directly behind me is a relative, and to the left of that relative is a picture of my mother.  And behind my mother, directly behind my mother is a cousin.  But to the left of that cousin is a picture of my uncle whose name was Augustus Bryant.  He was one of the most wonderful men in the whole wide world.  He was sort of like our, our father because my, my dad [Miles Bryant] had died.  And he just took over, and he was just a very, very fine man.  And I've always admired him and always will, never forget him, he's such a fine man.  My uncle Gus.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Ms. Stith when you say that you're on the right, you're referring to the woman who is seated.
Speaker 1: Yes, sitting down on the grass.  That's me.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And when you describe your mother, she's wearing the dark dress?
Speaker 1: Yeah my mother--directly behind me is a cousin, and then to the left of that cousin is my mother. OFF CAMERA VOICE:  In the dark dress.
Speaker 2: In the, in the--no to the left.  Yeah, that's my mother.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And the uncle you were talking about?
Speaker 2: And the uncle, directly behind my mom is another lady, and then to the left of that lady is my uncle.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay in the very light colored clothes.
Speaker 2: In the very light, yeah white like shirt.  You can't see him too well because he's sort of in the shadows, but everybody there is my first or second cousin.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: This picture was taken with a Polaroid camera.  It's a snapshot and I had it enlarged.  But that picture was taken in about 1965.  And to the left, that's me to the left with the black dress on.  And that's Hana Stith.  And next to Hana Stith is my mother, Viola Bryant Jones.  And next to my other is my sister-in-law's mother, Susie Washington.  And then next is my niece Danita Jones.  In the black row from left to right, that's-
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Spell Danita please.
Speaker 2: DA-N-I-T-A, Da--Danita Jones.  The second row to the left is my oldest brother, Miles who is now deceased.  And next is my sister Wilma, Wilma Ferguson.  And next to Wilma Ferguson is Minnie Bryant, my sister-in-law.  And next to Minnie is my sister-in-law Lena Jones.  And next to Lena Jones is my brother-in-law Wayman Ferguson.  And we had been to church and we were celebrating I think it was--well we're all wearing flowers so it's quite obvious it was Mother's Day.
Speaker 1: This, this is a strange picture.  But it's a very interesting picture.  This is my daughter and my granddaughter.  The little lady in the front is my granddaughter.  Her name is Hanani Taylor.  And behind Hanani is my daughter Robin Stith.  This picture was taken at a--some kind of aquarium or planetarium or serpentarium or something like that, and it was taken in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my only granddaughter, Hanani.  Hanani was born in 1995 and that picture was taken in 2001 when she was in--it's her kindergarten picture.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Have we spelled Hanani yet?
Speaker 2: H-A-N-A-N-I.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my husband [Harold Stith] and I.  We were celebrating our 50th anniversary and my daughter had given us a trip to Alaska.  We were on a cruise in Alaska.  And that picture was taken in our 50th wedding anniversary, so that would have been--we were married in 1948.  So that picture was taken in 19--50th wedding anniversary.  That picture was taken about 19, 1990--1996.
Speaker 2: To the left and standing in the middle is Mike Davis, coach of IU [Indiana University] University, and next to Mike, that's me.  And that picture was taken in the year 2000.  I was re--I received a award for being outstanding work in the community, of my founding of the African American History Museum.  I was being recognized by East Wayne Street Center at that time.
Speaker 1: On the left is a picture of my husband and I'm on the right.  That picture was taken in 1986.  We had taken a month tour of the west, and we were at the Grand Canyon when that picture was taken.  It's one of my favorite pictures.  Such a wonderful vacation.  And we saw so many beautiful sights.  That's--and it was 1986 at the Grand Canyon.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 2002.  It was in a magazine for Saint Francis University in Fort Wayne, Indiana], of which I am a graduate.  And they did a story on our museum, and that was taken in our African Village Room.
Speaker 1: That picture, it's a picture of our African/African American Historical Museum.  It's located at 436 East Douglas Avenue, Fort Wayne, Indiana.  And that is a Queen Anne house and it was built in the year 1880.  It's a very historical building in the black community.  It is the last home of the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center, and the first home of the Fort Wayne Urban League.  It has gone down to--through the years, to the hands of many African American organizations, but presently we have our museum located in this building.  It's fourteen rooms in the building.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That picture is the bust of a black man, John Nuckols, who was the first black man elected to the City Council in the city of Fort Wayne, Indiana.  He's a very--I think he was a very outstanding person.  But he was elected in 1959 and he served till 1982, and he set a record nationwide.
Speaker 2: [tape interruption]
Speaker 1: All right, that bust is in John Nuckols Memorial Park.  He's the only black man in the city of Fort Wayne that a park is named after.  And the--he's the only black man in the city of Fort Wayne who actually has-well a bust made and dedicated to the work that he has done.  It was all paid for by a group of black people of which I was co-chairperson of the organization, Young Democrats for John Nuckols.
Speaker 2: The large building--this is a picture of the oldest club of black women in the city of Fort Wayne.  It was founded in 1935, and it is sixty-seven years old, and it is still in existence.  However, these are the original members, and many of them are dead, but others have joined.  And at the very bottom row to the left is Mary Will--Mary Williams.  Next to Mary is Virginia Sweatt.  Next to Virginia Sweat is Edna, Edna Thurman.  And next to Edna Thurman is Dimple Wilcher.  In the second row to my left we have Susie Buggs.  In the middle is Elma Alsup, she's the lady who the club is named after.  She was a worker at the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center for many, many years.  And next to Ms. Alsup is Juanita Ford.  Top row to the left I Corinne Brooks.  Next to Corinne is Ann Walker.  Next to Ann Walker is Laura Karen, who was the first black, second black police lady in Fort Wayne.  And next to Laura is Mrs., Mrs. Jennings.  All of the ladies in the picture are deceased with the exception of three.  And that would be Virginia Sweatt, Dimple Wilcher, Wilcher, and Corinne Brooks.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Could you please spell Sweatt and Alsup.
Speaker 2: Okay, Alsup.  Okay first I'll start with Sweatt, S-W-E-A-T-T.  All right and then Thurman is T-H-U-R-M-A-N.  Did you get Wilcher?  W-I-L-C-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  How bout Alsup?
Speaker 2: Alsup is A-L-S-U-P.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay good, thank you.
Speaker 2: The house to the left is the home of Mr. William Warfield.  And Mr. Warfield was the very first black man to live on Douglas Street.  He moved in that house 1909, on April the 12th.  That's a 21 room house.  At that particular time, blacks were not allowed to stay in any hotels in Fort Wayne, so Mr. Warfield provided a rooming house where people could room, they could live and also have meals.  He had a contract with the Pennsylvania Roundhouse and gentlemen that would come in that worked for the Pennsylvania Railroad were housed in this building.  And he had a contract with the railroad and they paid him for the keep of these men.  We have that is a real, real fabulous house; it's no longer there.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1941.  It was--was it '41 [1941], let me think.  Thirty-three [1933], '34 [1934].  No, that picture was taken in 1939.  And it was a birthday party.  The fifth birthday party of--it's kind of hard to even--to point out, but let's take the first row.  And the first row and the, the third person who is a boy from the left in the first row, his name is Carl Wilson.  And that was his fifth birthday party, and it was taken at Wilson's Chicken Shack.  His father was an entrepreneur in Fort Wayne and founder of the Chicken Shack, Fort Wayne exterminating business, a developer, and to--right almost in front of Carl is William Briggs, who was the first black man ever elected to become a judge in the city of Fort Wayne.  He must have been about three years old at that time.  That's a very important picture, and we do know the names of everybody there.  But it was taken in about--cause Carl was born in 1934 and he was five, so it was taken about 1939.  Carl Wilson's fifth birthday party.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: All right the first row is down, okay and it is Mary Breelove, Floretta Ford and then there's Carl Wilson, Jr.  Yeah, there's Mary Breelove.  Yeah, yeah, right there.  Mary Breelove.  This is Floretta Ford, okay and Carl Wilson.  Next to Carl, he's right there, that's Carl.  Carl Wilson and his fifth birthday party.  And really like the little boy in front of him, that's Judge William Briggs.  Yeah, and he was three years old.  He was the first black guy ever elected to a judgeship in the city of Fort Wayne.  And behind him is his sister, right there is his sister Barbara.  And then to the, the next boy standing up, that's my brother whose name is Dan.  So okay.
Speaker 2: All right, that is a picture of a group of people from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And that picture was taken in the late 1940's, the NAACP was founded in Fort Wayne about 1944.  And so we know that that was in the early years of the convention.  And it was taken in front of Union Baptist Church, which was located at 421 East Brackenridge Street.  But it's a very important picture in the history of the NAACP and Fort Wayne, Indiana.  And the gentleman, the first gentleman to the left, we do know his name is Graham Jordan who was the first minister at Union Baptist Church, and he was also an early President of the NAACP.  And that was taken in front of the church, which is no longer standing.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay thank you.  Next.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken at the Phyllis Wheatley Center, and that is a group of young ladies, and they just called it the Negro Girls Sewing Class.  The lady in the front row is Elma Alsup, and she was the Director of the girls' activities at the Wheatley, Phyllis Wheatley Center.  She was also the Director of the Sewing Club.  And their meeting in the Phyllis Wheatley Center on the second floor of the building.  That picture was taken in 1936 by the Fort Wayne Community Chest, which was a red feather agency.  And it was taken in 1936.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of a lady whose name is Hester Greer.  She was the first black lady to preach at a church in the city of Fort Wayne.  And she later founded a church and it was built--she built a church on the corner--1929, she built a church on the corner of Chute and Eliza.  Her name is Hester Greer and she was the first lady, black lady, to preach and, and have her own church in the city of Fort Wayne.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 1936.  Thai's another one of those Community Chest pictures, and it was taken at Westfield [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  We had a Westfield Community Center.  This was at a time when Fort Wayne was totally segregated.  And we had--the--our parents had built this center in Westfield so the young blacks would have a place to go for recreation, to--as you can see, play games like table tennis, there was a stage there.  They could also roller skate in that building and they were--would give parties because of the stage.  They could buy refreshments and it was just a nice recreation center, very small, for blacks in Westfield.  And the picture was taken in 1936.
Speaker 1: That is the logo to our museum.  And I'm very proud of that.  And our logo--and we are dedicated to the researching, writing and teaching the history of a people.  And that's the African/African American Historical Museum, and that is our logo.
Speaker 2: That is Ellis Micheaux.  And he was the first black mortician in the city of Fort Wayne to stay any length of time.  There had been another before him, but he's very interesting in the museum because his funeral home is still in existence, and it is the oldest ongoing black business in the city of Fort Wayne, it is seventy-seven years old.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of Girl Scouts that operated out of the Phyllis Wheatley Center.  And that picture was taken in 1929.  The lady in the very middle, if you--in the very middle of the picture, who has a very pronounced figure.  Her name is Carrie Wilson and she was the very first black lady to be a welfare investigator in the city of Fort Wayne.  And to the left of Carrie Wilson is Elma Alsup again, Works Secretary Director of girls' activities at the Phyllis Wheatley Center.
Speaker 2: This is a very interesting picture.  It was taken at the Wizards' office on Coliseum Boulevard in Fort Wayne, Indiana.  It was taken this year, in the year 2002.  What had actually happened is that the museum had partnered with the Wizards, as well as Gregory Guice who is minister of Unity Christ Church, to bring the Baseball Hall of Fame from Kansas City to Fort Wayne.  It was a traveling exhibit, the very first time it ever traveled, and it came to Fort Wayne.  It was so huge that it had to be housed in our public library.  And it was an outstanding exhibit.  And it was in Fort Wayne for one month.  And from Fort Wayne it left and went to Indianapolis [Indiana].  And we were making plans for this exhibit, it was just fabulous.
Speaker 1: There's a, a picture of Turner Chapel, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopalian] Church.  It's the first black church in the city of Fort Wayne, it was founded in 1849.  However, that church building was moved to 801 East Wayne Street in 1869.  It had been purchased from an old German Reform Church on the corner of Webster and Washington, and taken by horse and wagon to 801 East Wayne.
Speaker 2: That's the picture of the church.  That's Union Baptist Church, the very first black Baptist church in the city of Fort Wayne.  It was founded in 1892.  It was located at 421 East Brackenridge.  It is no longer there.  The only thing existing are the two pieces of concrete where they entered into the church.  But it was the very first black Baptist church in Fort Wayne, and it was actually built by Baptist people.
Speaker 1: Was Heather Headley in town--
Speaker 2: That's Heather Headley, and she's the first black from Fort Wayne to receive a Tony Award.  She received that award for her in the year 2000, for having been on Broadway and star in 'Aida.'
Speaker 1: This is a newspaper release on the opening of the African/African American Historical Museum.  And there's a picture of, of me on the telephone and I'm going over some answer probably, giving some kind of information on some of the displays and items that we have in our museum.  And that picture was taken in January of the year 2000.  And our museum opened on February the 1st, 2000.  So that shows a picture of me working, getting ready to open the museum.
Speaker 2: Okay, that picture is a Community Chest picture.  It was a series of four.  And it was taken in 1936 in front of the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center located at 421 East Douglas.  At that particular time, recreation was really segregated in Fort Wayne, and blacks had to provide their own entertainment, their own facilities.  And that was one of the goals or aims of the, of the Phyllis Wheatley Center.  To the far right in the front row standing is Edgar Unthank who came from Philadelphia to be the Executive Director of the Phyllis Wheatley Center.  And he was a dynamite director.  This organization and this Phyllis Wheatley Center did many fine things in the city of Fort Wayne.  And that was taken in 1936.
Speaker 1: I--okay.  That is the cover of a song that was written by William Eli Warfield.  And the song was written in 1930 and it was played from the top of the Lincoln Tower, which was the tallest building in Fort Wayne at that particular time.  The building is twenty-one stories high.  And they have a very wonderful organ and, and system, broadcasting system.  And that song was played from the top of that building when the building was dedicated in 1930.  It was written by Mr. Warfield, 'We Love Old Fort Wayne.'
Speaker 2: He was a black songwriter.
Speaker 1: He was a black songwriter, right.
Speaker 2: And what else about him?
Speaker 1: He was an entrepreneur also.  He was really had quite a lot of real estate in the city of Fort Wayne.  He wrote articles to the newspaper.  He published the first black newspaper in Fort Wayne.  And he came to Fort Wayne in 1888 and he worked as a waiter in a hotel.  But he was really an outstanding man in Fort Wayne, and we have his diaries where he recorded everything that happened from 1909 to 1936.
Speaker 2: This the paper over there?
Speaker 1: That's the, the copy of the first "Vindicator." [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's a picture of the "Fort Wayne Weekly Vindicator".  To our knowledge, the very first black newspaper ever written and published in Fort Wayne.  It was written in 1913.
