Story_ID: 393558
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The History Makers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name, my name is Reverend Fred L. Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], F-R-E-D, L is for Lee, S-H-U-T-T-L-E-S-W-O-R-T-H.
Speaker 1: All right, and I heard now, I don't know if it's true, but rumor has it that this was not your original name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not.  My stepfather [William Shuttlesworth] married my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] when I was around maybe three or four or five, somewhere in there.  But my real father's name would have been Greene [Vetta Greene], G-R-E-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Pause) Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 18, 1922, Montgomery County [Alabama], I was born in Montgomery County.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Close to Mount Meigs [Alabama], somewhere in there.  (Unclear) all those little places back in there.
Speaker 1: Montgomery County, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Montgomery County, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it's close to where?  What was, what, what little place in (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Course I took my mother's name.  I was named Freddie Lee Robinson.  That's what my first name was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Birth certificate name, taken name.
Speaker 1: So what was, I'm sorry.  What was your, the name you were born with?  Was it Freddie Lee Robinson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's father was named March Robinson, March Robinson.  R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was your, the name--you, you came in, on, into the--on your birth certificate it's Freddie Lee Robinson?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Greene was your biological father's last name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that never was on the birth certificate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And then your stepfather's name was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother told me, said, "Son the man that raised you is your father."  So that's--both people that are practical ideas.  Back then I always took what she said.  Didn't make me any difference at that time anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Now? Oh, minister, of course.  Civil rights fighter, all of it I guess.  Do what you have to do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 25th I believe, yeah March 25th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in the archives room [Shuttlesworth Archive] of the church I organized and pastored here for forty years, just resigned it the last Sunday.
Speaker 1: What's the name of that church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After forty--Greater, Greater New Light Baptist Church [Cincinnati, Ohio].  Greater, G-R-E-A-T-E-R, New Light, L-I-G-H-T, Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: All right.  In, in Cincinnati, right?
Speaker 2: In Cincinnati, Ohio, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 393559
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, we start off with five lightweight questions that they compel me to ask everyone, and they only require a short answer.  So the first one of these questions is:  sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) People always ask me that.  I tell them, "I eat what people eat."  I don't have a particular favorite food.  I would think if--from my boyhood we used to eat a lot of rice, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't have a special favorite.
Speaker 1: Now what, what, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think when I came up, I favored pink, between pink and yellow.  Somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm gone all the time, so vacation really means not too much to me.  I used to just take a week, because I traveled so--for so many years and gone almost every place 'til I don't have a favorite place.  Now my favorite city if you ask me that, is Birmingham [Alabama], that's the city I was raised up in.  My mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] lived there and died there, all of her life.  We weren't in the city properly at that time.  We, we were in the little rural area outside the City of Birmingham four, five, or six miles, and called Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama], O-X-M-O-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I developed so many speaking 'til I don't have a favorite now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 393560
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Vetta Greene] side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But we want to start with your mother's side of the family.  So can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, she didn't have a middle name.  Alberta Robinson [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth], R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 25th I believe, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Montgomery--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --County, Montgomery [Montgomery County, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about her side of her family and how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: We were, see, my, my gran- her father was named March Robinson.  And the Robinsons, Robinsons, and they had some Greenes in the family, the father's side.  And I can remember his, his mother was named Sarah [ph.], Grandma Sarah we called her.  I don't know whether her name was Robinson or not.  I don't know if she had remarried, but his name was March Robinson.  We were Methodist, came up.  And they came from Montgomery County.  I think my grandfather, and I don't know what he was doing.  I was a baby, born in the county.  He moved away from there to keep my mother from Greene, Vetta, V-E-D-A--V-E-T-T-A, Vetta Greene.  And my mother--myself and my older sister [Cleola Shuttlesworth Willis] were full children.  And I guess he--and his desire was for her to be the first educated person I think in our family.  I kind of got that later on as I'd hear people talk.  And she just loved him and of course when she had two children, I guess the only way he could, in his power get her--just move to Jefferson County [Alabama] outside of Birmingham, Oxmoor.  I remember it was a red house they moved into on the side of a--between two hills like.  Big spring right down, running between them.  And, and I was about three years, three and four when they moved from there.
Story_ID: 393561
Speaker 1: And I think, let's see, I think my fath- my, my stepfather [William Shuttlesworth], well when we moved, we moved to get away from him.  And he was a smart person if you we going to ask me that question there.  He could, he could almost make a watch or fix guns, he did that kind of thing.  He was very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was your stepfather?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Not my stepfather, my real father.
Speaker 2: Oh, your real father.
Speaker 1: My stepfather was, had worked in the mines and he had--he was working the oil mines and the coal mines had (unclear).  He had children, he had one family older than my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth], he had children older than my mother was when they married.  And around 1927 I believe, '26 [1926] or '27 [1927] something like, something like that.
Speaker 2: Oh your, your, your biological father had some children older than your mother was--
Speaker 1: No, my biological family--I never did get into their ages.  I don't know, I think mama might have been, they might have been about the same age I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your biological father and mother were about the same age? What was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I didn't know him, I didn't know him now remember 'til after I was practically grown, actually.
Speaker 2: Okay and what, what was his name again?
Speaker 1: V-E-D--V-E-T-T-A, Vetta Greene.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He had two children by my mother and then of course after they, my mother left Montgomery [Alabama] and came up, he had, had several more children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 393562
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your mother's [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] family now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes sir.
Speaker 1: How, what--are there any stories about what the family was doing, you know, say I mean way back, you know?  Were they, were they slaves way back when, or were they free, or were they (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't know, I don't go back.  I know that he, they had farm, they were rural people lived in the, in the--and he worked on the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother used to tell the story that he'd be out working and he [Shuttlesworth's maternal grandfather, March Robinson] would, and her, her mother was named Martha [Martha Robinson], Martha.  And she would say he'd kind of get hot and want a drink of water.  "Hey Martha, hey."  She'd sing one of them old hundreds (laughter).  Religion was in the family, you know.  "Sing me one of them old hundreds." And she'd start singing 'Amazing Grace' or other words or something like that.  But he was not a--he was not a lazy man even as he rode, as, as it came in and I grew up.  I would, I don't know, I was always a little devilish like and something.  I thought I could outrun him (laughter).  And it was just like a V8 over a T Model [Ford Model T], I guess.  I remember that.  I remember him whooping me once real, real well.  He was a disciplinarian.  So, so was my mother, very much disciplinarian.  They would build a new jail I expect now to put my mother (laughter), she raised me up.  But we've belonged, we belonged to St. Matthew A.M.E. Church [St. Matthew A.M.E. Church Oxmoor, Birmingham, Alabama], right on top of the ridge when, when they got married at that house, as I said, he had raised a family in that house.  His friend Hagard [ph.] had made another house, they both built the houses the same way, the only two, only two style houses like that in, in Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama], he and his friend.  But he had raised a family because his children were older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay now who is this?  This is--
Speaker 2: He had married a family, my stepfather now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I never did see my real father [Vetta Greene].  He always stayed in Montgomery [Alabama].  He never came to Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--your step (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause when he died, my mother and I after I was grown and got a car then, my mother took us to his funeral.  My mother and two of her sisters I think went to his funeral.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he died before my mother.  My mother lived a long time.  My mother lived to old age.  My mother lived to, to be ninety-five years old.  She died when she was--she would have been, she would have been ninety-five that August and she died in January, in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your stepfather's full name?
Speaker 2: William Nather- Nathan [William Shuttlesworth].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Used to sign his name Wm. Shuttlesworth.
Speaker 1: And 'bout when was he born?
Speaker 2: I believe it was 18--I don't know, we'll say it was 1868, but he died in 1940.  We had some--just, just before he died, he really, he'd been real sick a while and he wanted to, he wanted to see me in my graduation gown.  He was pretty mean and tough, naturally like a older man marry a younger woman.  Quite jealous of her sometime and concerned.  But I knew anything of my mother but just a saintly kind of Christian woman.  Never did have a lot of clothes, but she made good with what she had.  And I think that's been a part of my life.  "Son, take what you got and do, make the best with it."  We were on the welfare back there.  And at one time, he worked on the WPA [Works Progress Administration], at the time Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had 'em fixing the roads.  That's back there when people was saying, "Let Jesus lead you and Roosevelt feed you" (laughter).  I know all about that.  And he would drive to, he had a T Model Ford, drive to Bir- Birmingham and get the food, day old bread, et cetera, you know, cakes and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 393563
Speaker 1: Do you know very much--now was, was your stepfather [William Shuttlesworth] or your--were, were they sharecroppers or did they own their own land or what?
Speaker 2: He owned his house as I told you.  If you come over the hills of Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama], he lived right down, going down the hill where you would keep going down I guess to the--we call it the bottom, down at the bottom.  Then we go, go left and then go Red Mountain, where the old mountain, and go up the--old mountain was always on the ridge.  And go up the mountain, TCI [Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company] had--over the ridge had a commissary and everything.  TCI camps, houses, ridge, houses in a line.  But this was about oh, four and a half, five miles from where we lived.  We lived--the railroad station, trains used to come directly through Oxmoor and there was a little train, it was a fairly good sized station at one time when I was a very small boy, and then they tore it down and built this little, more of shed, something big as this house--room here. And I threw papers from the time I was--could ride a bicycle good, 'til almost to the edge of where Birmingham [Alabama] took it in.  When Mayor Arrington [Richard Arrington, Jr.] became the first black mayor.  Well they, they put, they took Oxmoor in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was just a few years ago.  Maybe, maybe 20, 15 years, 18, 15 years, 20 years ago maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Oxmoor was outside of the city (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was outside of the city.
Speaker 1: And now it's incorporated in.
Speaker 2: In Jefferson County [Alabama] they call it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did our probate type stuff in Bessemer [Alabama], which is about, Bessemer's twelve miles even from, from Birmingham.  So we would be not, we would be between.  You would go directly west and you would go into Shannon [Alabama], you keep--you come by that station and you come on up over the hill, that ridge, and you be what--in that little area called Sand Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama] in Oxmoor.
Story_ID: 393564
Speaker 1: Can you give us, now you gave us your father's full name, his name was Vetta, your biological father was Vetta Greene.
Speaker 2: Vetta Greene, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when was he born, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact year.
Speaker 1: He was about the same age as your mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth]?
Speaker 2: Probably the same age.  My mother, my mother might have been a year or two older, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Or younger, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do, do you know very much about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know him.  I never met him 'til after I had gotten grown and married and start preaching, which would have been--see I married in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was still living in the house that my father, stepfather [William Shuttlesworth] married and brought her to in 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you think of your biological father when you met him?  Did--you have any reflections about him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I met, I was quite young you must remember, around five, three, between four and five and six years.  Well I, I would--I thought he was a mean man.  He'd say, he said a lot of curse words.  In fact I think he learned mama how to curse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now this is Shuttlesworth, right?
Speaker 2: Shuttlesworth, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is your stepfather.
Speaker 2: I was not raised up at all around my father--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --real father.  I never met him until, I must have been--I started preaching when I went, well let's see.  Get mixed up here.  I grew up in Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama], I married, I, I finished high school [Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] when I was--'40, in 1940, Oxmoor.  They built a called it consolidated school for that area right up, partly around the curve from where our house sat, where I was really raised up.
Story_ID: 393565
Speaker 1: So I did what boys did, played around, ran rabbits and all that kind of stuff.  But I was very brilliant in school, time I was in elementary school, elementary school and middle school [Oxmoor Elementary School] was in Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Now do, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's your earliest memory (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember things when I was two or three years old.  I, I have a very kaleidoscopic memory.  I had a very apt, brilliant mind.  I never did have to study hard.
Speaker 2: That, that's what I, that's what I read about you, that you had a great memory when you were a little boy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Great memory.  I read just--I remember when I was in eighth grade, eight or ninth grade.  My teacher, Mrs. Owens [ph.], a lot of them called her tough but I always didn't have any trouble getting my lesson.  I read a--she gave me a--I guess teaching kids to read.  She gave me something and I remember what the word was, the conquerors, K-O-N-Q-U-E-R-E-R-S, O-R-S, the conquerors, I don't know what, I don't even remember the book now but the name of the thing was, I remember it was conquerors.  And I read that in either twelve or fourteen pages, and I read it three times and the fourth time I could commit it, I was--had it practically committed to memory.  Which served me well because during the civil rights struggle we couldn't keep records, not around me anyway.  Other people kept a few.  I could go to a telephone and almost dial a hundred numbers.  If I try, if I call your number even today, three, three times I could get the first numbers, you know, and at that time they had letters--
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) W, T, so on and so forth.  I'd commit that and then I--the other four numbers and, and you remember (unclear) Humphrey in Chicago [Illinois], Reverend Humphrey [Gordon A. Humphrey, Sr.]?  If you knew much about Chicago or Shiloh Baptist Church [Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: That was my best friend.  He just died here about five weeks ago.  And she and I drove, drove up to his funeral.  I met him in--come here--I'm way (unclear) from that now.
Speaker 2: Let's go back to the childhood (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We'll pick that up maybe later.  But I wanted to know about childhood and you said you had a great memory as a little kid.  What's the first thing that you--
Speaker 1: I could read very well.  I could--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And my teacher, Israel Ramsey, I think his picture is right over there.
Speaker 2: Yes sir, it is.
Speaker 1: He was a little man, he wasn't quite tall as I was, I am, 'bout as tall as I am now.  And some of my cousins, they was much taller than he was.  But I thought he was one of the most saintly persons I ever met.  He, he was one of the--I never been influenced too much about people who had degrees and things like that.  I just took people as they was.  I thought peop- I, I never thought degrees made people.  I thought education--and I think education now is the best tool you can get to bring the best out of you, if you're a creative.  I don't think just because you're educated, you're a great person.  I, I think--I've always thought people who did things or offered themselves, even in a whole way, in the deep, deep South, in church.  You could be best known--I never did think of people as being great just because of their names or something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393566
Speaker 1: But do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's your first childhood memory that you--
Speaker 2: Being, my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] brought me up in church and never asked me.  I never heard her say, "Fred [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], would you like to go to church today?"  I was--I mean no, no, no.  She'd be helping me out of the bed with a switch or something if I didn't get up, we didn't get our work done, whatever it had to be on a Saturday, get our clothes ready for Sunday and all of that.  And she was a Christian woman, she believed in Sunday school, church, and I had to get up.  Wasn't no, wasn't no, wasn't no mess about it.  She was very a strict disciplinarian.  She never played with us.  She told us what to do, we better do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the, what, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well the church was--we lived down, going as I said, going down, going down and as you were coming, like you coming from the opposite railroad station where I told you.  Come on up top of the hill and it was pretty level around as you coming.  There was a ridge that went down, (unclear) halfway between where we lived and, and the, I told you the (unclear) that run into another ridge, oil mine.  Number nine, ten and eight, all were there on the mountain, side of the mountain.  But our church that was the biggest thing--one of the biggest things I remember--was a little, little, little wooden church, St. Matthew [St. Matthew A.M.E. Church Oxmoor, Birmingham, Alabama], sitting on top of the ridge, Sand Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama].  You could--when you go up as you, as you get ready to go down, you could go up a little more and turn left and just go way back about a mile, mile and a half.  So it was regular sandy roads.  It wouldn't, muddy, wouldn't--dirt roads back there.
Story_ID: 393567
Speaker 1: Long time before they began, really began to pave the road--cars travel--wasn't a whole lot of cars back there then.  You could count--you could see as many cars now if you go from here to my town here you see many cars than I'd see in months, months in my lifetime, very few cars.  Ford [Ford Motor Company], Chevrolet, Dodge [Dodge Brothers Company], Plymouth Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC].  I think that was back in those days.  Nash [Nash Motor Company] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So your stepfather [William Shuttlesworth] had a car and that was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Had T--had a T Model Ford [Ford Model T].
Speaker 2: So that was impressive to have a car in those days.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, anybody that had a car back there.  He didn't know anything about cars.  Whenever it would stop running, his favorite words, "Go get Jesse [ph.] (laughter).  Go get Jesse."  That's the man my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] married later on in her later years after he'd been buried for years.  Jesse would always tamper with cars.  I remember used to, he used to have what was known as a magneto in a car, something akin to a generator I guess.  But he said, "Go get Jesse."  What made me remember Jesse way back 'cause Jesse would--keep his mouth lip open, have a cigarette hanging on his lip.  When you, when you suck air down your pipe with smoke.  He always be hacking as he working on the car.  (Laughter) Had these--T Model wooden spokes in the wheels way back then, wooden spokes.  I wonder sometimes was the spoke gonna break out when the car be on the side of the road you know.  My grandfather [March Robinson] had a little red mule called Frank.  My stepfather had a, a friend named Eb, E-B Carroll, C-A-R-R-O-L-L [Eb Carroll].  And it was his wife's niece which I think was my stepfather was attracted to her and my mother find out, they'd get into battles over that periodically.  I plowed all kind of mule colors, gray (laughter), black.  He had a famous female mule named Ada.  And I plowed, I did what you supposed to do.  And then we rented--
Speaker 2: Now why was Ada famous?  You said she had a--
Speaker 1: He just called her Ada.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Get up Ada, Ada, Ada.  But he had, he had two mules at one time.  But Ada was a female mule, black mule, dark brown skin, brown and he had one other one, I don't remember what his name was.  But my grandfather had a mule named Frank.  He was smaller than the average mule at that time.  My grandfather would drive his mule to Edgewood [Homewood, Alabama], which is up to Birmingham [Alabama].  Edgewood would be on the east side over the mountain [Red Mountain] from Birmingham.  And Frank knew the way exactly to every house he'd stop and pick up garbage.  And, and Frank would, he would, he would, he--I guess he was a mean man at the time.  He, if he had to move, get up, put the line and the mule wouldn't move he would, he would whip or something.  And he would shake his head so he'd hit him again, wham.  And I remember going up to Edgewood with him one time to pick up, and Frank could just go to a house and stop.  He just, he knew which house they were going to, (unclear) grandfather would pick up the bags of garbage or whatever (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hold--
Story_ID: 393568
Speaker 1: Frank, we're talking about Frank the mule (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. And grandpapa [Shuttlesworth's maternal grandfather, March Robinson] was much taller than the mule.  And he'd say, he wanted him to move, and he--and he was hitting him with this wire, you know, he shake his head and still wouldn't go.  And grandpapa put a small, little, small links of chain in there, which I thought was very cruel.  And Frank one morning when they, remember I, he'd had the mule for years.  And went, going from where we lived down, back toward the, I told you the radio--the train station right here, and that's a level place there, but the county had thrown up the road all, almost as high as this room, maybe nine feet.  And that morning I happened to be with grandpa on the wagon.  And he was, he said, "Dat blammit, I want you to go and hit him," and the mule, and Frank wouldn't get no faster.  (Laughter) But he was a strong mule, he was a little old mule.  I've seen him almost take an Avery plow they called them, almost take it down to the top of the (unclear) cutting shed and Frank would just almost stop, but he would make it in there.  I never saw him stop.  But this morning grandpa wanted him to run.  Wham, "Get up, god dangit," he called that, he didn't curse much.  And, and, and Frank would just sit, but he would not run.  And he said, "You ain't gonna run, are you?" And wham, and that wire and chain.  Now he had hit him, his, his backside, top of his hips in the back.  He had gotten, he had beaten all of this off the time, all the skin off and it had become flat, scabby, but he still wouldn't run.  It's amazing.  So this mule waited right good 'til he got to this high ridge the county had thrown it up good.  And I guess sometime I don't think animals have sense like we do, but they, they, they know how to--they have instinct.  But he wait right good 'til grandpa got on the edge there and he look like he got slower deliberately.  And grandpa hit him down on the side.  Right under, right under the side (unclear) right behind his front leg.  That's tender, you know.  And Frank almost stopped.  He say all right, "I'm gonna go--I'm gonna kill you if you don't--."  And after a while, after he hit him 'bout four times, Frank just went right off that whole wagon--almost as tall as that window, down side the road.  That's one thing I remember. Tore the wagon up.
Speaker 1: He just jumped off the side of the--?
Speaker 2: He just went--he didn't jump off the side.  He was in the road, but he had to go two or three steps to get to the edge of the road.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he just brought it to the edge and let it roll over?
Speaker 2: It went on down.  Frank himself went on down and the wagon he tore up went down (laughter).  I always thought that was something, I never forgot it.
Speaker 1: It seemed to you that Frank knew what he was doing.
Speaker 2: He knew, he intended to tear the wagon up.  Grandpa gone make it, he had intended wanted him to run, he just wouldn't run, that's all.  I remember that about that mule (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They talk about mules being stubborn I guess.
Speaker 2: He was a stubborn mule.  He was stubborn.  Never did (unclear), grandpa couldn't hardly make him run.  Once in a while he'd make him do it, but unh-uh.  But he was always slow, but he could go from our house out in the country, we call it in the country, to Edgewood [Homewood, Alabama] they call it, which was Rosedale [Homewood, Alabama] but a little further on north would be.  And he could go to every house that grandpa picked up garbage himself, and stop deliberately.  Wouldn't tear the wagon up, hit anything.  Grandpa'd go get the garbage, put it on, and he'd move on.  I thought it was marvelous that a mule could understand some things.
Story_ID: 393569
Speaker 1: So what happened to Frank?  Did Frank get hurt when he fell over that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he got away.  He just went, see--
Speaker 1: He didn't--okay. He just tore the wagon up.
Speaker 2: He just tore the wagon up.  The shafts, two shafts from the wagon, know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Oh, the traces, like, broke off.
Speaker 2: Broke off the chain, yeah, broke the, broke the--even the stage just-- you have wood pole like beside him chained to the collar on his neck that you pull with.  But the--to go down that hill the, those shafts would just break.  Then Frank just went on down the hill and went off the road down.  Remember I had to lead him back home.  I thought it was good, I kind of felt good to see grandpa [Shuttlesworth's maternal grandfather, March Robinson] in that position.
Speaker 1: So did you, were you thinking--I mean it seems as though it's like a, kind of a, a--it's analogous to the fight against oppression in a sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--it had to be.  It had to be.  He just--and you know he whipped his tail and shake his head, but he wouldn't run, he would not run that day.  And he waited right good 'til grandpa got to that edge of the road and grandpa had (unclear) he said, "Doggonit, I'll kill you if you don't."  And he hit him, he just went right on to the edge of it and he tried to pull him back, and he and the wagon went over the hill, the mule went, broke the shafts off that would be up between them you know, between the mule and connected to the wagon.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I'm up round about twelve or fourteen now, somewhere in there.  But I thought it was vengeance.  I thought, I thought it was good for grandpa (laughter) to know that mule had sense enough to--and I thought he was brutal.  I thought it was very brutal for him to beat the mule and put a little chain and wire into it, would hurt it, you see.  You could have a leather strap that was there on it, why put wire up there and a chain.
Speaker 1: So that was pretty mean.
Speaker 2: It was very mean.  It was mean to the mule.
Speaker 1: Now was--you said your--
Speaker 2: But when he was in church and you hear him pray, you thought he was a great Christian.  But now I never did hear him curse that much.  And I never did hear him get in trouble with other folks that much.  He wasn't a mean man, I thought he was nice.  But the mule knew he was mean.
Story_ID: 393570
Speaker 1: Now what about your stepfather [William Shuttlesworth]?  Did--was he a peaceful--?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't a peaceful.  He would--his first--his finger like that.  If he point to you--if he point at you, his finger was this way, it would be pointing over there (indicates direction).  And it's a wonder God had to have something to do with my family.  He provided food, he made liquor, you know, bootleg liquor.  And it's in the history book that I was arrested for stealing.  But I--at eighteen he had just died.  And I wasn't running no liquor, I didn't know nothing about that, you know.  I knew how to do it, he'd make you get up and you, you get up and 'fore day and always watching for the sheriff, you know.  But to me I was reluctant to be out there that time of morning.  You had to get the mash, put it in a vat, heat the fire under it and all that kind of stuff.  Then you had the coils, that's why it's called distillery, he'd have the coils in cold water.  And when that steam would go up, come out of this big drum and go in there, it would distill into liquid.  And that was, that's what you call liquor.  And he would do it.  I have struggled about that.  He'd always be--wait 'til about three or four o'clock in the morning when you asleep, everyone get to sleep.  "Get up, get up (unclear)," and he would curse all the time.  He say, he would say curse words, it was just a thing with him.  "Dammit I got to run."  Put another word there.  "I got to run this morning."  So I'm getting up, reluctantly but I had to go.  I was a teenager, you know.  And in the wintertime we had our hog pen, hog pen inside our property.  We had a little gate in the back of it and you go across a little stream of water and as you walk across the stream, you can halfway walk across it and it becomes wider and it may be a little deeper but wider, and he was just--I couldn't get ready fast enough.  "Come on dammit, I got to go."  So this time it had rained just enough for water to be on there and it was cool enough for it to be icy.  And so he was, he was, he was doing this this morning, getting ready, mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] was in the bed.  Had a big fire in the fireplace.  And he was rushing me and went there--he put the planks, two planks across this water.  And he rushing me and hit that spot and fell off into the water, the water was about that deep (indicates depth) at that time.  The thing was rising from here almost to over there.  And he said some words.  He said a whole lot of vulgar words.  Dammit, so, and so, and so, and so.  All kinds of names.  And then he fell into it, and he was cussing.  He, he got up and he said, "Damned if I run tonight (laughter)."  I went back and built a great big fire.  Mama was lying in the bed.  He, he was, he had put on some clothes, got close to the fire, took the wet clothes off and put others on.  Mama just laughed, too.  And I was, I could felt I could laugh a little bit then 'cause mama was laughing.  He said, "What's so damn funny?"  You know all this, just sort of typical boy, typical life.
Story_ID: 393571
Speaker 1: But what he [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] would do, he would fix all of our plates.  There were, me and my sister [Cleola Shuttlesworth Willis], and he and my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] had nine children, I mean seven children.  My mother had nine children altogether, all of which I'm the oldest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Two for Greene [Shuttlesworth's biological father, Vetta Greene], we, we were two.  We--I was two years exactly older than she.  She had a stroke after mama died and so if I'm 84 now, she'd be 82 in May.  I mean just he did, and he would say okay.  So papa would fix the plates.  He sat at the head of the table, he'd go around the table.  And my family had see nine children and two adults.  He would always fix the plates.  And he had a name he would call out.  My eyes were quite white.  He called me a white-eyed hound, that's his word for relieving himself, getting it off on me.  My brother, his oldest child, his and mama's oldest child was Eugene [Eugene Shuttlesworth].  That was my brother who's 5 years, 4 years and, 4 years and 11 months to the date.  If I'm 84, he's 79, 5 years, always.  When I was 80, he was 75.  So he's 79 now and he just had some hints of Alzheimer.  He fell here about nine months ago I believe it was, in the bathroom somewhere.  And he just hit his head right here.  Not in the forehead, but right along in here (indicates).  And since then they thought he had a touch of Alzheimer.  And at one time I went to see him, I'm always in Birmingham [Alabama] whenever they have any programs or people come to Birmingham, I stay with them or stay in a hotel.  And we went to see him in the hospital.  So here I am, when I had this brain operation last week, last year.  And I went to see him and I had, we had this sister who had the stroke kind of--you can hardly understand what she says.  She says words but you can't understand too well.  All three of us in this same room that was visiting him.  And somebody was saying it's ironic that my mother's three oldest children in the same room talking.  We were in his room of course in the hospital.  We were--all of us weren't in the hospital.  And, but, we, we was brought up close together.  So here, here's papa setting at the table.  You know the table is kind of elongated like this, kind of round and goes on up, elongated over to where my coat is, all of us.
Speaker 2: Kind of oblong table.
Speaker 1: Oblong table.
Speaker 2: And everybody could sit around the table at the same time?
Speaker 1: Everybody could sit around the table, just exactly.
Speaker 2: So that's like eleven people.
Speaker 1: And he'd always have something to say mean when he fix your plate.  Used to call me white-eyed, used to call me a white-eyed hound.  Well I couldn't do nothing about it.  I always vowed when I was small I might have to tackle him someday (laughter).
Speaker 2: You didn't like that.  You didn't like that.
Speaker 1: I didn't like it.  I always resented being called it, but I just didn't say anything.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sister--when mama would get at her with a strap, she'd be crying.  He called her a little, he called her pea-eyed, pea-eyed heifer, that's his word. P-E-A, pea, pea.  I don't know what he meant by the pea, he'd say pea eyed, he said okay, he said, "I been had held up my sleeve--."  He'd tell me a lot of times.  "I held my sleeve a long time."  And I'd feel like telling him he ought to get it out, but I wouldn't say anything for a long time.  And then Eugene, he would call him, Eugene's head was always larger.  That's his first child with mama.  He would call him a big-head hound, that's what he called him.  I was a white-eyed hound, he was big head.  He knew it--and as soon as he would get through eating, he would trot right across the porch, go down the steps, he'd--papa tell me eat stuff like a dog and then got to go to the so-and-so house.  He'd have something, something to say.  He called sister a pea-eyed heifer and would all her, always give her the wing of the chicken.  This is just, this is just life.  It was just his habits, you know.  And then he would say something to the other girls, they were younger.  But sister, myself, Eugene, and maybe one or two more would get the harshest words.  And, and he had let's see, 1, 2, 3, 4, I have 6 sisters and 2 brothers.  All of those are--only one, two of us whole, me and my sister from Vetta Greene.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All the rest of them were born Shuttlesworth.  And, and, and let's see, my baby sister is now is just--oh we got a lot of grandkids.  I got 17 or 18 great-grands.  Got 4 children and about 14 grands and about 18, 19 great-grands now.  My oldest grandson, from my, my oldest daughter is 41 or 42 this year.  So we grew up.
Story_ID: 393572
Speaker 1: So we wanted to one day--and maybe mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] would think he'd [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] been out with this other woman some day.  They be, they be talking a lot. Sometimes fighting a lot.  Now my mama was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he was interested in another woman?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, and mama knew it.  And he was a--I remember once he used to carry some (unclear), little sticks, bout big around as this thing, big as this pole--big as that round, black pole.  And mama--
Speaker 2: What was it--?
Speaker 1: Mama asked him once, she (unclear) she said, "Well what the hell you gone do with that?  You gonna beat me, beat me?" and so on and so forth.  Now he had very short wind.  If you want to talk about funny thing.  But he had a great big hand.  His thumb was much bigger than mine.  His--probably smallest finger was just about big as this thumb.  But his, his index finger, his finger like this.  It was always like that.  If he'd be pointing at you from here, he'd be pointing over here (laughter).
Speaker 2: It was broken some kind of way, right?  He must have broken it.
Speaker 1: I don't know how it got fixed.  It didn't have a, it didn't have a scar on it too much.  It was just, just like that.  He'd be pointing, just made that way.  I don't know whether it got hurt one day, I don't know.  He worked in the mine before I knew him.
Speaker 2: Okay so he pointed his finger, and--
Speaker 1: And he would point his finger at me.  If he gone call me a white-eyed hound, he'd be pointing at me but his finger be going over here (laughter).  And, and we, we had funny thing--I was, I was always funny.  I had maneuvered my kids where each one of them would--like we'd be eating.  Like they had meat with the skin on it or something and they--I had it so they make their contributions to me.  Papa, papa got onto it.  And I would tell them I'd encourage them to do this by saying so-and-so broke the record.  Each kid, all them eight kids, you know, including Eugene [Eugene Shuttlesworth].  I had them, I had as much meat as all of them would have.  Papa'd call me, papa would say some curse word, "Taking them damn children's meat," you know.  He was vexed about it, but I had a nice childhood I guess doing what I was doing.  I always could engineer what I wanted done I guess with them.  So my mother and he would get into battle and I told you he was short winded, very short winded.  I doubt if he could run from here to that wall too well.  If he did he'd have to lean against something or sit down.  And so he and mama would get entanglement.  I wouldn't know what they'd be fighting about all the time.  And we had--I remember we had a chicken yard and you'd go down some steps, about eight steps you had to go down.  And the first time I think we decided we were going to chastise him, we kids were gone get into him.  But I wasn't going to provoke him.  But I remember they would just be (unclear)--came out fighting sometimes, came out on the back porch out the kitchen you would come out and you'd go straight across, or as far as that, behind that--the porch was longer than that.  And then you could come out this door in the kitchen and go right back up the hall going to the front, see.
Story_ID: 393573
Speaker 1: And somehow or another, he [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] had slapped mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth].  She had--you know women always had mouth.  They had more mouth than you do, actually.  And so they were arguing, and I think it was about the woman was named Louise [ph.], little slender nice looking woman.  Eb Carroll's wife, Eb was his best friend.  Ms. Carroll [Lizzie Carroll], she was kind of light skinned, not too light.  Her sister was dark, dark, nice built young woman, young woman.  But papa was so, he was, he was, he was near sickly then.  And he had this T Model Ford [Ford Model T] and his fender come to think of it, his fender was loose.  You could hear him coming a mile away, that fender, (makes sounds) (laughter).  I'm telling you it was, it was, we had--I remember things.  And one time I was trying to get even with him you know and I call myself gonna put a nail in his tire.  And I had a nail sticking up, Ford wasn't heavy in the back.  And the thing ran across my finger, didn't break it, nothing.  I was gone puncture his tire, get back at him like that for being mean.  So--
Speaker 2: So you were saying--you were at a point where he, he slapped your mother or something?
Speaker 1: He had slapped my mama on the porch.  And she, and, and she had a stick, my mother had one eye for a long time after this.  And she hit at him with this stick.  And mama--so he didn't, he didn't throw the chair, held the chair up 'cause I was right there looking at it.  I had to tell mama that too.  She thought the chair foot had punched her eye out, 'cause he had--'cause he was holding the chair up to keep her from--I guess from getting to him.  And she had a broom and she hit the broom and it slithered.  I'm looking at it, stick went right in her eye.   Her eye was knocked out.  Mama's eye was knocked out a long time.  She didn't have but one eye.  And of course so he ran down the step, down the step holding as best he could.  And went to go in the chicken yard to get away from mama.  And he had put this thing up about, oh like this shelf.  Well, he being short breath, took him difficulty to get over it into the chicken yard.  And mama was caught on him just like a bull, hitting, fighting and everything.  So there was a lady that lived across the street, like where your car is parked out there, little bit further.  And she was just looking at him, she was just looking at him.  Mama was cussing out.  He was standing there, trying to quiet, trying to get her saying (unclear).  So Ms. Tolbert, named Maggie Tolbert.  She was looking at both of them, you know.  Looking from her house, from our house.  Papa was trying to saying, "Berta, Berta, look at Maggie, look at Maggie."  Mama said, "Damn Maggie.  You done slapped me, you SOB," all this kind of stuff.  And she was wailing at him and he was leaning against the tree, had gotten over this now, leaning up against a tree and she was clawing him like a (laughter).  My mama was tough.  I don't know, some ways I think I took after her, I took after her in principle.  She didn't bother people.  She really believed in right and righteousness.  But she would claw him down whenever, whenever they would come to blows you know.
Speaker 2: So she didn't just, she just wasn't absorbing punishment, she would give it out too.  She would--she, she'd fight back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She would. Oh she would--
Story_ID: 393574
Speaker 1: But his [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] hand, his hand was--if you think I have large hands, I told you his hand was much thicker than mine.  And if, if that much weight gets against you, you wasn't well balanced, you'd go off your feet you know.  I saw him one day, some fella came there and he used to--made the liquor people on the paydays would come and buy liquor, you know, whiskey.  And one guy was acting drunk you know.  Staggering through the house and so forth and he told him to sit down.  And he, he just slapped him.  Just that quick, that guy was spinning across the room.  He wasn't, he wasn't tall as I am.  But he was just muscular.  And of course he was--I never saw him go to church twice--but twice in my life.  And went to jail the next day or two.  I guess that was, "The Lord was trying to say something to him," mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] would say.  But he got along in the community [in Oxmoor, Birmingham, Alabama], I didn't have, I didn't know many people he was mean to.  He just--didn't anybody fool with him.  He had been known and he was raised up in that area.  His other family, all of his children.  His youngest child was older than my mother as I told you.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 393575
Speaker 1: Tell me about, now you said you were--so I take it you did a lot of work on the farm, growing up, a lot of work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the farm.  We had rented a farm up, almost half, it was almost halfway to Birmingham [Alabama].  And that's where those--the roads were look like to me a half a mile long, not quite, just looked that way to me as a child.  Where I don't know, I don't know whether you know where things are in Birmingham--you know where Edgewood Lake used to be.
Speaker 1: No, sir.  But go on and describe it.
Speaker 2: Well it was about halfway--you could go twice that far and you'd be at the Birmingham edge line as it was then.  Course we are in the city limits now.  It's paved out going down the road where we are.  As a boy I remember we didn't get electric lights until--I believe it was 1930 something, yeah '30 [1930].  We finally got gas line, we got water line out there and we got gas.  It's in the rural you see.  Then we got electric lights, all that's new.  And of course I bought a bike, my mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] bought me a bicycle and I carried papers to all over the Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama] area.  And whites had begun to settle almost as you got to Birmingham, you know.  I carried paper almost to the city line even then.  So I went to high school [Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] when I, when I graduated from the ninth grade--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  I don't want to get you that far yet.  But--
Speaker 2: I must be going mighty slow.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: This school right here.  This is Oxmoor Elementary School [Birmingham, Alabama].  It was kind this of building (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay I see, I see it there on the, yeah.  Oxmoor Elementary.
Speaker 2: As I told you when you got up on the (unclear), come up the, come up and go on the level.  The school set right on the side of that where you came up to the level, to go up to St. Matthew's Church [St. Matthew A.M.E. Church Oxmoor, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay and Oxmoor Elementary School, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was Oxmoor Elementary right there.  And they would have at that time, sometimes five or six classes in a room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I learned one thing from him.  He--the problem on the board.  I see it just like that (snaps), but he never would let me get up and show those big boys up.
Speaker 1: That's Ramsey?
Speaker 2: Ramsey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Israel Ramsey is his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he wouldn't let you show.
Speaker 2: Who I thought was a great man.  Huh?
Speaker 1: So, so he wouldn't let you show--
Speaker 2: He would never let me show them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew it just like that (snaps).  I just was itching you know.  He never would--go up to the board.  He wouldn't let me.  He said, "No, sit down Fred [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth]."  Nice person.  But he never would let me show them.  What I know now he was--it would have been discouraging if they'd seen little old me get up there and do all of that.  I've always thought of that, all through life I, I been, I had a kind of a bent toward making things equal.  Empathize with those who couldn't.  That was just part of my life.  I never had to study hard in school too much.  I never made under an A.  Even in college [Selma University, Selma, Alabama], too far ahead of you now.  You ain't gonna get way up there.
Story_ID: 394135
Speaker 1: Tell us, you were talking about school [Oxmoor Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] and how Mr. Ramsey [Israel Ramsey] wouldn't let you, you know, overshadow the older boys, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in about the fifth grade and these were ninth grade kids.  And he'd have them, he'd have them at the board trying to figure out a problem or something like that.  Have two or three of them up there sometime.  And trying to make them get arithmetic.  And I just knew it, and I was burning, itching to do it.  He would never let me either tell them from my seat or come up and do it.  He never did that, I remember that.  And I'm talking about years I was under him from, from fifth grade on up.  Until they tore that, they tore this school down and built a school that's there now.  It's not a school now, a church bought it.  Right after you come right around the hill, right in front of our house.  We had a lot of experiences.  The ditch was between our house and the road and people would, it would rain would get, sometimes you have the mule help people pull they cars out, you know, all this kind of stuff.  Still going up the hill.  Sometimes we had a time.
Speaker 1: So you have a phenomenal memory and, and your lessons were easy for you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My lessons was easy.  I never had to study hard.
Speaker 1: Now did, did--was, was Mr. Ramsey a good teacher?
Speaker 2: I thought he was the greatest.  I have, this is him--come in, open the door there.
Speaker 1: Pause a second.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Talking about Mr. Ramsey.
Speaker 2: Oh, Mr. Ramsey as a man he was--he didn't belong to our church.  He belonged to the Christian church, I believe it was.  But he always stood out.  He was about the--I guess the most prominent person.  Schoolteachers, I always thought that schoolteachers ought to be prominent in the community.  Back there people raised their children if you got a whooping at school, you had to get--get another one at home, you know.  And I thought that's the way you raise children.  You know and now they have these, these halfway houses and all that stuff now.  I say back in the Jewish, in the Bible they never did have halfway houses in Israel.  God told them how to live, cups on gates and all that stuff.  Here is this child of God, here is this and that.  So and it was somewhat like that in Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama].  People reported to your parents what you did.  And vice versa.  And like to me--like to me, mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] had a penchant for whipping.  She would beat the devil out of us.  And I used to tell people when I first started speaking, mama beat the heck out of me and scared the rest of them into line (laughter).
Story_ID: 394136
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Okay so I went--don't have a copy of that.  We started off going to Wenonah [Wenonah School, Birmingham, Alabama] over in, over the mountain [Red Mountain].  And then they transferred us to Rosedale High [Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] which is a little south of Birmingham [Alabama], just a little south and east of Birmingham.  Right across--when you come up by Vulcan, you know where Vulcan is.  Down--Vulcan supposed to be the god of iron. There's a statue there in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Way back then, they remodeled it now.  Rosedale High School, it went to the twelfth grade.  So we were just a few weeks over in Wenonah and they transferred us to Rosedale where I did--I did most of my high school there.  I was very up there also.  B.M. Montgomery lived in Rosedale [Homewood, Alabama], was the principal of Rosedale High School.
Speaker 1: B.M. Montgomery.
Speaker 2: B.M. Montgomery, I was, and, and I was valedictorian, valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting.  Now you were able to, to finish high school and you didn't have to take time off to--cause I know a lot of people we've interviewed say that down south they couldn't go to school all year round.  They could only go part time cause they had to do farm work and then go back and--but you were able to go (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in the rural, the deep rural you did.  I taught school in Dallas County [Alabama] when I was pastor First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama].  I started preaching in Selma, Alabama in '48 [1948].  And I been--this is my sixth church.  So in '48 [1948]--but remember I, let's see I was in my early thirties when I got into problems.  If I was born in '22 [1922], and I--[U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was in '54 [1954], I would be thirty-four.  And that almost activated what religion I had.  I understood my calling.  I had to do something as to begin changing the world of segregation.
Speaker 1: Okay now I don't want to get there yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: In high school, now what were--?
Speaker 2: Some of the things happened.  I couldn't, I couldn't catch a ball too well so I didn't play baseball.  But I liked to play football and couldn't get tog.  And I remember--
Speaker 1: Couldn't get a what?
Speaker 2: Couldn't get a football tog (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, football uniform.
Speaker 2: They didn't have enough for all of us, uniforms.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: And the way I got mine, I would be out there in my suit, falling, tackling and all that kind of stuff.  And how I got my football togs was a fella called Pop, they called him Pap, Pap Sawyer [ph.] got his arm broke in three places, he was tackling somebody.  He pulled his togs off on the field that day and I picked them up and used them ever since (laughter).  I guess it's crazy but I did.  I wanted them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played football in high school?
Speaker 2: I played football in Rosedale.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called ourselves the Sons of Kong, K-O-N-G.  Big ape, you know.
Speaker 1: Sons of Kong.
Speaker 2: The Sons of Kong, that's what we were named at football--
Story_ID: 394137
Speaker 1: So now coming back to--I graduated [from Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] in May 1940.  My stepfather [William Shuttlesworth] was very sick.  He had been sick, now he was on his last leg.  And he--we weren't very close but we got closer when he was sick, real sick.  And of course he had told my mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] he wanted to see me graduate twelfth grade.  And so when I got my robe, I went in and mama said, "You gonna let your father see you."  I was fixing to go to school.  She knew he was passing.  And of course I went in.  She said, "Go and let your," she said, "Let your father, let your dad," that what she (unclear), "Let your dad see you."  Although he was my stepfather.  So he was real sick so I went in, had my robe on and I spoke to him.  And all he said to me was, very sick, breath always--when he was all right he didn't have much.  He just said, "You got it on have you.  You got it on, ain't you?"  I said, "Yes sir, got it on.  Mama said you wanted to see me."  And he grunted.  I think that's the last words he said to me.  And that was in, I think it was nineteen--it was '40 [1940], 1940 when I graduated that same year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He had, he had gotten down for three or four years before where he'd get real sick but he'd come back.  But he passed this time.
Speaker 2: But your mother--you think, you think your stepfather and your mother really loved each other?
Speaker 1: I guess as it--oh I'm sure she did, she always was satisfied.  She never did leave home or nothing like that.  In fact, I guess she had too many children to leave home (laughter).  I don't know whether--she just--when they battle, they get it over, whatever they doing.  But he was, he was just himself all the time.  When he was well, he was well, he was doing what he I guess called taking care of the family.  Made his liquor when he could.  Peoples who would get paid from over the mountain in Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company, they would come like on weekends or something.  It was once or twice a month to buy liquor, you know.  And I, I don't know.  I guess things have happened in my life that I call God sent from the front.  I could have made, I could have been an expert at it I guess.  But I never did learn to like it because when I was young it would work me just like medicine.  So I never liked it, never did drink.  I don't think I ever drank as much as a quart of liquor in my whole life, never did drink.
Story_ID: 394138
Speaker 1: When you were in high school were there any good teachers in high school that helped you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Most of my teachers were pretty thorough.  Some I didn't like, I didn't like my literature teacher.  But--
Speaker 1: Well why not?  Why, why not?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess I thought she was a little more talkative.  She wasn't flippant like women flippant, but she would talk a lot.  And I remember she'd be talking about, "Quoth the Raven 'Nevermore'" ['The Raven,' Edgar Allan Poe].  What was that, you remember?
Speaker 1: Edgar Allan Poe, yeah.
Speaker 2: And she, and I just guess I got sick of hearing her say, "Quoth the Raven, 'Nevermore.'"  And I just didn't like her very much.  But Rosedale [Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] had good teachers.
Speaker 1: How many students about, approximately how many students were there?
Speaker 2: At Rosedale?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes sir.
Speaker 2: It wasn't like a thousand, I think about from, from the lowest grades there up through the high, and I was in the twelfth grade.  I graduated in '40 [1940] on time, when I was eighteen.  And I guess around--a complement of about three--between three hundred and four hundred, five [hundred].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never a large school.  Then the school, the school house burned down and the, the year before I graduated and we had to march from a church, and the march.  I was the valedictorian and a young man from New York named Henry Williams, he was the salutatorian, whatever you call it.  But I always was at the head of my class.
Story_ID: 394139
Speaker 1: Well tell me about race relations.  We haven't mentioned white people in this narrative yet, but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well one white family lived in Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fred Morris [ph.] had a store right, half a block from where papa's [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] house was.  There was one house right in front of ours, the Sykes, S-Y-K-E-S, they had a lot of children like we did.  And we always got along.  Then we have down the hill a half a block we were kind of the way was Mr. Morris, Fred Morris' store set about a half a block back from the regular road that ran through there.  Fred Morris had a--there was a hall, I don't know what the hall was built for, two stories.  And I think he bought that and we, we had times like when the saints had the revival, beating the drums and things, calling themselves holier than everybody else.  And I remember that one night the sheriff came, one day the sheriff came and threw barrels of liquor out.  They was, they were having revival on the bottom, about five or six guys throwing liquor, you know (laughter).  Sheriff, sheriff threw out about five barrels of liquor out from up there.  And people were talking about how they--you know how people criticize.  "Holy down here and hell up here or something."  I think it was--Mr. Morris was buying the liquor from somebody else and selling it to the other places.  But the saints were beating drums.
Speaker 1: So he had a big meeting hall that people could come to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And have revivals and--
Speaker 2: Do the dance.
Speaker 1: Dances.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it was open, open to--well--
Speaker 2: Anybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But the, the events were--were the events segregated?
Speaker 2: The sheriff never did come out to see and, and white folks from town never came out to do with us, to mix with us.  We were segregated as such, just by nature.
Speaker 1: The whole community--
Speaker 2: Police in town had no jurisdiction out there anyway, it would be county sheriff.  And one--Newton [Newton Hubbard], the one that arrested me after my father died, he died in May.  He, he had a, had a cork leg I think it was.
Speaker 1: He had a ba- you know--
Speaker 2: So they didn't patrol out there too much.  It was kind of a let alone thing.
Story_ID: 394140
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  Now you were arrested for bootlegging or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, bootlegging.  The people above us, Satterfields, Satterfields, they--the line, fence line, bushes on it and everything.  And papa [Shuttlesworth's stepfather, William Shuttlesworth] never did go to any deep problem trying to hide.  He just put the worm in the line and run in the grass and put it in a sack or something.  And naturally I'm a youngster, I didn't, wasn't careful about that either.  So when he died, one day the sheriff, Newton Hubbard, call him Newt, Newt Hubbard came out there, had my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] and Eugene [Shuttlesworth's brother, Eugene Shuttlesworth] and me.  And he asked me where was, where was, where was the worm?  And he's a white man, we always obeyed, you know, basically.
Speaker 1: Were there rules for how to deal with white people?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No rules?
Speaker 2: You just knew when to keep your silence and do everything.
Speaker 1: Did your parents teach you that or did you have to learn from just watching people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Course the--just watching and told you I wasn't hard to catch on anything.  But I know, I had been to courthouse.  I had, I had even been to court once and see--one Negro killed another one.  And, and they had a white man that said somebody was a good nigger or something like that.  He got off.  I didn't know too much about that.
Speaker 1: So he, he got off from killing another man cause the white man said he was a good--
Speaker 2: Good nigger, test--character witness, yeah. But see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So they came out to--when they, when they came out there to arrest you, you were talking--
Speaker 2: Newt was walking--he went to the fence line and had mama.  Mama was there.  Now mama had, mama hadn't taught me.  Mama knew where it was too.  He just said to me, "Fred [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] where is that still?"  And Eugene knew too.  All, the whole family--and the people upstairs, I think they was the ones turned us in.  'Cause papa had been dead and buried then, and this was oh at least two weeks or maybe three or four.  And he just came out there and he just, he--and they could see us what we could do, we were doing.  And he just asked me, he said, "Fred, where that worm?"  The worm was--that's what the--you had to have a worm to have a still.  The big drum wasn't there, naturally you know.  And just had been some vines growing up on the fence and everything, just laying there.  And I just pointed to it.  If I had known like I know now, I wouldn't have, but--
Speaker 1: So all you did was point to it and they arrested you, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, arrested me.  Eugene was underage, I was eighteen, see.  I was about eighteen and so that's it.  So the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] put out a little paper when I got--I wasn't in civil rights then.  I wasn't known, except in school.  The Klan tried to make a little something of that when I first became--challenging segregation in Birmingham [Alabama].  And the Klan had a little, they had a little paper called The Wizard [ph.] or something, I don't know what they called it.  And they--I first saw it mentioned in that.  Somebody told me about it.  And then after I started really shaking up segregation, the Klan called me a bootlegger.  But that didn't get anywhere.  I don't think they--even the white people didn't make anything out of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess.  Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 394141
Speaker 1: After high school [Rosedale High School, Homewood, Alabama] now when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you think that you would go to college?  Here you are the valedictorian--
Speaker 2: Oh no I didn't have any--I graduated in May 1940.  I got married when I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when you were getting ready to graduate, did you think about going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought about it but I didn't know what would happen.  My stepfather's [William Shuttlesworth] dead now.  I knew mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] believed in education.  As I told you, her father [March Robinson] wanted her to be the first--you know Alabama State College [Lincoln Normal School; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] now used to be called Normal, State Normal, Normal.  And they wanted her to be the first in our family to graduate through that.  So when she had these children, naturally that--these two children.
Speaker 1: Now, that kept her from going to school.
Speaker 2: Kept her from going to school.  They left Montgomery County [Alabama] and came to Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so you had response--you, your father just died.  So you, you thought you had responsibilities with the family.  Is that it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, but the war started too, World War II [WWII].  Were you, were you drafted?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: I had, I had three children.  When--in '40 [1940] let me see.  No, no, no.  I just had gotten married '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Went to Mobile [Alabama] the next two years, took over the shipyard--three of us.  And we picked up jobs at the [U.S.] Air Force base [Brookley Army Airfield; Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley, Mobile, Alabama], the same way we went down there.  But when I got my draft card, I was in Mobile, this later years, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay so when, when--right after high school, what did--did, did you go to Mobile immediately after high school?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  Nineteen I married.  That's the year the Japanese--
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], right.
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941], and I married in October.  Japs attached us, Japanese attacked us in December.
Speaker 1: December 7th.
Speaker 2: December 7th, right.
Speaker 1: "The day that will live in," you know.
Speaker 2: But they weren't, they weren't drafting somehow or another I didn't get a draft call at eighteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 394142
Speaker 1: Tell us about meeting your wife.  Now, where did you meet her?
Speaker 2: Well I told you we were, we were on the welfare.  And I would--and, and one part of it later was that they had--welfare had if people were able, they had for instance, somebody might being sick, their papa been sick.  They would have a department where people who were on the welfare, if they could, if they could do jobs or something they would get them jobs.  But I was on-and that was YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] thing.  So young kids in high school or so forth, I got a job working at the Southern Club building downtown on 5th Avenue in Birmingham [Alabama].  And I guess all the time I must have thought it was a further than it was 'cause I even walked from--I met my wife there.  She wanted to get married.  She wanted to get married more than I did, tell you the truth about it.  She liked three, like one--she lived with her uncle, her aunt and her husband.  I always call him my wife's uncle.  And she, her name was Ruby Keeler [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth], K-E-E-L-E-R.  And she had--they were sending her to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  They were able to send her to Tuskegee, and she take nursing training.  She lacked one quarter, not over two quarters from being, having taken the nurse training.  She would have been at least an RN [registered nurse] or pretty well to it.  Well, she just I guess got tired of school.  So she met me at the Southern (unclear) Club.  What I had to do was to sterilize needles and, and some doctor would take, take blood.  I'd sterilize those needles, clean those syringes and so forth and so on, like that was my job.  And I met her there.  She's quite a lovely person.  If you had (unclear) this book, you'd see Ruby was a nice looking girl.  And we--I just liked her.  I just liked her.  I wasn't in love, I just liked her.  She was a nice looking girl.  Kind of on the stout side a little bit but pretty good hair.  And we just start talking.  And I remember once I--when I, my bicycle, remember I was tearing, tearing papers I told you.  But I got done with this little welfare job, it wasn't that much.  And we would walk from in town to west end, which was out near--let's see west end was about half as far as I lived from, from out in the country they call it then.  And she--we just socialized, talked, walked.  I liked her like that.  And she probably talked me into getting married 'cause mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] wasn't ready for me to get married as you know.  She didn't have nobody.  And I wasn't thinking about getting married.  And I liked her enough though, and she, she just liked me.  And I had to tell mama, I did tell mama that she was pregnant.  We hadn't even touched each other like that.
Speaker 1: So you just, you kind of deceived your mother there.
Speaker 2: That's right, I didn't have to get married.  I never had, I never touched Ruby physically.
Speaker 1: Well how, well how did, did you get talked into marrying somebody that you--?
Speaker 2: Well she just didn't want to go back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we talked about it.  And she, and it came that she'd like to find somebody to get married.  Well, I liked her real well.  Just you know I knew she was in college.  I could have stayed unmarried.  I never did try to get close enough to get to her and have sex.  We never did get into that.  And so we finally made up that we were getting married.  That's all about a three month period.  I hadn't met her that long.  And mama had, was depending on me, I learned later was depending on me to be the man in the family.  And of course we got married and mama thought it was the honorable thing to do.  But it was, I wasn't into sex then at all.
Story_ID: 394143
Speaker 1: So did you live with your mo- where did you live?
Speaker 2: Stayed with my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] for a while and when we got married, we stayed with her aunt's aunt who had some relatives.  I think had some relative once came to visit from Battle Creek [Michigan].  I was in there about six weeks ago and trying to see if any of those people was there.  But anyway, they had come to Oxmoor [Birmingham, Alabama] to visit then, her people or kin.  Very few people in that family.  Her uncle died in '65 [1965], I was in civil rights then.  They, they brought me, me to his funeral from the jail, I was in Jefferson County Jail [Birmingham, Alabama].  But, and Ruby [Shuttlesworth's wife, Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] never did come out into Oxmoor unless we was having something at the church, something special.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She still stayed with her auntie at Thirgood Church [Thirgood Memorial C.M.E. Church] in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her aunt was a member of Thirgood C.M.E. in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And then we rented a house.
Speaker 1: So, so you were there for--until you moved to Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Moved to Mobile in '43 [1943] I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had already begun to feel the call.  Remember I was the superintendent of Sunday school.  I'd walk from, walk all the way across the mountain, I told you beyond the old mines, walked from Oxmoor there, which is about three miles.  And then I'd ride the streetcar, we rented a, rented a house on, on what was that 8th Avenue I believe it was, and 24th Street.  I believe that was.  But I always wanted to buy a house since I was--I always believed in having something.  So we bought--first house I tried to have--it was on another man's property.  Really that was the first really lawsuit, I'm known for lawsuit.  You'd think I have to sue--it is, but, but that house was about six feet on another man's property out there in, near (unclear) out there where Lawson State College [Lawson State Community College, Birmingham, Alabama] is now, community college.  About two or three blocks from there.  And so we bought this house, bargained for it for $750 and we knew it had to be--we didn't know then it was on another person's lot.  So when we found it, I got lawyers, Allen [ph.] was his name.  I remember names.  I always had a good memory.  And he filed a lawsuit and the man did move the house, which later on I had one of my preacher friends there close to Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church] in Birmingham put up another block house.  And if I hadn't--when the city was--they took my car.  But when, when, when I look at that, I had deeded to him, to my preacher friend.  And then let it alone, so I kept it until I sold it.
Story_ID: 393585
Speaker 1: Now how did you end up going to Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I told you I married when I was nineteen but I had begun to feel the call to, to ministry.  So the presiding elder had said to my mother [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] and to me that would come next quadrennial, every four years the Methodist have a--they were gone take me to the bishop.
Speaker 1: Now this is the C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] or the --
Speaker 2: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], I was a A.M.E.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: D. Ward Nichols who's one of the most famous bishops at that time.  But I never did get there.  Two other men, Dewitt Murphy [ph.], who was just a ordinary person, and Dave [ph.], I don't remember Dave's name, last name, but we three decided we was gone to Mobile to see if we could get work at the shipyard.  And I was married, so I went with them.  I think we drove Dave's car down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dewitt had a family that lived in the Southtown projects [Southtown Court] in Birmingham [Alabama].  His family is still there I think.  And so we went the same day.  We were going to the--we were going to the shipyard the next day.  And we decided we'd go by Brookley Field [Brookley Army Airfield; Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley, Mobile, Alabama], we heard they were going.  And, and got hired on the spot, all three of us as truck driver, where you pick men up, take them out to do whatever to be done.  Mine was just to take them out, put this tar and expansion joints on the runways and so forth.  And we went, we went, we went--there was an old man who was a barber on St. Meador Street, M-E-D-O-R [sic.].  And he had a--had been a big, big house, great big house with a porch all around it as I recall.  Ran into a corner and right before that corner was, it was a place about wide as this room but it was a circle on the edge of that porch.  It was round.  And three single women, this is where the time single women, soldiers in the [U.S.] Army were getting fifty dollars a month, way back there.  That was in '40s [1940s].  Now we were, before this though we were working at Bechtel-McCone-Parsons [Bechtel Corporation].  The government was training people for automobile, people working, training air, on air, on aircraft, but not in Birmingham.  So we took training in, in Birmingham and learned how to work on automobiles.  Like one time I got to where I could ring my own car.  I had a '36 [1936] Chevrolet I remember.  But we decided we'd go to Mobile.  I could take the car down and ring it.  So they had a professor there teaching us how to deal with motors.  Getting ready for war, you know.  And so we just all of us decided we go to Mobile.  Got down here and I guess I could have been (unclear).  I think, I think God has his hand, keeps his hand on people that he wants to do special things.  God loves everybody, I'm convinced of that.  And he, somehow or another he steers your life in a way where he can keep in touch with you 'til he have something for you to do, I'm sure of that.
Story_ID: 393586
Speaker 1: Dave [ph.]--I told you about this three women get, get, was getting fifty dollars a month from the government.  One was real light, I didn't--I have to confess now it's crazy but I didn't like light people too well at the time.
Speaker 2: Why not?  What was the, what was the reason?
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't want anybody to call me black; I hadn't been fighting for that all my life.  I'd go to school with light girls as well as others.  But she just made herself a nuisance.  There was three women and everything, one of them was brown skin, I could have liked her I guess if I could, but remember I left my wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] and baby [Patricia Shuttlesworth Massengill] in Birmingham [Alabama] to go down there [Mobile, Alabama].  So I didn't want to get into that.  I'd felt the call of, to preach.  And I really wanted to live as good as I could.  We all tempted of course.  And I don't think I would was that good that I might not have been had not God just kept charge of my mind.  I met some people who worked at Brookey Field, [U.S.] Air Force base [Brookley Army Airfield; Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley, Mobile, Alabama], William [ph.].  When I started going--see I was still--I was a Methodist you know.  And at Brookley we met some friends and started visiting, church, Corinthian Baptist Church [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church] in Mobile [Alabama].  This is how I got into this change.  I was a Methodist.  And so we got so close and those people just lovely, some of them would leave--let me use the car and they would walk to work.  It wasn't that far to--it wasn't that far.  I've always had when I was young, I'd go to school, go to church.  I'd get in any discussion, like if you was Sunday school, if you was a guest.  If you got something to say, so I'm gonna get up there.  Think I was, they thought I was witful and learned.  I was able to make myself known.  So all the people in the church who would come to Sunday school, all at church if I had anything to say in church.  It was always that, it was in a way that I would know, look like know what I'm talking about without any--so I had, I had started to stay in this house.  There was another brown skinned woman, kind of thick, in--staying with this old man.  He was very old.  He had--they had took care of him.  He, he'd been a barber for years.  And so we'd stay there.  So she'd have cook, have food cooked for us when we come from work at 3:30, go in in the morning 7:30, get off at 3:30.  And I think the Lord kept rein on me.  This light skinned girl, she, she was well--straps and shorts to me at that time.  It's vulgar for a woman to show herself you know.  And she just took to me just like white on rice.  And all we would do is come back and play checkers like in the afternoon for--get time to go in the house or something.  And she had pushed my checker on--had to push me and I just didn't like her.  She had nice, she was built like a doll, really.  And I just, I just disliked her because she just made herself a nuisance to me.  And she got crazy.  There was two others in the building and I had--I didn't even go in that building but about once or twice.  The woman in the house was named Iola [ph.].  She was kin to Dave also, that's how we went down there.  Dave, where was that, Dave, what was Dave's name?  I can't think of it.  But Dewitt was Murphy [ph.], he had a fat wife and three kids in the Southtown project [Southtown Court, Birmingham, Alabama].  So Iola was taking us over to show us how this old man had built (unclear) and that's how I met these three women.  And this girl, she would come out every day we'd come from work she'd be outside.  The other girls never did come out.  They took care of their own business I guess.  But this girl, she was just, she was just a nuisance to me.  And I guess it helped me to dislike her for wearing shorts like this.  Straps had a, just had a, a--she wasn't naked.  But if you don't like something you just don't like nothing in there, you know what I mean?  I wasn't trying to see what she looked like or what she wore.  I just didn't like her.  And she--we'd be playing checkers.  She had to mess with the board, she had to be trying to put her hands on me some way or another and I just hated.  And I almost got to hate her.  Well I didn't understand ways of people then.
Story_ID: 393587
Speaker 1: Dewitt [Dewitt Murphy (ph.)] says--and Dave [ph.] would be talking about it.  And he even told Iola [ph.] who cooked for this old man, that's all the time we'd see her, breakfast and come back in the evening.  Sat down and a lot of pecan trees in Mobile [Alabama].  We'd sit out there and crack pecans and play checkers.  And so she told Iola I was, I was just a mean person.  I wasn't trying to be.  Iola said, "Well it's nothing wrong with you taking her to a movie or something sometime."  I said, "Well I didn't come down here to go to the movies too much."  And with her I didn't want to go.  I might would have gone with somebody else.  I just think that's the way God does things.  And so one Sunday evening, Iola say, "Well you can take her to the movies."  So I took her to the movie and we left the movie before it was out, I just come back.  So we was talking the next day and Iola came out of the house.  She said, "You shouldn't treat her like--you could take her to the movie or take her to dinner."  I said, "Well I didn't come down here to--I got a wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] and a young child [Patricia Shuttlesworth Massengill] at home.  And I really need to get me a house to put them in."  So Iola said so that, that, that was a Sunday evening I think I took her and left before the movie was over.  So Dave and Dewitt sit up talking, made me feel bad kind of.  Said, "This boy is silly, you don't use no women at all."  I said, "I didn't come down here to learn women, I got a wife and children."  He said, "But all three of them women out there like you in this thing."  And say and one of them I understand now would have sort of let herself go.  But you know how when somebody gone--just be always out front then she was the kind wouldn't've jumped, try to jump ahead of you.  I might have would have responded and got out, out of line, I don't know.  I don't sit up and play God ever.  And he, he said now Dewitt said yeah, "All three of them."  And then Dave said--this was his cousin.  He said, "Well no, he got four like him."  Said, "Iola too" (laughter).  She was like--Iola tell him what you told me.  She said, "Well fool I didn't tell you to say--."  She said, "I just said that you--that all three of them women like him and, and I could go for him myself."  I said, "Oh my god," to myself.  So we were about to get a half of an estimate, the government paid twice a month.  And so when they paid I said, "Well let's, let's go back."  I'm gonna have to go back and went back and brought my wife down and my kids.  I think that's how I avoided getting involved.  I understand a lot of them women was giving the men money and all that stuff and vice versa.  And I just thank God for it.
Story_ID: 393588
Speaker 1: So then I started going to Cedar Grove Academy [Cedar Grove Academy Bible College; Cedar Grove Preparatory Academy, Prichard, Alabama], they call it.  Like from here to Prichard [Alabama], it's in Prichard, like from here to Lake (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay so it's called Cedar Grove Academy?
Speaker 1: Cedar Grove Academy
Speaker 2: And that was--
Speaker 1: Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 2: That's a theological school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Taught--and I had felt my call to the ministry.  And I started--preachers would go out, older preachers, pastors, would go out and talk to the younger ministers.  And I started going out there.  So I left--I never did--I went--I never did go back and find out where the house was.  I been, I been to--so I went and grabbed my wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth]--had a (unclear) concrete (unclear) and the government had put up down there close to Mobile, close to the Brookley Field, [U.S.] Air Force base [Brookley Army Airfield; Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley, Mobile, Alabama].  So I had my wife and my kid [Patricia Shuttlesworth Massengill] and, and I'm at, I'm at home.  And then I lost all contact with Dewitt [Dewitt Murphy (ph.)] and Dave [ph.].  They still stayed there.  I think I saw them once since then.  And they still stayed there for a while.  I don't know whether Dewitt went back to his wife and family in Mobile--in Birmingham [Alabama] or not yet.  But from then I got where I had friends in the Corinthian Baptist Church [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, Mobile, Alabama].  They liked to fish.  I didn't care too much about fishing but--and since I was a young man, young, very young man.  People, men, women, not just women, all, men and women just took to me for some reason.  And I think that--I knew that so I went to church they said well--and they would let me review the lessons all the time.  And I'm going to school out there.  And they had what is known--to show you how the white folk--Mobile was supposed to be one of the gentle parts of the state, the gentile part of the state.  And I remember that missionary society--
Speaker 2: That means--I mean it wasn't as racist as--
Speaker 1: It wasn't as bad as Birmingham.  Wasn't no place bad as Birmingham but Johannesburg, South Africa (laughter).  And they had in Mobile what is known as a white man, retired white minister and his wife.  They had him to be quote, the goodwill missionary to the Negroes.  Even with segregation--that's silly now that you think about it.  That's what--his name was L.S. Maynard, L.S. Maynard and his wife.
Speaker 2: L.S. Maynard, he had the goodwill missionary.
Speaker 1: And his wife.  They were good, good--he was the goodwill missionary to the Negroes.
Speaker 2: Goodwill--
Speaker 1: Whatever that association was doing, like extra clothes, women would have, men, ways to be nice, help support.  This was segregation I guess called at its best then.  But Dr. Maynard and his wife just took--they were assigned to deal with me since I just--I had spoken to some of the white pastors with the, with the black ministers.  Just a little bit.  Not too much.  So they were assigned to me.  I'm a young man, a child.  And taking missionary training.  So that was--and be associate to work for them, you see.  And as I think about it now you know it, it sounds sickening to me to think that the white folks thought they were doing good way back there, being goodwill missionaries to the Negroes.  That's, that's how it was, that's, that's what it was.  Few dresses, or they knew where to get something cheap.
Speaker 2: Oh so they had like a rummage sale or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think--
Speaker 2: A thrift shop or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah just, it was minute what they did for us.  They didn't have to do that much.  They didn't have to feed us or nothing like that.  But it was just race relations I guess.  They could do this and feel like they could make a report (unclear) work with me and he was a preacher. Anyway Dr. Maynard, he's a retired minister.  And had been something else in there.  And that would be a, a report to their district.  The white folks was cooperating, doing something in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well what denomination were they, do you know?
Speaker 1: Well I, I'm still a Methodist.  But then--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, the goodwill missionaries.  What, what denomination were they?
Speaker 1: It would have been Baptist.
Speaker 2: Baptist, okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 393589
Speaker 1: So then I said to my pastor, E.A. Palmer, you see his picture there somewhere.  One of these things.
Speaker 2: That's the pastor of Corinthian [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Corinthian, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He didn't preach but one Sunday, he's the pastor.  He had another, he had the first Sunday good--Prichard [Alabama], goodwill--he'd been there for thirty odd years, okay.  He'd been at Corinthian a good while too.  So they had three people who preached--few people, assistant ministers is what you call them.  One of them was very old, but they would get back for me to preach, so I got a chance to preach all the time when, when the pastor would be gone three Sundays a month.  They would just give us so I would preach.  So I took off just like a jet.  And so then I remember one time--and all of them, we was just--I don't know, people just took to me or I never considered myself nothing special.  I was just a nice person, I thought, tried to be.  And they, the--finally the deacon, my pastor never, never was a hooping preacher.  He would just teach, but he was a deliberate teacher, very good I thought.  And what made me want to join the church, he preached one Sunday. He read the Bible that the Philistines were Israel's worst enemies for a long time.  And they had captured the Ark of the Covenant and taken it into some other city.
Speaker 2: Right it's in the book of Samuel [I Samuel], I think.
Speaker 1: Right, absolutely.  And he preached that Sunday on Samuel took, got a group together and went back and got the Ark and brought it back to where it belonged.  And this text was, "Here I sit my Ebenezer, hither to has the Lord helped me."  I remember that, what he preached, yeah.  And I made up my mind that Sunday is when I was gone join the church.  I had to go back home and tell mama [Alberta Robinson Shuttlesworth] and all.  I felt embarrassed.  But looked like every time I go to Methodist church, look like poor, poor preacher was straining himself to death and just couldn't take it.  While at the Baptist church they had, they had a good choir.  Man I--even when I, before I preach, if everybody go to Mobile [Alabama] when I went back to Birmingham [Alabama], I'd go down there just to hear them sing sometime.  Well I told him after, he said you know, we have to baptize you if you come in the Baptist church.  So I consented to be baptized.  And I got tired and I told I said now I have been--I feel like I been called.  So he baptized me.  I was the first preacher he baptized, and certainly the first one later on he organized.  So then I'm coming up in the church, preaching honor to the church. Did have a pretty good gift, I think.  And in that district I was known.  Sunlight, Mobile Sunlight Association [Mobile Baptist Sunlight Association, Prichard, Alabama].
Story_ID: 393590
Speaker 1: And then I had a Cedar Grove Academy [Cedar Grove Academy Bible College; Cedar Grove Preparatory Academy, Prichard, Alabama], Selma University [Selma, Alabama] was the biggest thing for blacks in the state of Alabama.
Speaker 2: Selma University?
Speaker 1: Selma University.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Course Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] was there but the religious thing I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay now Selma University was a Baptist--
Speaker 1: In Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A Baptist training school.
Speaker 1: For training. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what, what year was it when you went to Selma.
Speaker 1: I'm getting to that now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So this was, I went there in '43 [1943].  In '45 [1945] I was thinking about going to school.  They were encouraging me to go to school just (unclear).  I would have gone to school.  I went to, I went to four, it was in '45 [1945]?  Yeah, '45 [1945] Cedar Grove, I went to deliver an oration at Selma University.  And they, the--my oration overdid the one D.L. Motley [D. L. Motley, Sr.] who was pastoring in Mobile [Alabama], little older than I was.  And the president of Selma University, Dinkins, Dr. Dinkins [C.S. Dinkins], D-I-N-K-I-N [sic.], he said, "Well why don't you come up here and go to school?"  And I was married.  He said, "We, we got one house built there on the campus."  He said and I can give you some, a few--help you to get them (unclear) in the dormitories this and that.
Story_ID: 393591
Speaker 1: And I remember--now remember I had built this house.  We go after that, you had left that a while ago.  I didn't build it out of government stuff at first.  There was another boy named Samuel Davis [ph.], we worked together when we first went to there.  He liked me and I liked, I said, "I tell you, why don't you help me build a house and I'll help you build one?"  So I bought one going on 1211 Ghent Street [Mobile, Alabama], G-H-E-N-T and the back of that lot going up to Antwerp Street was the next street behind that.  So you buy a lot, I paid ten dollars (laughter), I had a tough time, terrible time but I made it.  I paid ten dollars down on that lot, paid it out and bought it within a year.  To build this, you see these red clay tile blocks, four foot high and that's what we built it out of, out of cement.  I never, I never built out of cement before.
Speaker 2: That's like cinderblocks like?
Speaker 1: Not cinder.  We used concrete now, we don't use--these was hollow clay tile, hollow.  Bout that thick, bout three eights of an inch.  It had ridges in them.  You could set them on top of each other with the cement between, against each other, cement.  So he helped me build one, twelve by twenty-four.  I turned right around and helped him build his, so we both was in our houses.  Then the government this time, I'm truck driving now.  I had become a, I hadn't become a tow motor driver yet.  Still driving the truck.  The government was tearing down buildings.  So from my house is twelve by twenty-four.  And one of the older members who lived right down the street from me on the corner of Ghent Street, good man.  He belong, they belonged to Corinthian [Corinthian Missionary Baptist Church, Mobile, Alabama].  He could do this.  I said, "I think I'm gone take some of this lumber home, two by fours, two by sixes, whatever.  Extend my twelve foot up to twenty-four now.  My house now twenty-four foot wide.  You got to help me figure out and how to fit the rafters."  So when I left for Mobile [Alabama], I (unclear) in the church preaching, doing the thing.  I'm going to school now at Selma University [Selma, Alabama] on the campus.  We getting ready to go, rather.  But I--this house twenty-four feet wide and another man had bought it, did buy it, rather after I made, after I made and went to Selma [Alabama].  I gave the oration and I was invited to come to Selma and did go to Selma.  My wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] did a little nursing work at a little hospital and house too.  I made it though.  And that's like my rise in the ministry was just like a little jet, take off and keep going.  I had problems but I always overcame them and kept on going.
Story_ID: 393592
Speaker 1: The president bought a cow for me to help me along.  Milk at that time was about seventeen and a half cents a quart, back from '33 [1933].  Then you lay down and stay when you go, hire people back.  It was advertised.  I sold two--I paid for the cow by, by giving this school, two, two quarts of milk a day, fourteen and one fourth cent a quart (laughter).  I got a strange life.  Fourteen and four cents a quart and all that I had got over two quarts I could sell it to the school for the same thing, see.  And my wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] started working for the nursing school, the hospital.  Mr. Dinkins [C.S. Dinkins] was a strict doctrinal person.  And he met my wife coming up to school one morning.  In all that white, you know.  He almost stumbled in the bushes.  So he called me, "Mr. Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], Mr. Shuttlesworth, you know Baptists don't have nothing to do with the Catholic, the hospital."  He said, "Catholics or Baptist and Catholics, they don't run together."  I said, "Dr. Dinkins I'm the only man who tell my wife what to do."  He never said another word about it (laughter).  Life is just--I been always direct, I been always, always respectful, but yet been the man.  He never said another word to me about it.  I went on through Selma University [Selma, Alabama] and start taking teachers in the county who didn't have their degrees to Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] to work on, they had to take so much training to keep teaching.  And so they had a C certificate which is not a degree, but a certificate.  I said, and so in '48 [1948], I went up in '47 [1947], '48 [1948] I got my first call to the first church, on the east, eleven miles east of Selma [Alabama] in July and October I was called to another church west of Selma about four miles.  Just, just right up--so I thought if I get a few dollars a week I could lead two churches.  I could go get me a C certificate and get a B.S. and teach.  This was my--I thought the Lord was blessing me then.  And bless your soul, I started preaching around Selma and, and I was going to school at Selma University.  And was doing some extra teaching supply-like in schools.  I didn't have my B.S. yet but I did.  So I didn't stay in Selma too long.  So but yet I made--then I got a job teaching one year solid at Street Manual [Street Manual Training School, Richmond, Alabama], about thirty miles from Selma.  And they thought I was a great teacher and they offered me a full time job.  But I got in the First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama], that's where I met the modern Pharisees and Sadducees and I know men could do things just wouldn't think, you wouldn't think.  This for--
Speaker 2: Now First Baptist Church, that's in, in Selma? Okay.
Speaker 1: In Selma, Alabama, oldest church in the, oldest Baptist church in that area of Alabama.
Speaker 2: And you became the, you became the pastor of that?
Speaker 1: I preached at these two churches.
Speaker 2: Okay so you were preach, preaching in two churches.
Speaker 1: Two churches now.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And I had made both of them a one Sunday's churches.  But I had made one of them every Sunday church.  And so the deacons of First Baptist, and they were something else.  They said, "You set your service back.  You come preach for us."  Now the preacher really I can understand his not being there, he'd gotten involved with some family, some nice looking woman.  Always something.  And the preacher would get up in the pulpit.  Now if any man in here know anything on me, come up, come on up in here to my face like a man and tell me, you know.  That was one thing I learned too, I never fuss at people in the pulpit.  If I had something to say, I would stop and say it and go on back and--even after I'd taken my text and everything.
Story_ID: 393593
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Pharilsees [sic. Pharisees] and the Sadducees.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Sadducees, well they had, let me see, about eight or nine trustees and deacons together, two or three.  One, one man was a pharmacist, he owned a pharmacist.  His wife had about the only master's degree in Selma [Alabama] and she's dark as my shoes with red eyes.
Speaker 1: With red eyes?
Speaker 2: Her eyes were more red than normal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was, she was--this is First Baptist Selma [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama], but I told you, but you'd have these two or three deacons to do everything.  For instance the project now in Selma come down up against almost the First Baptist Church.  The Methodist church they have celebrate there.
Speaker 1: Right, the Methodist, I know the one you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the one we talking about on that side of the street, going on up.  But First Baptist had a big church.  Oh god you walk in, you can set, oh, three or four like this inside the church if you wanted to.  But they had done some preacher so bad that I understand that they never did preach anymore after they left that church.  Well tall, prestigious church, steeple seventy-five feet in the air or more.
Speaker 1: Yeah those are both impressive churches.  Those two, the Baptist and the Methodist in Selma.
Speaker 2: And the Methodist.  But you know the Baptist church is bigger and taller.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And while I was there, that's the year, the year and a half I was there, we had to put a roof on it, they didn't have toilet, they had toilets on the outside.  You pull a chain.  If you didn't run out, you'd get wet inside.  Dilapidated but still prestigious.  But I've always kept things up where I was.  So how I get to that church, this preacher, he been in the pulpit so finally he left.  They said to me, he left went back to Nashville [Tennessee], the school of religion.  The deacon said to me, "Now you set your church back, service back an hour, and you come preach for us.  We'll give you ten dollars."  That's what they said to me.  They didn't make no bone, if I hadn't accepted the ten, maybe they wouldn't, but ten then was like two hundred now.  So several times, so I started preaching for the church.  And they--at that time it was just almost artificial.  They didn't have any spirit much in the church.  But I'd be preaching.  Some--one time I was get preaching, getting ready to go to my church.  I had to go down the aisle and leave them shouting.  They wasn't shouting, and I wasn't no great hooper then, I just more--so and I was organizing the younger people and the women in the church, the Missionary Society [Women's Missionary Society], was doing well.  And but you see if I'm, if the pastor sits in on a meeting and you get a report it's done, then it's done.  He may not say nothing.  I understand that.  I told them I say, "This is wrong. I'm not supposed to sit in this chair and y'all do the work.  I'm supposed to make recommendations, we talk together, we make them do it."  So what really made me decide to do--when they built the project running up--it runs up close to the First Baptist if you (unclear) is out there.  What was the name of that church now? Brown Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Brown Chapel you mean, right, that's right, that's right.  That's the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, Brown Chapel.
Speaker 2: You could see First Baptist right down the street if you will.  And so Ben Harris was the first black plumber in Selma.  Pritchard [J.D. Pritchard] was the--did the printing for everything.  Pritchard could curse like a sailor and sing like an angel.  Wasn't nothing to it.  And, and so, so I started preaching there in October.  They said, "We'll send out and get us a preacher."  And of course people just rallied you know, the church began to grow and work.  I was the youngest preacher ever been there anyway.  They were, they were, they were losing people.  So I told them, I say, "Well now you won't--." I think I--if I thought the officers were to recommend to the church with the pastor or through the pastor.  But they just did things.
Story_ID: 393594
Speaker 1: So they did--I went to a convention. Pritchard [J.D. Pritchard] tell me, "Oh the city gonna take that property, gonna take it anyway.  Me and Ben [Ben Harris] told them go ahead and take it."  I say, "Pritchard, well Pritchard," I say, "you can't do that.  The church has to vote to sell it.  It has to be a resolution."  "Well they gonna take it anyway.  We just told them go ahead and take it."  I said, "It ain't--it's not the deacon's job, a trustee's job.  The church has to sell the property."  And they were ward leaders, they wouldn't, they wouldn't bring the names of who gave the money.  I just put in the report I got.  It's got to be this way.  But they was, they was zealous I guess and, and the church was rallying around a young pastor anyway you know.  They had built a parsonage on First Baptist [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama].  Put one of the finest little houses put it brick, you know.
Speaker 2: The parsonage (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I, my friend named Stewart [ph.], we had pastored in the rural, I had two churches and he had one, St. Paul Baptist.  So Pritchard knew that Stewart and I were good friends.  "Stewart go round there and tell F.L. [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] we gonna take care of him.  Tell him, tell him to be happy on them hardwood floors."  I, I sent word back.  I said, "Tell him I don't need hardwood floors."  I never back, I never backed down, wouldn't take it.  And he would, he would, he would sign a loan for me at First National Bank.  But I always pay them off.  Never, never late, always pay them off ahead of time so I didn't have to pay the full.  And he--I knew it was gonna be a problem.  So finally we had to put these, I told we had the toilets on the outside and when get off the stool if you pull that chain, you got to go outside.  Don't, you be wet inside the toilet.  So it--First Baptist now got the--I told them, I said, "Let's put the--."  You go, you walk up to the floor of the church.  I go--first you go in, then you go down into the church.  And way in the back of the church, which is wide as this church, we added two things.  Two toilets there with chain, pull chains in them.  So we agreed that it should be done.  And they got angry with me 'cause I say we needed to get bids.  They say, "Well no, just let Ben do it."  I said, "I favor him doing it, he's black, he's here, plumber.  But we ought to get bids so that we can say--."  Of course they had said they had built the thing, Ben had built the parsonage and everything, put plumbing in, put the gas in.  I wasn't gonna have folks thinking I'm stealing money.  That's what they said about--I understand that.  "Oh, just let Ben do it."  So they carried so much sin until I agreed to appoint the committee, but Ben had to be on the committee.  So I mean he, he know what anybody else's was.  I'm just trying to get that it's actually worth what anybody says it's gonna cost.  And they just broke with me.  I knew then--they started riding around campaigning.  And we was near--my wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] and I lived back up far on the school [Selma University, Selma, Alabama] campus.  And you had come out right up where you go out to the little alley there.  Little alley run into the road.  You could see down Minter Street [Minter Avenue] you could say way down there dusty, you know, hadn't paved them then.  Joe [ph.] (unclear) this man who ran the store there.  He came to me one Sunday morning and said they, they, they just crusading and this and that.  He said, "If you can, don't argue with them."  I said, "Look, I don't have to argue with them.  I speak my peace.  I say what's right."  And then old Bennett [Nora Bennett] who was the woman superintendent, woman chairman of the women, she told me, she said, "Reverend, you better let us support you."  I said, "I'm tired of arguing."  I said, "I'm not sitting in that chair anymore."  And of course they were set that they were--my influence had to be tamed.  I had one deacon on the board there he thought I was near the Lord pretty good.  He was--so that--and they got, took him off.  It, it, it's easy sometimes to get into something you don't know what you doing.  Well I just made up my mind I was gonna be straight.
Story_ID: 393595
Speaker 1: So I went to First Baptist [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama] in nineteen--well when I preached there from October to May, although they had other preachers come in, and they called me unanimous to that church.
Speaker 2: What, what year is this now?
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Fifty [1950], okay.
Speaker 1: May '50 [1950].  I had to leave my churches in east and west, two little rural churches.  Took over in May '50 [1950], live in the parsonage.  Maybe we want to cut the grass around the parsonage so grass would grow up in that fence.  And so I told them one, I say, "Well we ought to cut the grass."  They said, "Well, we'll cut it."  No, actually I just let it grow up.  They say, "Well, well we'll cut it this time."  I said, "Don't cut it this time.  Just get the grass cut."  I said, "So I'll tell you what.  Don't cut it, I'll take up a collection Sunday."  They didn't want to be embarrassed you know.  So they said, "Well, we'll cut it this time."  I said, "Do ahead and cut it this time and when it get ready to be cut next time, I'll tell you to cut it.  Or you can see it and cut it yourself," you know, always nice.  I respected them.  It was a thing.  So finally it just got to where, it just got to where it was I knew, I knew in August or September that I was, I was gonna get ready to leave, 'cause the Lord began to take what you feel for the church from you.  Although I was having a good service.  So we had this meeting.  If you remember when Carl Erskine struck out fifteen Yankees [New York Yankees] in the World Series [sic.].  What was that 1951 or '52 [1952] nineteen--
Speaker 2: I was too little to know then, but I haven't heard that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well historic data.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's the World Series, all right.
Speaker 1: So I called them a mass meeting, wrote six recommendations and they all met.  Church, I say, "No, the pastor of the church supposed to be the, the director of the church, not the deacons."  They agreed with me.  "And it ought to be my privy to okay or sign checks if all the money--I'm over everything in the church."  They agreed.  And all of them resigned that night.  And came, I said, "Now if I had wanted you to resign that would have been my first recommendation.  I just want you to be the deacons and let me be the pastor."  I said, and they left one good one, he died that week.  I said, "Now Lord, what have I got myself into, or what have you led me into?"  So that next Sunday morning I preached.  They were all sitting on their seat.  Seats kind of go round like (unclear).  I said, "Due to the resignation of the deacons, I'm calling the following men to the front and I want the church to vote them in as temporary deacons," six people.  Course had I know like I know now, if I'd of had to do that, I'd just let them sit for a while put some new temporary deacons.  But the church went on from October 'til December.  And the Lord just took everything from me and I just--I wanted to go to Florida to pastor.  My place wasn't in Florida.  Birmingham [Alabama] was heaven's choice for me to change.  You know (unclear) anybody else that's stuck to bombing, beating, mobs, all that stuff.  But God has got me through all of this to know that he is there.  He where you are.
Speaker 2: Now the church in Selma [Alabama], that First Baptist Church--
Speaker 1: First Baptist.
Speaker 2: --in Selma, now that was a, that's a historic church in the South, right?
Speaker 1: It was, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think at one time, correct me if I'm wrong, but I heard from somebody I interviewed that the president of the National Baptist Convention was at that church at one time, was pastor.
Speaker 1: His church--Jemison.  His church was about six blocks from First Baptist on Broad Street.
Speaker 2: Okay that was another Baptist church.
Speaker 1: The main street that run through Selma and goes over that bridge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Tabernacle [Tabernacle Baptist Church, Selma, Alabama].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That old Dr. Jemison, D.V. Jemison.  And I was a very young man then.  But I had--so I just--from May '50 [1950] to the end of December '52 [1952], I stayed there and I just got ready to go, left.
Story_ID: 393596
Speaker 1: So well how did you get the church in Birmingham [Alabama]? How did you--?
Speaker 2: Accident.
Speaker 1: Okay what happened?
Speaker 2: I was getting ready to--I wanted to go to Florida.  T.J. Hale [ph.] who was pastor, see the biggest church there, can't think of the name of it.  Think of it in a minute.  He was going to Florida to preach.  D.L. Motley was pastor of the church in Mobile [Alabama] and he had been called to Bethel Baptist Church in Birmingham.  Look how the incidental, coincidental this is.  And T.J. Hale said well--and Motley was somewhere in, one of the churches talking.  I said, "Well I want to go to Florida.  I want to go to Pensacola [Florida] out there."  And he was going that day.  He said, well Motley said, "Well I look, I'm called to Bethel Church in Birmingham, and I can't go Sunday so they want me to send somebody.  So I'm asking you to go."  I said, "Well no I don't go to no church preaching.  I'm not interested in it, it's yours.  You just tell them."  He said "But they want you, they want you to come."  They didn't know me.  My uncle, wife's [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] uncle lived in Birmingham as you know.  But I had never been to Bethel.  I didn't know anything about the church.  He said, well so Reverend Hale said, "Well look, I'm going to Florida again in two or three months and you can go down there and be preaching and be heard if you want to."  And I go then, so that made me say, Motley said, "Well fool, you can get you some grits, you know."  You know and I didn't have no church.  And four children now, see.  I said, "Well I'll go, but I ain't going up there but one time and preach for you."  So I went up and preached at Bethel that Sunday morning.  And boy it was like cheerleading segment.  People just took, I got--I didn't preach about twenty-five, thirty minutes that time.  And they said, "Get that man's address.  We want him.  We want this man to preach."  We, well someone was saying, "If we heard this man, we never would have called that--."  And this is embarrassing to me, just to go and preach you know.  And I'm making it sure in my mind I wouldn't come back again.  And so that week Motley called, "They say they want you back at Bethel next."  I said, "I ain't coming, I ain't going back, I told you the first time I wasn't coming back."  I said, "I don't play with the church."  I wasn't, I wasn't gonna to--he said, "Well no, I just can't go Sunday."  I said, "But Motley ain't no use in us lying to each other, we're friends.  You gonna need--," I said, "I am not interested in that church."  He said, "Well I got to do something else and I, I would be telling them that I would come back that next--."  I said, "Well if you let me tell them you coming next Thursday, I'll go tell, go then."  So I went back and preached.  And boy it, they just took--it was just like your hands going in the glove, tremendous.  So I told them he was coming that Thursday night.  I say, "He said he'd be here to see y'all Thursday night."  That Thursday night it rained.  You ever see in the day time when it rain so bad, get dark and cloudy and you can't, you can't even see the road hardly to drive, see cars pulling over.  Well that night, that Thursday afternoon, that night he was supposed to be there, it was like that.  It was pouring down rain.  But they unanimously met out there and called me and didn't know me.  It had to be God or somebody and look at the work I've done in--and that church was bombed twice while I was there.  I told them, I said if I stay here, it might get bombed again.  So that, that had to be God.  So God moves in human affairs once in a while.  Go ahead.
Story_ID: 393597
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask a question.  Now what did your--what did your sermons consist of?  Did you preach the same kind of sermons that most preachers?  I mean I don't know was it a typical sermon, or did you have--did any of your content have like social, I mean the issues of the day in your sermons?  Did you preach about what was going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --in the black community, the politics and some of the other things?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes sir.
Speaker 1: Did you talk about the situation?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean for instance.  Give me a for instance what you were discussing, you know.
Speaker 2: Everybody supposed to have heaven in their view.  They're supposed to be working to make earth better.  That's our job as Christians.  "God so loved the world" [John 3:16].  So if the church is gonna save the world, the church has to keep God in his mind and preach the word and so forth and so on.  And we are supposed to, if we are good soldiers, fight the evil within ourselves as well as anybody else.  So I never, I never tried to preach easy sermons or nice sermons. I just preach what we had.  But I have always been against segregation since the Supreme--been for it all my life.  But since the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], I already had religion, I was a preacher.  But look like some new stir up.  I knew, I knew almost without saying that I had to do something about segregation.
Speaker 1: And it was the Supreme Court decision that really made the--
Speaker 2: Supreme Court decision stood up and most people in the Deep South, some kind of, some of them would hope.  Some people would never do anything about that.  But I preached in my church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  I started getting my members who were eligible to vote, vote.  I, I'm the first one who put up all the people who registered.  And they had trouble registering, in the (unclear) vestibule.  Put their names in the--
Speaker 1: Anybody that registered to vote?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wasn't no whole, wasn't no whole lot of them.  Just one or two.  And then--but I had all the members, members registered who could.  I went and got them, taking the test or whatever.  But I'm the kind of preacher, always have been, I push what I want from the pulpit.  I worked with the civic league, closing ditches in black areas.  Getting people to take the test to vote.  Start taking them down there.  And I'm the kind of preacher that push.  I call all of our members by their first name anyway basically.  I never did--when I went to Revelation [Revelation Baptist Church, Cincinnati, Ohio], one woman said to me when they was installing me.  When I left Birmingham [Alabama] and went to Revelation, Cincinnati [Ohio].  They had a thing, they was everything.  Woman say, "They left my name off.  I'm Betty."  She come over to me.  Come up and got down on her knees, talked to me.  She said, "They left the Mrs. off of my name."  I said, "Are you offended by that?"  She said, "Yeah."  I said, "Did your mother name you Mrs.?"  "No."  I said, "Well if I'm here any time, won't be Mrs. on anybody's name.  It should be Brother or Sister or your name."  That's the way it is in this church.  You don't have no Mr. So-and-So, Miss So-and-So, Brother or Sister or your name.  And that's the way I went there.
Story_ID: 393598
Speaker 1: Now but--
Speaker 2: I'm way off--
Speaker 1: Now were you a member in Selma [Alabama] were you--was there an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Selma, or --
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were you a member there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met with them several times.  But they weren't doing anything.  I think they had--I remember when I first went there in '47 [1947], there was so many, just a few voters.  They weren't half that many when I went back in '50 [1950] to pastor.
Speaker 1: How did, did you know--I know in Baltimore [Maryland] the Union Baptist Church is a big NAACP power, you know.  I mean that's where they organized, Vernon Dobson [HistoryMaker Reverend Vernon Dobson] and all them organized all the NAACP members.  Thurgood Marshall is associated with it and the Mitchells and other people.  Did, was there anything like that in the South?  I mean outside of--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Birmingham [Alabama] became the hottest thing.  Course the Montgomery [Alabama] would off the--that bus thing [Montgomery Bus Boycott].  That's how King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got the name of being--everybody thought King did everything in the movement.  Walter Cronkite comes on, 'You Are There.'  You remember that?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: So King basically got credit for everything blacks did until Bull Connor, and I got--became adversaries.
Story_ID: 393599
Speaker 1: Let's go step by step on this.  So you come to Birmingham [Alabama] as pastor of Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came to Birmingham in nineteen--
Speaker 1: In 1950 was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], okay.  Okay so you were in Bethel in 1953, okay.
Speaker 2: I had left First Baptist [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama], walked away from it the end of December.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Motley [D.L. Motley] asked me to go preach and I preach.  I think I preached one, I preached two sermons.  And then he was supposed to come back that third night and they call me.  So they called me.  He was just second or third Sunday in February when he went up there that night with that group who had met to meet him and see what he was gonna do.  They unanimously called me.  I took over in March the 1st, March somewhere in there, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Of '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was about a, so you said it was like a, like a hand in a glove, a good fit for you.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  They wanted a pastor.  I was spiritual and I was this and that.  I said what wanted to and I had something for them to do, and I--you know I talked about segregation the first Sunday I went there.  Even though I was preaching for somebody else.
Speaker 1: So what kind of thing would you say about segregation in those days?
Speaker 2: (Pause) It's hard to think about what you said.  But I never put segregation even in a nice light.  I didn't take my text about segregation, I was talking about--I think that was the last--I used that same, one of the same text that I preached going into Bethel.  Way back there in '53 [1953], Jude, the book of Jude, just one chapter.  I got to talk about the four parts of the steps of Christianity, the men in the world, well rounded Christian life.  I said but you beloved--I can't quite think of all that right.  You keep praying and the Holy Ghost building yourselves up on your most faith, asking for the faith once delivered for the same.  Keep yourselves in the, in the love of God.  But, and also an exultation to fight against all evil, if you read that chapter.  Because how evil is just growing and gaining.  I think, I believe as I looked at my notes, I think that was the first sermon I preached at that church in March '53 [1953].  Bethel, and most of my sermons are on notes.  I, I, I've written some lately as I sit down and write, speaking, I never, I hardly ever write a full speech, just do it.
Speaker 1: Just notes, okay.
Speaker 2: Just basically notes.
Story_ID: 393600
Speaker 1: So the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] in '54 [1954] excited you, got you excite--
Speaker 2: Didn't get me excited.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As you read in the paper the other day, I said I excite things so that they move, I don't get excited.  The reporter asked me when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] gave me the Presidential award [Presidential Citizens Medal], he was, they, he was real thrilled 'cause he was thrilled to meet after going through what I've been through in my life.  He said, "Well I'm excited about you."  I said, "I'm nothing to get excited about.  Oh you mean, am I concerned or appreciative?"  I said, "You probably, that's what you mean," I said, "but I'm excited about what we can do to get rid of evil, segregation.  I'm excited about how we can overcome so much violence in the country."  I talk about that now.  You take Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to be the nonviolent man, was taken away by violence, something wrong you know.  All that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: I've been, I've been a practical preacher.  I've always preached.  I even said to Martin once, Martin would talk, Martin would, would talk philosophy quite a bit.  He--in that sense he was, Martin was much more educated so far as theory and the theoretical than I am.  Or the theories of the past and this and that.  I never speak to anybody without bringing it down to modern day, where we are and the word is there.  I asked him, I said I hear you talking about the role and Socrates this.  I said but the world still gets worse.  So I've always been a practical preacher.
Story_ID: 393601
Speaker 1: So in 1954, you weren't excited but how did you--how did you feel?
Speaker 2: I wasn't excited, but I believed that God--I've always said in things, I said, "God moves at periodic time in human lives." I think the writer of Hebrews talks about God who moves at sundry times, periodic times in people's lives.  It did not excite me--excite me in the sense of--little like I felt a sense of divine movement, that God who allowed the 1894 decision to be, blacks have no rights that whites have to respect.  Isn't that, isn't that about right? Eighteen ninety-four [1894] with the same court, separate but equal.
Speaker 1: You're talking about Plessy versus Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] yeah back in 1890s, right.
Speaker 2: Plessy versus Ferguson is out; it's gone, and separate but equal is no more, see.  And then I felt like God was lifting the material, the yoke off people's mind.  When I saw it written in the paper.  Now I, I guess I--if you want to just use the word excitement I don't, I don't have any problem with that.  That it was time to move.  That if people pull together and walk with God, God would move, cause God does move.  President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was right when he said, "On earth the works of God are done by men and women.  But when men and women who will hear the divine call or feel the divine pull, whom shall I send and who will go for us?"  And I always thought, my thought was, now we can all be free.  Now we can all struggle to be free.  As bad as segregation was, and I thought it still was gonna take a struggle.  But in the bombing after I got into it, got myself to be the target of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], the police, everything bad, I understood that it was gonna take a close-up fight.  I might get in there and stay to it, stay with it.  Don't back up.  That's why I just say a fire you can't put out.  I always push what I think I ought to do.  Never back up and I just thought it was time again that God was good.  And if that was God, it had to be God.
Story_ID: 393602
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in the struggle at that point?
Speaker 2: Well remember I was called to Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] in '54 [1954], right after I was taken to Bethel.  But I had started preaching against--if you just want for me to give you one picture to sort of demonstrate what I'm saying.  I went down to the courthouse one day and a white man--you know how when you get rheumatic, it can kind of twist your body that way and then back that way (gesture).  An old white man was on a stick and he started walking round that court and 'bout wide as this room.  It took him look like thirty-five, forty minutes.  I just stopped and looked at him.  To go a third a way of that hall.  And, and, and, and remember now I seen the [U.S.] Supreme Court for paper, in the paper, what they'd done.  And I said now he ought to be at home.  You couldn't see a black person pushing a broom or nothing.  And if a black person had a piece of paper in his hand, it was one that some white man had written to another white man in the power.  And, and at that time actually we were 40 percent of the population, I think over 40 percent of the population in Birmingham [Alabama] with exactly 0 percent of the privileges.  No power, no word, no anything.  No initiative.  You couldn't make any decisions and anything about real life, things going on in the city.  And the segregation laws at that time, if we, if we were gonna be, if this was gonna be big as this church would be, we'd have to have a wall seven feet high to separate the parts that whites gonna sit in and blacks gonna sit in.  Was an extra entrance and exit, you understand, seven feet high.
Speaker 1: They had to have a wall, by law, you had to have--
Speaker 2: By law.  Worst segregation law, now that they say it's ever been.  And Bull Connor was a bull, I said, told you why (unclear), he was a bull 'til we made a steer out of him.  In 1948, Bull Connor arrested Idaho Senator Glen Taylor [Glen H. Taylor] at the 16th Street Church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  President Roosevelt's wife [Eleanor Roosevelt] then was living, and sat in that meeting of Southern Conference Education Fund, way back then.  Southern Conference Education Fund, SCEF, I became president of that too.  And was organizer of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights.  Served first on its board then became president.  I understand Ms. Roosevelt took her chair and set it across the rope that he put there.  Well and that says to me--
Speaker 1: So Bull Connor didn't arrest her.
Speaker 2: He did not.  And that says to me though that leaders, you see now I respected President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].  I used to marvel at his idea, but I respect Truman [President Harry S. Truman] as a man.  Roosevelt could have integrated the [U.S.] Army years before Truman.  All the folks, folks used to say, "Let Jesus lead you and Roosevelt feed you."  You know how we do these isms.  President Roosevelt could have moved this country much further.  A. Philip Randolph, thank God for the day came when he (unclear) people like me and Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] who had been involved in Montgomery [Alabama] in a different way, who pushed things.  Now before the March on Washington you remember we had what is known as a prayer pilgrimage in Washington [D.C.].  You remember that?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: You don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Now this is be, before the March on Washington?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Let's not get too far ahead now.  We're trying to--
Speaker 2: I ain't gonna get too far ahead.
Speaker 1: Now, now when was, when was that done?  Was that in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], yeah '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957] okay.  But it was, we still jumping though before.
Speaker 2: We still jumping.  But I'm saying, but A. Philip Randolph, Martin, Bayard Rustin and I met and we called--and A. Philip Randolph was a little skittish about the march.  Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], they, they didn't want it, you know.  I'm just saying the facts now I'm not trying to build up to anything.  I suggested a prayer pilgrimage, 1957.
Speaker 1: That's shortly after SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was formed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  Very shortly after.
Speaker 1: All right.  I, I want to talk, talk about how that was formed.  I, I want you to tell us how that was done.  So that's why I don't want to jump too far ahead.
Speaker 2: Well maybe we shouldn't talk about it much more then.  But the truth of the matter is I think that was suggested, I had either been in jail.  I was at the motel and, and, and they were trying to get together us so we would--
Story_ID: 393603
Speaker 1: A. Philip Randolph had wanted to march in Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] time, you know that too.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes sir.
Speaker 1: Now you, okay.  But here he could come get SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was popular enough for Montgomery [Alabama], don't you remember?  All the news, just like now that the war come to be over.  'You Are There,' Walter Cronkite.
Speaker 2: Yeah they start--the Montgomery Bus Boycott started what, '55 [1955], '56 [1956]?
Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], right okay.
Speaker 1: And when the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision outlawed it after 381 days.  My secretary [Nelson Smith] and I was at the TV station when it came down and I said, "Well let's tell the city to rescind the laws and allow this, see?  If it not, we gonna all ride anyway."  That was when I first bombed '54 [1954], remember?  Fifty-six [1956].  Went too--
Speaker 2: We want to get to all that in time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Let's set it up now.  You got--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Birmingham [Alabama], did they, did they--
Speaker 1: Outlawed May 26th, a Tuesday, 1956.  One week later June 5th, I had organized against the injunction, a call for all Negroes to meet.  That night we founded the ACMHR, Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights.
Speaker 2: Now that's in '50 [1950]--
Speaker 1: Strongest thing in SCLC, yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's in '56 [1956], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was bombed in '56 [1956], December.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now let's lead up, let's talk about the events that led up to you being bombed.  That's an incredible story.
Speaker 1: That's it, that's the one that led up to it.  The Supreme Court outlawed Montgomery segregation rule.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Alabama in May, that, that's, the--we'll get back there.  May 26th, which was a Tuesday I believe, Governor Patterson [John Malcolm Patterson], not Wallace [George Wallace] who came after him, Patterson got Judge Walter B. Jones, bald headed, all over.  Like the front of your head all over his.  Would be dangerous for a fly to try to land, slip up and break his neck.  But anyway, Governor Patterson urged Judge Walter B. Jones from Montgomery, see, to issue an injunction outlawing NAACP from operating.  They figured if they could stop NAACP, they'd stop anything against segregation, in agitation against segregation.  NAACP bout the biggest thing, you know how slow they went.  How long, how long does it take a segregationist judge to see any justice enough for they go and do anything?  And so actually that, these are the points that led up to it.
Speaker 2: Now I've read that you, that you thought at the time that it was bad that they banned NAACP.  But then you thought again, you said well that gives you a chance to--
Speaker 1: Again, I never did think any other way.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: You, you said I thought once it was bad?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I thought it was stupidity and hellish and that the white folks gonna take advantage of it.  Now with the solid foot by law on Negroes, by banning the Negroes.  I suspect if, if, if I had done it, any meeting they could have said it was a NAACP meeting, anything.  White people do anything when they want to do it and then think what they did later.  No, I never thought and changed my thought.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I thought it was wrong.  So I thought so much and you'll get it later on.  But I tell you what.  White folks and a few Negroes have always talked, but there's no progress.  Forty percent of the population, 0 percent of the privileges.  No power.  And this is why, this is why I used to talk about Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] so much.  I liked his statement.  "Some men see things as they are and just simply ask why.  Others see men, things as they ought to be and ask why not."  Now that's me if you want to get me down to a T.  I thought that was one of the greatest statements and the greatest mover of men back there.
Story_ID: 393604
Speaker 1: Okay so you decide, decided to form a, another organization, right?  You just mentioned it a few minutes ago that the--what did you call it, the--?
Speaker 2: Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, ACMHR.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was organized only one week after the state outlawed NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], statewide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I called a mass meeting.  Now just give you this to whet your appetite since you want to get into it.  Luke Beard was the pastor of 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] then right across from the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: What's his name now?
Speaker 2: Luke Beard.
Speaker 1: Luke Beard, okay.
Speaker 2: And the press was--every outlet, and, and statewide injunction, you have.  I was on the NAACP board there, a few of us.  We wasn't supposed to meet anymore, so we slipped and had one meeting.  And I said, "Mr. Shores [Arthur Shores], something got to be done."  Lucinda B. Robey was the only black teacher openly in our movement, joining the movement.  She's on the NAAC--.  She said, "Yeah, I think so.  And I think you're right.  You talk like the black prince of peace," she said to me.  I said, "No, Jesus is the Prince of Peace.  But I think all of us can do more than we doing."  So Mr. Shores said to me, he said, "Well an injunction is an injunction," he said, "and if you violate an injunction, you go to jail."  I said, "Well Mr. Shores it looks like jail here I come."  I have a feeling to begin with.  And so I, on Saturday after that Tuesday, that weekend, I announced that all Negroes ought to come together and decide if they want to organize a fight for freedom.  Is that an injunction?  Ain't that violating an injunction?  I announced it publicly.  Everybody was saying, nothing like that ever been done against a statewide injunction?"  No, Bull Connor in Birmingham [Alabama], and so I'm on all the newscasts, Reverend F.L. Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth], 3191 North 29th Avenue.
Speaker 1: They gave your address.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, telling the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] where to put the bomb.  See Birmingham is a north and a south.  And--
Speaker 1: So wait a minute.  Now that's an important point, though.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: That the news media is giving the Klan the coordinates to take care of you.
Speaker 2: Well now, thank you for discerning that.
Speaker 1: That's cold.  That's real cold, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wasn't that cold? 3191 North, every newscast from Tuesday throughout the week.  So Sunday night Luke Beard calls me and says to me, "Hey Doctor, this Luke Beard."  I say, "Yeah, how you do Dr. Beard?"  He says, "Lord want you to call that thing off and then he told me to tell you to call and ask me (unclear)."  I say, "Well Doctor, when did the Lord start sending my messages through you?"  He said, "Well I'm not afraid of anything, but so-and-so."  Well I knew he was lying.  He said, "But I--." I said, "I tell you what Doctor."  I could have cursed him out but I didn't.  I said, "I tell you what.  You go back and pray over this.  But at 11:30--."  And remember if you, you shoot, shoot my face looking up at my face, you make it longer and wider look like.  Depend on you--cause at that time the thought was that, that the only thing scared of black folk is a big, black burly Negro.  So I ain't never been no size.  And so that's the way I looked.  At 11:30, prime news night, every picture, every TV, every radio, that big black picture.  I was black as this suit I got on.  So he called me back during that time.  He say, "Well listen I been praying and I, I think you ought to call it off and the Lord really wants you to call it off."  I said, I said, I, I started to say something real curt and bad.  I said, "Well Doctor you, I tell you what you do.  You go back and tell the Lord that I think he told me to call it off.  And if he really wants to call it off, he have to come down himself now and tell me to call it off.  Don't send an angel, and to be sure it's him, I'm gonna look for the nail prints in his hand and in his feet, and his spear print in his side."  And then he went on.  Tuesday night, one week from the time they outlawed it.  Tuesday night was June 5th, that's when it was organized.  If you look at the history way back there I think it was a Tuesday, seven days later we met en masse.  Over two thousand people.  I gave one of them rip roaring speeches and man they had the audience swinging like a limb.  And they elected me president.  My statement then was that the movement means that we, we're going to move.  And what this thing will guide us or something like that.  Not one hair on the head of one white person would be harmed by us in our struggle to be free.  And to date none has.  I been hurt, I been this, but--I'm just, I'm just as sure God was in it as you looking at me.  I see that I suspect better than you see me (laughter).
Story_ID: 393605
Speaker 1: Now were you a--were you a student at that time of nonviolence?  I mean had you been exposed to it as a tactic?
Speaker 2: If you understand nonviolent, God's organizing, not King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], not (unclear), not the other man, not Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi] either.  Gandhi just believed what the Lord did and he was able to sway his countrymen about it.  Well, I believe that nonviolence, I believed in nonviolence, I always believed since preach, I been a preacher you know now eighty--well, see what I started preaching in '46 [1946].  And I been leading people ever since '53 [1953], '54 [1954].  And so I'm a student by practice.  I told you I'm practical.  I never talk about going to heaven unless I'm talking about straightening things out on earth.  And I'm sure that people--you see my friend one of the things and I'm closing now cause you tired of writing.  I ought to be tired of talking.  I am sure that God is who he say he is and what he says he is, I have no doubt.  That's why I wasn't gonna keep, keep, you know keep going back putting your head in the lion's mouth.  And I been in death's jaws near 'bout as much as I got hands.  But I never worried about dying or getting killed or nothing.  When they were beating me up they said let's, in September of '57 [1957], after the bombing.
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about the bombing before we--now let's not jump that far.  But if, if you would, what events led up to the bombing?  Now you formed an organization [Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights].  The bombing was in December, Christmas Eve, right or almost, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when the [U.S.] Supreme Court directed that the segregation on buses was unconstitutional.  We were Nelson Smith and I, my secretary, we at the TV station.
Speaker 1: Right, okay and the Supreme Court decision came down about the segregation of the buses in Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: That's what triggered it in my mind if you saying, if you want to use for what, for what brought it about.  And I announced to the city council, "In view of this decision you should rescind the segregation law.  And if you don't, we gonna ride anyway."  That's the threat.  That's what triggered it.  So the Klansmen [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] decided I was not gonna be around to ride.  And so the night before Christmas, they set this sixteen church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] (unclear) about twelve, fourteen inches apart.  Sixteen sticks of dynamite was (unclear) at the corner of the house and corner of the church.  And it blew the wall between my head the dynamite, 'bout twice as far from here to that corner of that door, that metal.  Tore it off, tore it up.  (Unclear) flew out from under the bed.
Speaker 1: Now you were, you were there meeting with one of the deacons [Charles Robinson] or something?
Speaker 2: Not meeting, he just came up to see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every Christmas Eve and his wife would come up.
Speaker 1: Now was, was your family there? In the house?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] was on the first room, other room, and I'm in the bed up against the wall.  My head right, about far from the church as that.  Tore, tore the springs up.
Speaker 1: And the, the, a, a bomb, sixteen sticks of dynamite.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Blow up your house with you in it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, where else was I gonna be?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So what I read was that the, the cops were coming--I guess they knew it was gonna happen.  They was already there with flashlights looking around and you were in the basement.
Speaker 2: No, wasn't no basement to it.  It was sitting on the--'bout that far off the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The house, see if you walked up on the porch, you wouldn't be a foot from the ground, or maybe, maybe twelve, fourteen feet.
Speaker 1: So it's built on a slab or something
Speaker 2: Wasn't a slab, wasn't a cement slab; it was on the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As close as you could get it to the ground.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--
Speaker 2: And they had it in the corner of the house, corner of the house.  And the, and the corner of the house and the corner of the church was the same thing except 'bout that far apart (indicates distance).
Story_ID: 393606
Speaker 1: What--do you remember?  Well just tell us what else you remember about what happened that night.  You were, you were talking to one of the deacons.
Speaker 2: He was talking to me, he was sitting by my bed.  I had a mirror near 'bout, not quite wide as that thing.  And that bomb went off.  I knew what, I knew it was meant for me like I'm looking at you again.  I mean directly.  I knew I wouldn't get hurt.  How did I know?  I was comforted.  I knew I wasn't gonna get hurt.  I was not afraid of dying.  In fact I felt better.  I don't think any baby ever felt as comfortable or even more comfortable at his mother's breast.  As to what was on my mind at the time the bomb went off, was this 27 Psalm, "The Lord is my light and my salvation" [Psalm 27:1].  I knew it was a bomb.  I knew I wouldn't get hurt.  I was not afraid of dying.  I could understand that God was there.  And look like I just, I could discern my conscience, look I'm here.  And so I never felt better.  So this, this wall was flew--blown out from under the bed, the springs was shattered.  We didn't find any large pieces of fingers (unclear), these three fingers--springs I'm talking about.  The wall between my head and the dynamite was blown away at least to the corner of that thing there like that.  That--course my teeth was sitting on the, on the floor.
Speaker 1: You're talking about, about ten, fifteen feet away, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  And that mirror was shattered I guess into a million pieces (unclear).  He got two, two or three little pin pricks in his head.  Didn't no blood run.  He was stunned I think.  He said the Lord saved me because I was with you.  I said that he did Charlie, Charlie Robinson [Charles Robinson] was his name.
Speaker 1: Sully Robinson?
Speaker 2: Charlie, Charlie.
Speaker 1: Charlie, okay.
Speaker 2: Charlie, Charles Robinson.  Floor was blown out from under the bed.  Part of the floor was arced up into a little open face.  (Unclear) put the heat out, the wall, the center wall of the house now, was like this.  It was about thirty something degrees.  Not standing straight up.  About three or four hundred slithers of wood from that wall behind my head was stuck into that wall, into a coat and hat I had on that wall.  And we, when we found the head of the bed where my, my head--I'm in bed.  But a, a shaft of wood had come through that head of my bed and probably traveled a little further than, might have been driven into my brain where I was lying.
Speaker 1: This is incredible.  I mean, I mean that--
Speaker 2: God's more than incredible.  That's what I'm says, that's why he can handle incredible things (laughter).  That, tomorrow, all this.  I have no, I have problem telling you.
Speaker 1: So I mean, so this is fully documented.  You walked away from a bombing.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: When things all around you were destroyed.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And you led a march the next day, right?
Speaker 2: Like I said I would, um-hm.  I never say I'm gonna do something I don't do.
Speaker 1: So were, were you stunned at all by any of this, or did you--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Never felt better.  Never had a, felt a little (unclear) fire he can't put out.  He say I got a bump.  I said that's a writer's bump, I never had any bump.  Not even a scratch.
