Story_ID: 13379
Speaker 1: My name is Juliana Richardson and I'm the  and Scott Sterns is the videographer, and I'd like for you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including middle name if you've got one
Speaker 2: Shelby Arthur Steele, which I rarely use the middle name.  S-H-E-L-B-Y, A-R-T-H-U-R, S-T-E-E-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: One-one-forty-six. [January 1, 1946]
Speaker 1: And today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 30, 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And our location today, the address?
Speaker 2: This is Monterey, California.  You want the actual address? Three ninety-three Foam Street, Monterey, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can I have your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a, by trade I suppose, an English professor most of my life, but I'm probably better known as a writer.
Story_ID: 13380
Speaker 1: I'd just like to have your favorite food.
Speaker 2: It used to be barbecued ribs, but I stay away from that these days.  But that was definitely my favorite food all my life.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Wow.  "The dog barks.  The caravan moves on."
Story_ID: 13381
Speaker 1: I'd like to have your mother's name, and could you tell us about her background?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name Ruth Hootman.  She was from Ashland, Ohio, born and raised there.  Her father was a building contractor in Ashland, Ohio. She was born in 1915, and she went to college there.  She graduated from Hiram College in Hiram, Ohio.  She then went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and to the School of Social Work there, and it was while she was there that she met my father.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Hootman for us?
Speaker 2: H-O-O-T-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  And your--did your mother share any stories about her growing up, sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, thousands.  Her background, her family was--they were from Alsace Lorraine area of--between Germany and France, and her background was that--what was it?  That the Hessian soldiers who came over to fight in the Revolutionary War, American Revolution, and so she had relatives who--her family was here before 1776, and so she thought--she qualified, actually as, to be a Daughter of the American Revolution.  I think her mother and other relatives were actual members of that.  And so her family settled in Ohio after the Revolution, and I think there's still some living there today.
Speaker 1: And your father?  Can you give his name and tell us about his background?
Speaker 2: His name is Shelby Steele.  He had no middle name.  Same name as mine.  He was born in Camp Nelson, Kentucky. It was one of the sort of way stations after the Civil War, slaves coming from deeper in the South--Alabama, Mississippi.  It would have stopped there and some stayed and it became known as Camp Nelson, Kentucky, and he was born there in the year 1900.  His father, my grandfather, died in 1908 to an accident, and so when my father was eight, his father passed, then his mother, whose name was Rose Steele, lived until he was twelve and then she died.  So he was pretty much on his own from the age of twelve on, and when he was fourteen, he made his way from Camp Nelson, Kentucky up to Detroit [Michigan].  It took him about six months to make that journey, working his way, and he was in Detroit until he was about seventeen and then he moved to Chicago [Illinois]. Got there in time for the 1919 riots, which he remembered well, and lived in Chicago pretty much for the rest of his life, until he retired last--oh, a year or so before he passed at Seattle, Washington. But most of his life was Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: They met in--when CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality, was started in Chicago in the, the very early '40s [1940].  They were both founding members of that and they met in that organization, in sort of the beginning of the nucleus of the Civil Rights Movement in Chicago.
Story_ID: 13382
Speaker 1: I have the three siblings, one who's a twin brother.
Speaker 2: Okay. Can you give your siblings in the order that--?
Speaker 1: I have a brother named Claude. I have a sister after him, younger, is Marilyn Steele, and the youngest is Karen Steele.
Speaker 2: And so are you and your brother the oldest?
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 13383
Speaker 1: I want you to share with us your earliest memory of growing up.
Speaker 2: Wow.  Well, I remember that my parents were always involved in civil rights in one way or another, we had--but, I think when I was two, they moved from the south side out to Harvey [Illinois], Phoenix [Illinois], to Phoenix. In those days, Phoenix was black, Harvey was white, was a very sharp line of segregation.  And they founded a--an integrated church and this would have been in the very, you know, late '40s [1940], early '50s [1950].  I'm not--a little vague on that but it was the first integrated church in the entire Chicago [Illinois] area and I can--my first memories are--and I went to that church all of my--grew up in it, and my first--sort of full memory--is of playing with the other kids, you know, after Sunday school.  They--the church had a sort of communal garden and they would  have a potluck dinner every Sunday and I can remember that was a lot of fun and we would get into all sorts of trouble and do things that kids do, and so I can remember that.  I suppose that's my first sort of vivid memory.
Speaker 1: If you take yourself back to that time, or you know, even years forward, but can you describe what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Humidity and hot weather.  I've lived in California a long time as an adult, but I grew up in Chicago and I remember the, sort of, quality of the air, and so as I travel around and I encounter that, it sort of--it can bring up memories of my childhood and what it was like and those long, hot summer days and summer--hot summer nights.  We don't have any of that in California, very cool here. So that kind of takes me back.  That's one thing.  Barbecued ribs take me (laughs)--my father did a good job with those and I learned how to do it as well, and I--so that's another connection to childhood. And I remember in Phoenix, which was a black community, community, still is, where I grew up, on the fourth of July or other days, somebody would dig a hole in the ground and they would put hot coals in the hole and they would put a piece of wire chain link fence over it and that would be the barbecue pit and it would cook all day.  Then around, you know, after--in the evening, you coul!  d go around for a few cents and buy a plate with some white bread, and that was about as good as it got for me, (laughs) so--
Speaker 1: Now are there other memories you can share or think about, you know, with your growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, there were difficult memories.  It was not a--this was the time of really rigid racial segregation in Chicago and we lived in Phoenix, which was all black, and then right next to us was Harvey, which was all white, and never the 'twain met, and now, today, I understand Harvey's black--all black, but it wasn't then, and the border was kept pretty close, and so I went to a segregated school.  There were two schools in the district.  One was all white and the other was all black, and we got their left over books, their left over teachers, and so forth.  And I can remember that when I was in the--oh, about sixth, fifth, sixth grade, my mother and father organized the parents in Phoenix and had a boycott of that school.  Organized--where the entire community kept their children home in protest of--they weren't even protesting so much the segregation, they were protesting the quality of the education.  Several of the teachers were abusive and we just weren't being educated.  So they closed the school down for several months and they finally won. T he superintendent was fired, the principal was fired, several of the teachers were fired, and it became an entirely different school after that.  I did not go back to that school because it really wasn't safe since my parents had led the boycott, and so we moved.  This was in the days of blockbusting in Chicago, and about a block away from us there was a street of all-white homes, and what that meant was if one house went to a black--in five minutes, all of them went to blacks.  So some white person was pressured and sold to a black and my family then bought one of the houses on that street, and so by the time we moved in, it was an all black street.  The good thing about it was that it was also across the boundary line into another school district, an all white school district, and so for my junior high school years, I went to that white school in Harvey, and was the only black in my class for those two years.  But they were not bad years.  It was a good school. I got a good education there, and I have pretty good memories of it.
Story_ID: 13384
Speaker 1: You went to the school in Phoenix [Illinois] until what grade?
Speaker 2: Until sixth, about sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Coolidge [Elementary] School [Phoenix, Illinois].  Coolidge School.  It was the black school, the segregated one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then the school you went to afterwards in junior high?
Speaker 2: Was Bryant [Junior High School, Harvey, Illinois].  Bryant.
Speaker 1: B-R--.
Speaker 2: B-R-Y-A-N-T, Bryant Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Now in Coolidge School, do you remember any other memories about teachers that you were exposed to, or any other things that may have impacted you, besides, you know, your parents and the boycott [protesting inferior education at the all-black school; Steele describes this in the previous segment.]?
Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, I speak only for myself.  You could probably interview somebody else from that time and they would have different memories, but for me it was a dark time.  The, you know, the teachers were--our first grade teacher was just out and out insane.  She would ask us to go home and tell our parents to give us--she'd specify some box of crayons that she wanted us to use in class and then we'd bring them the next day and she would confiscate them and put them in the closet and keep them there.  She would take our lunches away.  She would not let children go to the bathroom, so there would be accidents.  She was insane.  She was not--she was crazy.  She would have us draw stick figures all day long.  That was first grade. And that--the next year, I remember that teacher was not too bad, but there were several teachers as we went through the years.  Some of them would give us some actual academics.  I remember the second grade teacher really did do a good job of teaching us phonics, and so we did actually learn to read pretty well, probably better than kids do today.  Then in that, sort of--second grade, I remember, was kind of an oasis of at least a human being who was reasonable.  Then, third grade, we was down in the basement and we'd do something wrong, we'd all have to kneel on our knees on the concrete floor in the wintertime for some length of time, till she thought we had learned our lesson.  She was, you know, the--again, these were teachers who had been in the white school, but had obviously had problems there and been rejected, and then that's who we ended up with.  So this, so this is what--by the time I was in, probably, fourth grade, my parents were really involved and had tried to get some changes made, some reforms, and had not been able to do so, and so things escalated to the point where there was this boycott that just closed the school down completely.
Speaker 1: Now were your teachers black?
Speaker 2: They were white.
Speaker 1: They were white.  So they were all white.
Speaker 2: All white.
Speaker 1: But assigned to this, you know, this--.
Speaker 2: All been assigned to this black school.  All the children were black.
Speaker 1: Was there any negative messaging that happened, you know, besides that?
Speaker 2: I don't think they were sophisticated enough for--I can't say that there was negative mess--that there was a racial, sort of, sense that, you know, that we were inferior.  These were people who were just profou--losers in their own society, were really at the bottom, and so they were naturally assigned.  That's where the racism was, was in--they were assigned then to teach the black kids.  So, I don't--they didn't--I think probably some of them thought that they liked us.  That they, you know, that some of them were--would tell you today, probably, that they were proud that they taught black children.  It's just that they were incompetent, and, very often, cruel people and had no skills, ability to teach, and that would have gone on.  In fact, that same grade school, Coolidge School, was the very first desegregation suit in the North several years later. I was gone by then, but years later.
Story_ID: 13385
Speaker 1: Because you are a product of the interracial marriage, was there--what were your parents telling you about your racial heritage, or your mixed heritage?  Was there any messaging around that?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean--well, you have to remember, my parents were very sophisticated people around issues of race and politics and civil rights, and so it was just in the air and they were well read on the subject.  There was never--and again, this might well be different today, but at that point in time, we were just black.  Everybody was black.  My mother [Ruth Steele], when she married my father [Shelby Steele] volunteered to live a black life.  She no longer had any--she could not live in a white community.  She could not buy a home.  All the same--all the restrictions that applied to black people, applied to her.  So, the, you know there was--in those days, race was a real--it was a fate as well as a race, and the fate was you lived as blacks or you lived as whites, and if you went over that line, you were--lived black.  So that's where she lived most of her adult life in that community.  Those were her friends and vice versa.
Speaker 1: Did her parents have problems with the marriage?
Speaker 2: They did at first.  Her parents were interesting people.  She didn't get to have the character she had without having pretty interesting, pretty--parents who also had character.  And this was in the early '40s [1940], and to marry a black man, at that point, was really a--no one--I mean it was not even heard of, or certainly very rare.  So her parents were shocked and they said, "Well, do you understand what you're getting into?  This means you're going to live this kind of a life," and so forth.  But my mother was, you know, in her late twenties.  She was an adult.  She knew what she wanted to do.  They did--there was a distance when she got married.  Then when my brother [Claude Steele] and I were born--we were born 'bout--after they had been married 'bout two years, I guess.  I guess we were around two or three.  It's one of my first memories, is that my mother was home cooking, she got a phone call, and it was from her parents and they were a couple blocks away and wanted to know if they could visit and they did.  From that time on, we were all together as a family, and I remember them both very fondly, and they were part of my growing up years, very courageous people.  I didn't think of them that way.  I just thought of them as grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 1: Do you think your mother ever had regrets at all about crossing the color line in that way?
Speaker 2: To the contrary.  I mean I think that she, she loved my father, first of all, who was an interesting person in his own right.  They were very close all the way 'til they both passed away, and I think she loved the life that she had chosen, and was--I never knew her--saw any sign of, you know, any--she regretted the racism of American society.  She was angry about that. She was up--I think I may have learned more of my own black anger from her than from my father, and that may be because she did know life on the other side.  And she was angry and she fought it all of her life until she died.  She was always involved and she fought it in organizations and she fought it as an individual, and she taught me how to fight.  I learned how to fight from her.  If there was a problem at school, she would be there.  I used to fear more for the teachers and the principals when she got upset about something than for her.  I didn't fear for her.  I feared for them.  She was intelligent. She was--she know how--she had moral--the moral high ground, she knew how to use it, and she was a strong, powerful woman.  I often think, had she been born in my generation, she would have been a senator or something.  She was a very--you didn't meet her and not remember it. She was a very formidable human being, so.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of the black community, that you were part of in Phoenix [Illinois], was accepting of interracial marriage?  That they accepted the--.
Speaker 2: Sure.  This was a different, again, a different era in segregation.  They knew the price tht a--somebody--this was not an idle thing.  This was not some white woman being a dilettante.  This was a--changing one's whole fate, and you know, there was not a lot--there was not this sort of racial antipathy in the black community then.  There is more of that today than there was then.  And so, again, she lived her life there.  Those were her intimate friends.  When she died, they were at her graveside.  Those were the people who were at her graveside.
Story_ID: 13386
Speaker 1: I've heard that twins have sort of some symbolical--[unclear].  Has that been the case with you and your brother?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. I've heard that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard it too.
Speaker 1: So, I--I mean because you're identical, you know.  That wouldn't be--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No.  Maybe some do.  I don't know.  I wouldn't--I haven't--we have not experienced that, no.
Speaker 1: Maybe it's a male thing versus a female thing [unclear].
Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, it's worth mentioning, and I thank my mother [Ruth Steele] again for this, is that when you are born a twin, an identical twin, that's almost like being born with a handicap where there's this constant--the world wants to, sort of, look at the novelty of that and see that, you know, the sameness, and my mother understood that was a threat to us as individuals, and so she did everything in her power to separate us and to make sure that we had separate identities and grew up as separate individuals and were not just seen as "the twins," and I thank her for that with all my heart.  I think probably my brother does too.  And so we grew up very different people, different sets of friends, and it was, I think, a very healthy thing.  It allowed us to become complete individuals unto ourselves, and so, again, I feel blessed for that.
Story_ID: 13387
Speaker 1: When you look at yourself, compared to your mother [Ruth Steele] and father [Shelby Steele], which--what do you have--what attributes do you have of either or?
Speaker 2: I have the fire and the passion of my mother.  My mother was a--she was--again, she was a strong woman.  She took nothing.  I don't mean this sense that she had any sort of a nasty or contentious personality.  She--this was not the case.  She was calm.  She was articulate.  She was self-possessed.  But it was her mission in life to make the world understand who she was and to, again, as I say, she thought racism was the great human evil and that from it came a thousand other sins, and she knew that everybody, nobody, black, white, or otherwise, was immune to it, and she was--both my parents were very well read.  I grew up, you know, hearing all about Mahatma [Mohandas] Gandhi and nonviolent, passive resistance, and they knew Bayard Rustin.  They knew James Farmer and so there was also this sort of almost intellectual component.  They understood the ideas that were central--that later became central to the Civil Rights Movement, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and so forth, and I would hear them around the table talking about the strength of passive resistance and how this was a moral power that would shame people who had military power and wealth, and so forth, and that this was the way to change America, and the way was to show your humanity and your dignity as a human, and to refute the idea that races made us somehow different and made, you know, one inferior and one superior, and so forth.  So all those--I was blessed to have all that kind of discussion going on around me, you know, in my home. So I--this was what I got from both of them...
Story_ID: 13388
Speaker 1: (Picks up at beginning of tape.) ...there's passing back and forth, passing back and forth, passing, you know, relatives would see each other in town and pass each other on the street so as not to give the other away.  Interesting.  Then we dealt with a white family that just discovered that they were descendants of [Thomas] Jefferson, and therefore had this black blood, and so they were our sort of, focus family because it tore the family in half.
Story_ID: 13389
Speaker 1: I got a lot from my mother [Ruth Steele], her passion.  She had this real sense of integrity and strength of character that, you know, I will probably never have that, but it was--she just didn't compromise.  She was unbending.  My father [Shelby Steele], ironically, who had only a third grade education, came from the South, was probably the more intellectual of the two, the more deeply reflective, and he thought about things in a very broad, human way.  He was also well read.  He read a lot.  He was self-taught, self-educated.  And so, you know, he was the sort of cool, wiser head, and so I also got--I got a sense from him that you can't, you know, that when--what you see is not always the case, and that the story--you have to look deeper into things. And he also gave me another, sort of, secret that has served me well in my own work and thinking, and that is that if you want to understand any group of people, you have to, first of all, understand that they're human and that everything they do is what human beings do, and they may have a group, they maybe have an identity, but you can't--you can never--you will never be able to truly understand them unless you look at them as human beings responding to certain situations and certain pressures that all human beings respond to.  That was a very radical, I have found in our own time, day and time, a very radical idea, but one that is, I think, true and has certainly served me well.
Story_ID: 13390
Speaker 1: What was the young Shelby Steele like?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always been, essentially, an introverted personality and whilst all this, sort of, turmoil, again, because my parents did so engage the world, so--they were pushing for things.  There were meetings at my house every single day, I mean there--as we grew up.  They were organizing for this or that, and you know, I got many benefits from that, but it was a busy--people in and out all the time, you know.  Trips to meetings in Chicago [Illinois], so forth, so--and then there was this tension around the school.  And so it was around, I think, fifth grade that I discovered reading and that really transformed my life.  I read a book.  It was the story of Kit Carson and the Pony Express, and I read it from cover to cover.  It took me nine months to read it.  I was a poor reader but I actually finished it and then I was hooked.  I read another one. It took me about three months.  And I've never been without a book since, and so the young Shelby Steele was--I was gregarious, had a good time.  Still do but I always had this, sort of, internal world of thinking and I've--I love to figure out things, to understand human beings and the world that it is around me.  It's a compulsion, and so, you know, even as I went through school, went through college, I was reading on my own.  There was this private world that interested me far more than what I might be doing formally in school, and eventually that's what sort of served me as a writer.  That's the world I've relied on.
Speaker 1: What was so appealing to you about 'Kit Carson and the Pony Express?'
Speaker 2: It was nothing.  It was just a book and a story about an interesting man who was, you know, had figured out a way to bring--deliver the mail across the Rockies, out West, and so it had all the things that kids in those days were interested in.  He rode horses and you know, he carried six-shooters and he fought the Indians, and he--so it had all of those kind of adventures and it was just a good story, and when I was young, I read any and every thing.  I read whatever.  I read all of the classic stuff, you know, 'The Three Musketeers' and 'Treasure Island' and 'Johnny Tremaine,' and all that sort of thing. And then I read 'Chip Hilton's Sport Series,' books on football, basketball, baseball, and by the time I was in seventh grade, I was starting to read bestsellers, whatever I could get on the bestseller list that was in paperback because I couldn't afford the hardbacks, and I just--by the time I got into high school then, I was really ready for real literature, and interestingly, I think the person who may--gave me this sort of intellectual leap was James Baldwin when I first read his essays in 'Esquire' magazine.  I used to go down to Chicago [Illinois] on the train to the Randolph Street Library, just all alone.  It was a big treat to go all alone and spend the afternoon in that library reading things like 'Esquire,' and so forth, and there was James Baldwin writing the essays from 'Nobody Knows My Name,' and that just spun my world around.  I had never seen--I didn't know black people could write like that.  I didn't they could think like that.  I didn't know they could be in places like Paris, France, and so it just wow.  It completely transformed me and it lifted my taste, so then I began with--if James Baldwin mentioned a writer, I would read that writer.  He liked [Charles] Dickens; I read Dickens. He mentioned [Fyodor] Dostoyevsky, I read Dostoyevsky, so I educated myself that way without really realizing.  I was having fun.  But I was enamored of him.  Thought he was just breathtaking.  Just the articulateness, the, you know, that sort of biblical rhetoric of his was just beautiful to behold.
Story_ID: 13391
Speaker 1: You said in seventh grade that, that was a good experience also, that with the new school.(simultaneous) And I want you to describe what was, you know, what you experienced in the classroom there.
Speaker 2: My mother, again--this was--you'd have to know her--she went up to that school and she met all of my teachers and she met the principal and she was a very charming woman, and she--she was no sense--nothing, nothing like intimidation, but she explained the situation to them.  They knew, it was all over Chicago [Illinois] what my parents [Shelby and Ruth Steele] had done [organized a school boycott to protest inequality in the segregated school their children attended.]  They had a little minor fame as a result of what they'd done.  And--so, you know, the principal said, you know--and all these people were sort of brought in to--over to her side, and so they were determined to make sure that things went well, and things did go well.  I had a--you know, the teachers were wonderful.  They were kind.  The first time in my life I'd ever had, you know, real academic work in the classroom and I began to make up ground quickly, and so it was a very good experience.  It was--you know, Chicago's is not the most liberal place in the world, but as my parents would always say, "If you go and you talk to people and you look them in the eye, they're human beings too.  They understand your situation.  People are not inherently mean.  You have to have some faith."  And so that--they acted that way and it proved--it worked out very well, and they did that in other situations.  We were the first black kids to go to the Harvey [Illinois] YMCA.  Now the converse of that is that the Steele children probably ran into more racism than other black kids in Phoenix [Illinois] because our parents kept pushing us out there and kept saying that the--you--freedom means you have the same access to everything in American life that everybody else does, and so we got--we ran into an awful lot of racism.  Places where we were rejected, where I wanted to be a caddy and they just said--threw us off the golf course, you know.  I wanted a job in J. C. Penney's and they just threw us out of the employment office.  It took a long time for us to get jobs as paper--delivering the 'Chicago Tribune,' and the 'Sun-Times.'  So we were always in these scraps where the racial boundaries were drawn, but we always--we were always, always--felt we had a right to be there and that we should be doing that and that it was wrong not to be doing that.
Speaker 1: Now at the time that you find James Baldwin in junior high [Bryant Junior High School, Phoenix, Illinois]--I'm just trying to figure out--is that around the junior high time period?
Speaker 2: Sort of toward the end of junior high school, you know, late eighth grade, ninth grade, around in there.
Story_ID: 13392
Speaker 1: Where did you end up going to high school [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Thornton High School in Harvey [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.  Okay.  And what are you--how was that experience at Thornton, and what other things are you getting involved with, you know, in high school then?
Speaker 2: In Thornton High School, the blacks and whites came together, and so, in a technical sense, it was an integrated high school, but in reality, it was a segregated high school because of the track system.  The blacks were in the lower tracks and most of the whites were in the upper tracks.  But again, I was the child of Ruth and Shelby Steele, and they--my mother knew and my father knew what the purpose of the track system was.  And there were many talented black kids in lower tracks than they should have been in--and this was the way that they, sort of, they just--they didn't even think about it.  It was just the way that business was done.  And so we challenged the track system right away, and so I began to get into higher classes and I would be the only in a--only black in those.  My junior and senior year, I don't think there was, I can't remember if there was--oh, there was, yes, there was a little tiny group of us.  A girl named Carol Parks, who later became an editor at 'Negro Digest,' worked for Hoyt Fuller--the 'Ebony' people. She and about one other guy, a guy named Mike something.  I forget his last name. Mike Clark, Mike--not Mike Clark.  I'll remember it.  We were about the only ones and we were not even in the same class with each other very often, but.--and it was a big high school, big, suburban high school, and all the other blacks were in the lower tracks.  Very, very bright people who were just simply in those lower tracks.  So that's how I remember that.
Story_ID: 13393
Speaker 1: We started what was called a Human Relations Club in high school, which was basically our little civil rights group, and I was the president of that, and we would go around to other high schools.  We would go to Hyde Park High [Chicago, Illinois].  And we would go--and have little meetings and talk about civil rights and try to be advocates for that in our high school, so I began to sort of do the same things my parents had done and I sort of did that--continued to do that all the way through college.
Speaker 2: And we're talking, at this point, in the early '60s [1960]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went to high school in 1960.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then graduate in 19--.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four.
Speaker 2: --four, okay. So you were very aware of things like that--well, I don't know, so much 'Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education, Topeka, Kansas],' but, you know, the Voting Rights Act?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Every little nuance of the Civil Rights Movement.  He was--whenever [Dr. Martin Luther] King was in Chicago [Illinois], we would be there, and again, my parents knew many of the people who had been in, you know, especially in CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], but otherwise as well.  So we knew--we followed it very, very closely, and participated in all sorts of marches when they tried to--when the Woolworth's, the demonstrations against Woolworth's, the lunch counters, we were in Harvey [Illinois]. My father led a march on Woolworth's and I was out there with him in the cold.  We marched so much--again, I wrote about that--in one place.  I forget where, but you get kind of tired of it, marching around for hours and hours with your signs.  We also marched for peace.  My parents were pacifists.  They didn't believe this was the age of the nuclear threat, and so we would march for nonviolence in Chicago all the time as well.  So I grew up with a lot of march time.
Speaker 2: Did you, 'cause I read about you saying enough was enough, sort of.  I think it was about the Woolworth incidence and it reminded of--my mother loved to shop and I was like, "I hate shopping."  Well, I hate shopping to this day because of--but it sort of reminded me of that.  Did you ever reject, you know, their involvement, their civil rights involvement?  Just like, "I've had enough," and you know, "I don't want to be part of this anymore," or--?
Speaker 1: Never.  I was, I was very--always very proud of my parents.  They were focal points in the community.  They were--I admired them--I saw them do really difficult things and I sort of always had the feeling that my parents were a little different in that regard that I was kind of lucky, and people would tell me that.  So I emulated them more than-- I didn't rebel against that, and so, again, as I say, in high school, I was the one who started this little civil rights thing.  The minute I got to college as a freshman, I started a chapter of SCOPE, which was the student's arm of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], King's group and then started a civil rights group in Iowa, my college campus.  And so I was always--it just--it was natural to me to be fighting these issues in one way or another.
Story_ID: 13394
Speaker 1: Now how did you end up going to Coe College [Cedar Rapids, Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Nothing special.  They gave me a better scholarship than the other college I was thinking about, which I forget what that was at this point.  But it was--I wanted to go to a--I didn't want to go to the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], a big, huge campus.  I wanted to go to a small liberal arts college because I thought they were better and you could get a better education, and so I applied at a couple and Coe came through, accepted me, and I got, you know, my little--little financial aid package and there was maybe ten more dollars I got from them, and I then--and I sort of wanted-.  I, I had visited.  I'd been through Iowa on the swimming team.  I was a swimmer in high school.  And so I liked it and just that sort of coincidence.
Speaker 1: So you were an active, active participant? I mean did you do well as a swimmer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very well.  I, you know, we--I swam from the time I was eight till my senior--till about the beginning of my senior in high school [Thornton HIgh School, Harvey, Illinois], and then in high school, in my junior year--I had--was always involved in student government--and in my junior year I ran for president of the student body and I won, and so I--even though most of the student body was white.  I think I was the second black president they'd ever had.  My good friend was the first, the year before me and so--but, you know, I became really involved in other things and the idea of swimming back and forth in the pool all day--because swimming is--it's nothing but conditioning, really.  There's no game involved, and so I kind of outgrew it, and I stopped.  And I went and--then I'll tell you another story that contributed to the ending of my swimming career.  I was the number one swimmer on the team in my junior and senior year, and I was the captain of the team.  The team elected me to be captain.  We had a coach and the coach, during the summer, invited the team to--his mother had a cabin in Michigan, and he invited the team to go there and vacation and for a couple weeks and swim and sort of get in shape and mainly have a good time.  And I remember I came back my senior year and the first day and I saw all my buddies from the swim team and they were all talking and you know, telling stories about this--where they'd been.  At any rate, it became clear to me that he had invited everybody to the cabin but me, and so I went to practice the very first day and--of the season and this was October.  And I swam down to the other end and to--I said to myself in one of those ways where you know it's real, this--it's over. And I swam back and I got out and I said, "You are a racist so and so," and he really was--needed me.  I mean I was the ticket to, sort of, the better meets.  He didn't--the rest of the team was not all that great.  And we had a real nasty, bloody fight, and I broke off my friendship with all they--every member on the team.  I'd grown up with these guys.  I'd known them since the age of eight in the YMCA, and I was unforgiving about it, and I probably still am.  I've gotten calls from a couple of them and so be it.
Speaker 1: Did they try to intrigue you back into it?  Did they--?
Speaker 2: Oh, they begged.  They did everything, they did everything.  They got mad.  They called my parents.  They did--he did everything.  Then he got mad and refused to speak to me, and so forth, and I said, you know, I just always would say to any of them, "There are consequences for what you do.  You had a chance to stand up for something right, you let it pass by.  You knew where I was.  You knew how I would react to this.  "
Speaker 1: And what did your parents say about it?
Speaker 2: They backed me up entirely.  My parents, I think, would have been disappointed had I--they didn't want my swimming career to end, but you know, by coincidence, I wanted it to end anyway, so this was a way out, but I hoped that I would have done the same thing under any circumstances.
Story_ID: 13395
Speaker 1: You go to Coe [College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa]  in 1964 or '65 [1965]?  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four.  And is that a different environment than what you're used to?  What is the racial makeup up there and--?
Speaker 2: Well, it's all white.  This was Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Coe College. It was all white.  There were--in my freshman class there were, maybe, five or six blacks.  I mean the whole campus, there was not more than ten when I first arrived there.
Speaker 1: And--go on.  And to being in an all--and so how did you find the location?  I mean the place you have been used [unclear] white environment too, but I mean, did you--I mean I'm just saying.  See, Iowa's different in some respects.
Speaker 2: Iowa was--I mean, you know, Chicago [Illinois] is more sophisticated than Cedar Rapids, Iowa, and so I fully expected that I would run into difficulties, and you know, we were obviously a tight knit group of black students because there we were--there were so few of us.  There was a little black community in Cedar Rapids, Iowa where we would go get our hair cut and so forth, and as the years went on in college, they didn't--this was before there was any sort of conscious affirmative action.  Now then in subsequent years, beginning, I suppose, '66 [1966] or so, they began to look for--to, to bring in more black students and they did, and so when I left, I think their numbers were up over forty by that time.  So there was a--this was a small school, about a thousand students.  But no, you know, I wrote a short story on that called 'Lonely in Iowa,' and not the best thing I've ever written, but I tried to get to that experience.  And where--I can remember there would be a kind of--we would love to get back home on the weekends to Chicago to the parties and to--so forth.  And you would feel lonely--we--there would be a kind of loneliness there in that sense, and I--in this story, I tell of the story that my fa--I--of going home one time and complaining to my father [Shelby Steele] about, you know, how lonely it was and there were no black people there, and blah, blah, and there was only one black girl in this group of nine.  So and I can remember that he said that, you know, "Are you crazy?  You have an opportunity here to get an education."  My father had never been able to go beyond the third grade, and he said, "So, I want you to think of yourself like a pirate.  You go there and you take everything you can get, everything you can possibly learn.  You leave nothing on the table.  You pillage the place in terms of developing yourself, and then come and talk to me."  So it got my attitude together.  I went back and pretty much began to do that and accept it--that I don't make the terms of the world, but there's still an advantage here for me to be had.  There's something for me to do.  This is about me developing myself and my skills and my abilities, and if I waste this opportunity, it will be gone.  I can't get it back again and so with that attitude, I was happy there. I made up my mind I was going to be happy there.
Speaker 1: Now what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in political science.  I was going to be a lawyer at that time.  Thought I was going to be one.
Speaker 1: And, you got through--can you talk about SCOPE [Summer Community Organization & Political Education] and it how it came about?  Do you know much about the history of that?  We have a limited time on this tape; shall we just switch?
Speaker 2: You've got a minute left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am trying--I, I was wondering about that not long ago.  I don't remember exactly how, but I know that I must have--because I was in the civil rights world, and so somebody must have made it clear that they were just starting a student group that was, you know, there was SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was the sort of better known one, and so--but SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], [Dr. Martin Luther ] King's [Jr.] group, Southern Christian Leadership Conference, wanted their own student group, and so they started one and it was called SCOPE and for the life of me, Southern Christian something or other.  I don't remember what the last three initials stand for.  But it was the student--it was their student group and it was more classic civil rights.  It was more Martin Luther King, nonviolent, passive resistance civil rights.
Story_ID: 13396
Speaker 1: What other things were critical to your, sort of maturation process or exposure at Coe [College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa].
Speaker 2: Well, this was the '60s [1960], and so I can remember--I mean there were all sorts of events that began to unfold after my freshman year.  We were sort of still in the, sort of, classic civil rights mode, and you know, integration was the thing and was the, sort of, ideal everybody was sort of aspiring to, so forth. Then things began to change.  I remember being at my girlfriend's house on e day that Malcolm X was shot and listening and this was back in--I was home on a visit to Chicago [Illinois].  And that--then there was, very quickly, around that time, Stokely Carmichael [later Kwame Toure] used the word 'black power,' and then things began to really sort of shift and shift pretty quickly, and then there was--there were Black Panthers out in California.  There were cultural nationalists, those movements.  We all became kind of infatuated with all of that.  There was the music of John Coltrane.  That was--we'd stay up and sort of listen to that all night.  So there was this new militancy, and some of it also had to do with the war in Vietnam, which we were all--of course, that was before the draft, and the day we graduated we'd be, you know, we would become eligible, and so forth.  And--so we had that to think about.  So, you know, about the time of my junior year, SCOPE [Summer Community Organization and Political Education] and civil rights was all completely gone and now there was this intense black consciousness and black nationalism, and so forth, and so I became very involved in that and we started a new organization at Coe.  All black this time, no whites allowed.  We had--the first one we had opened, we had outwardly recruited whites, but now that all began to change and I was again the sort of president of that group, and in my senior year, we were one of the first colleges to, sort of, occupy a building.  We take--barged into the president's office with a list of demands and we had stayed up all night writing, and we confronted the president.  I remember I was smoking a cigarette and I was so--as a sign of my militancy, you know, I didn't put the ashes out in the ashtray.  I just let them drop on his carpet and he was a man who was a strong man himself, but he had to take it.  And I'm writing about some of these episodes now.  And it was the first time that I began to see that whites were guilty and that they knew they had no leg to stand on.  They knew they had been--that racism had defined America and that they had been a part of it and they had benefited from it, and their--there was a shame and a disgrace on them, and that shame and disgrace was--gave little, you know, twenty year old kids like me an enormous power, maybe more than I, certainly at that time, knew how to handle.  And we could make up these lists of demands that we wanted a house just for black students, and we wanted a black studies--this was just before they began to talk about black studies programs, but we wanted black professors and we wanted black classes, and we wanted this and we wanted that, and I was stunned to see that these people listened, and some English professor donated to us a house that she and her husband owned that black students didn't have before.  I think they still have it to this day, from what I understand.  So, you know, that was this time of confrontation and black militancy and when I walked across the stage to get my diploma, I refused to shake the president's hand as he gave me the diploma in protest because he had not yet responded to all of our demands.  He had responded to some, but not all.  So it was this time when, it was--you know, again, in thinking about it and writing about it, it was history.  History really demanded that we be almost a little crazy, you know.  In the Civil Rights Movement, we had been very dignified and we wanted up--had to show you our humanity, and so forth and but now, that's all over.  There was, you know, negotiation, and this, some sort of false humility, this Sydney Poitier dignity, the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] dignity.  That was now passé and we were going to be in your face and there was, of course, hovering over this, the threat of violence, and so t was a crazy time.  Martin Luther King was assassinated that very spring.  [Robert] Bobby Kennedy was assassinated the day before my graduation.  The Panthers were storming into the legislature in California.  There was this sense that there might really be revolution in this country, that things were very delicate.  And what I see now, in retrospect, is that in many ways, this time was the collapse of white authority, and whites have never had the same authority since--and interesting moment. So that's what college was toward the end.
Speaker 1: Now what were your parents [Shelby & Ruth Steele] thinking of this?  Were they supportive?
Speaker 2: My par--it was interesting.  Again, I'm writing about this.  My parents were there when I--they came up for my graduation.  Somebody told them I had gone in to take--led this group of students into the president's office and had not used an ashtray, and my mother and father [said, "That's wrong."]  They were from the civil rights era.  They were from Martin Luther King.  They--their thing is that you never give them some bad behavior to use against you.  You show--your power is in your dignity as a human being.  And they liked the fact that I was protesting, but they did not--they never--they did not think that I had the right to be rude and abrasive, and when I did not shake the president's hand, they were in the audience and they understood, but they did not like that style, and they thought I was embarrassing the cause, and that one--there was never an excuse to lose one's dignity, but they understood our protest and they agreed with most of our list of demands.
Speaker 1: So you thought they were probably sort of old fogeys--old fogeys at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Sure, but I still respected them.  You know, they paid their dues.
Speaker 1: Now what--in your sort of recent analysis of this, what do you see as the black side of things?  Was it that these kids were out of control?
Speaker 2: No.  It was that--again, as I say, it's fascinating to me when I go--think back and I am writing about it at the moment.  A void opened up, a vacuum where whites simply no longer had moral authority.  They-as I said, when I confronted that president and I was smoking that cigarette and I was reading that list of demands, he was about to get up as he would have a few years earlier and said, you know, "I--you'll be out of here on your ear if you don't put that cigarette."  He would have, you know, done what an authority figure would have done because he would have felt confident that he had the right to stand before a--black students, or any students, and tell them that--dictate the way they should behave as adults did back in the '50s [1950] and early '60s [1960].  Suddenly, that authority was gone.  He knew this was a racist country.  He had been through many other incidents with me around racism on that campus.  He knew there were certain professors who were racist that he had not checked, he had not disciplined.  He was a collaborator in it and so now here was this group of black students confronting him and he knew his number--he knew it was his due, and my--hat's the way almost all of America was, and my point is that it was at that--in that vacuum of white authority was born this huge angry, black militancy because we now knew they would have to take it.  They would--they had admitted themselves that they were wrong.  America had acknowledged that it had mistreated us for four centuries.  And so that--their loss of authority was our gain of power at that moment.
Story_ID: 13397
Speaker 1: When you graduate [from Coe College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa], what are you thinking that you want to do?  What were you thinking?
Speaker 2: Well, on that level, I was supposed to go to law school.  I had majored in political science and done, you know, fairly well at it, and I went and visited a law school, at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], where they were actually interested in me coming there, and I saw what they did all day, and look up precedents in the library, and suddenly I decided that I didn't want to spend my life that way.  I didn't quite know then what I wanted to do.  I think unconsciously I knew I wanted to be a writer and throughout all this, I was still, you know, reading everything I could read.  You know, was in love with Franz Fanon at that time and Jean-Paul Sartre, who wrote 'The Introduction,' and so I was following the ideas as they unfolded as well.  But then I went too--after I graduated, I went to--my first job was in--the Great Society had all these different programs.. They had a special program in East St. Louis, Illinois, Upward Bound program, and I became a teacher in that program.  And they also had there what they call Experiment in Higher Education, which was the same concept, except for the first two years of college, and so I was in East St. Louis for three years doing that and I got my masters degree at night at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] in sociology.  I did not ever think, since I had never met a writer in my life, didn't know any, I didn't really think that was something I could realistically say I was going to do, but now I had gotten degrees in both political science and sociology, and had no interest in either one, and was still reading all the time, and so it was at that point that I finally decided, "Well, this--nothing is left.  This is really what I'm interested and what I want to do," so I applied to graduate school at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] because a friend went through there and I knew nothing more about it than that.  Said it was a good program.  I applied, I got in, and I entered a PhD program in literature, and because I had been in political science, I had to make a lot up, but they also encouraged you to write and there were writing classes, and so forth.  And so I begin to--S I went there, and--.
Speaker 1: Now there are two things I just want to clarify.  One is I read that you, at East St. Louis with the Upward Bound program, that you described it as one of your more memorable experiences.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And why was that so?
Speaker 2: Well it was--again, when I got out of college, this was 1968 I graduated and I started in this program immediately.  In--I was actually the leader of Coe College's [Cedar Rapids, Iowa] Upward Bound program that summer in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and then in the fall I went to East St. Louis and I was there for three and a half years.  And this was all the--again, this was the heyday of black consciousness and black as black nationalism and black is beautiful, and as Richard Pryor said, "Black, black, black."  And this was an all black community, very, very poor, very.  It was a sort of--I mean it was certainly the poorest black community I had ever been in.  I mean the town, it lived pretty much entirely on welfare.  It was in--every kind of deprivation was present there, and so it was this idea of the Great Society that you can go into these communities and you can set up programs and you can educate these young people and you can bring them out and uplift, and so I was a full, true believer in that, and I, you know, I never had worked so hard in my life.  I--day and night we would, you know, I'd take students home.  I'd do everything to--I'm still friends with some of them to this very day.  And so it was a chance for me to see what government--what was possible in terms of this interface between government and poverty.  Could government end poverty? [President Lyndon B.] Johnson said he was going to end poverty in our time.  Was this possible?  I learned the hard way in East St. Louis, in these sort of bowels of this, that it was not.  It just did not work.  And it was the, and so it was real--I didn't know it at the time.  I didn't acknowledge it at the time.  I just saw this failure begin to mount and to mount, and then I saw corruption everywhere, where a whole class of people developed who knew how to get these funds from the government, but they would never go anywhere else.  They would never get to the people.  I began to see teachers in the program say that black kids don't need to read that much and they would have them meet their classes one day a month.  They would assign one book a semester, Malcolm X's autobiography.  I began to see people cheat, and as more money came in--and then there were territorial fights.  And it was, you know, it was this huge guilty society wanting to do right, wanting to say, "We can fix this," but having no clue.  And so I--it began me--I began to understand that there were--as my father [Shelby] had always said, "You can't understand anything till you understand human beings."  It--what you--we're all human and when you give people things that they don't yet have the skills or the knowledge or the traditions for handling, they're going to do what--they're gonna take a shortcut.  And so I saw that there was this sort fracturing of a community that had once been, even though it was poor, it had some coherence.  It had some moral character.  It had some--and I began to see all of that begin to fade and there was the beginnings of black underclass.  I looked out my window on one Thanksgiving morning, saw a father shoot his son.  I go to get milk at the store and there'd be a body behind the store and so you began to see what was the--and I'm convinced that the black underclass of America came out of this sort of giving things without asking anything back, without demanding that people--without making it contingent on self-development.  If you develop, then you would be helped, you would assisted, you would be rewarded.  But we began at that point to give out, to give great sums of money to people and say, "We ask absolutely nothing."  We created a welfare then that said you can have a subsistence living forever and you don't have to do anything.  Well, then from that began the flow, this sort of black, urban, underclass gang warfare, drugs, the collapse of the family, things that segregation had never been able to do to the black community.  Slavery had not been able to do it, but these other--because of the way they were given, without any incentive to development.  So I saw all that firsthand and I was just absolutely shocked by it.  Kept my mouth shut.  I never said a word to anybody for a long, long time.  I left there after three and a half years and went to graduate school in English, and I--but I knew and it bothered me, and I saw the same thing everywhere else I went, and again, I said nothing.  I supported all those programs, you know, on every chance I got, and it was not really until almost twenty years later, in the late '80s [1980], that I began to sort of put all that together into a vision of what had happened to us during this time as a result of the '60s [1960].
Story_ID: 13398
Speaker 1: Why did you choose English and what were your thoughts?  You said sociology and what was the other were not--?
Speaker 2: Political Science.
Speaker 1: --political science were not going to be--but why did you choose English?
Speaker 2: Well, the best decision I ever made because--and I am to this day a deep disbeliever in the social sciences.  I think that they are very much overrated.  They're okay for gathering facts and statistics and they can tell you, you know, how many black kids do such and such on an exam or--they can give you numbers, but I found those disciplines utterly bereft of ideas and I still think they are today.  They deal with--as original as their research may actually be, their ideas are conventional and received and dated and they're never--a writer--in writing, writers have to be, they have to be right up with the beat.  They have to have a--they have to understand and have the ideas with which to sort of open up and see what's really happening.  Now there are, of course, great liabilities.  You can say, "Well, they're subjective," and you know, they don't have numbers.  But, of course, the social sciences are equally subjective.  I mean there's no--everything is subjective.  It's no--the numbers--what you do with numbers and how did you get those numbers?  I mean you can play an endless sort of game, so I saw that social sciences was just a way to, you know, to spend your life splitting the gnat's eyelash and never getting anywhere, never ever seeing reality in it, and it seemed to me to be--and I don't think they've figured that out to this day.  But I wanted to--I wanted a more holistic way of looking at the world and I found that.  When I picked up 'Native Son,' I found a totally coherent vision of the world, social determinism, that [Richard] Wright did better than any social scientist who will ever live.  He--there it is.  I could find in [Ralph] Ellison the same things.  I could find in [James] Baldwin the same things, and in other writers.  And you--so to get any understanding, you always had to go to a writer who could put it together, and so that's where I wanted to go.  That's where I wanted to put my efforts.
Speaker 1: So that was a conscious decision?
Speaker 2: Conscious, yeah. I argued with my advisors and they would tell me that literary people were effete and elitist, and so forth, and I would say, "No, you are. They actually deal with reality, you deal with statistics," and so forth.
Speaker 1: Just for my own clarification, sir, social sciences are defined as what?
Speaker 2: Sociology, political science, psychology, those are the main ones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Economics sometimes.
Speaker 1: Social studies really are more history or--?
Speaker 2: Social studies has more--more has to do with, you know, elementary school, civics, and the Constitution, and so forth.
Story_ID: 13399
Speaker 1: Didn't you get married around this--are you--?
Speaker 2: I got married in '67 [1967] when I was still in undergraduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you talk about your wife?
Speaker 2: I--she probably doesn't want me to talk much.
Speaker 1: Well, not much, but I mean--.
Speaker 2: But she likes her privacy, you know, so I respect that.  But we got married in--.  I met her in SCOPE [Summer Community Organization & Political Education], in this organization that I had mentioned earlier, in civil rights, that we had when I was a freshman [Coe College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa].  She was a year behind me.  She joined it that second year and we dated--didn't date for a while.  I didn't really know her.  Then we began to date and got married in January of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: You are also an interracial couple, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now the only reason I was interested in this was you--after SCOPE there was--what's the other group?
Speaker 2: The other group was a--I forget the actual name of it.  It had self-help somewhere in the name, but it was a black nationalistic organization. So how did that effect--?
Speaker 1: --and it was very interesting.  Many people were upset with me, as you would imagine, and I've had this--this is interesting--I've had this all my life where I've been involved and deeply involved, leading black causes of one kind or another, and yet people kind--criticized me for, if it wasn't my mother, it would then be my wife, as--and of course the point being that if you are romantically involved with somebody of a different race, then somehow, you know, this constitutes a betrayal of your own race.  My response to that then is the same as it is now, is that I have to, by necessity, leave that for other people to judge and they will. (laughs) I have no doubt about that.  I don't see it that way and I--and it has--it has caused me--it is a part of who I am.  It is a part of my vision.  I understand that human beings are human first and that when--if people are incapable of having whatever kinds of close relations with people of other races, that's a sign of weakness and I have to then go on to say that ultimately, ultimately, in the broadest and most humanistic sense, I do not believe in race, and I think that to believe in race, makes one a racist.  It makes you begin to think of terms of--it makes you begin to limit your sense.  Now the terrible thing for black Americans is that because we were black and we were seen because of our race and isolated, we then developed a culture around race.  You know, with Jews it's around religion.  With us, we developed a culture around race, and so we then tend to think that's a complete way of being, that's a complete sort of--a force.  But for me, the boundaries are much more fluid and that as people interact, those boundaries will break down, and that it's inevitable.  What you see, is that--if you look at the numbers, as time goes on, interracial marriage rates between blacks and others, blacks and whites, just in the '90s [1990], have quadrupled.  So no matter how nationalistic our policies may be, no matter how race focused our policies may be, and they're very--we live in a time, I think, they're very race focused right now.  People are bigger than their race and they go and come and I think that's a good thing.
Speaker 2: Well I also--what--was interested in--was the fact that your wife feel ostracized when you started this black nationalist group, and the reason I'm asking that is that when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], when Stokley Carmichael kicked out the whites in SNCC, you know, and there was this, you know, the whites felt really betrayed, and I was just wondering, there wasn't any of that between you and your wife?
Speaker 1: There was--well, again, my wife knew most of the people, was friends with many of the people who sort of made that transition into black nationalism, and she understood that I had to be a part of that and that that was fine, and we went to East St. Louis [Illinois] together, and this was about as black a world as you could--as it's possible to be because there was also this, you know, this black consciousness, this politics, and dashikis and afro, and so forth, and we went to Africa and we went to Africa together.  So, you know, I've always had this sort of way of I can't control what people think.  I'm going to do what I want to do and I'm pretty much still that way and I don't worry about it.  I don't really care much because I have no control.  I know people hold it against me.  I know that and I know that there's nothing I can do about that, and that my work will have stand on its own or it won't.  My wife has to come to feel as I have come to feel, that it was an insecure and unfortunate move to alienate whites in that way, to kick whites out, and what has it really done?  What has it really gained?  And that it was an ego move.
Story_ID: 13400
Speaker 1: You were just choosing someone like your mother in many ways?
Speaker 2: No.  My wife [Rita Steele] is not like my mother [Ruth Steele].  That would be you know, that's one of those things that from the outside it would seem that way, that, yeah, you're sort of picking somebody, you know, and it--that's giving--gives too much credit to race, you know.  I wouldn't--I mean there was a girl I almost married before that--I was certainly thinking about it and my wife was sort of the first white girl I'd ever really dated, but I don't think--and she's the opposite of my mother in many ways and she--it's--let me say this.  In many ways, in my own family, I was the rebel.  I didn't understand it then, but I had already sort of set off in another--I came to--I came--direction that said, in terms of ideas, intellects, in terms of my life, there are no holds barred.  I will go anywhere, do anything, see anything, read anything, and if it makes sense to me, that's the way I'll go, and many things that I may then finally come up with and believe in, will contradict what my parents believed in.  My mother was very, sort of, traditional, classic civil rights person.  I had already become tired of that.  I'd already, sort of, begun to feel that wasn't enough--that wasn't--and so I was--without realizing, you know, I don't think I realized that consciously at the time, since then, I wanted a woman with a very large mind, with--who was capable of living a life that was in many ways risky.  It was in many ways not conventional, that was where I would go where my own, sort of, inclinations, insights, took me.  I think that you have to do that if you're going to be a writer.  If you're going to be a writer, nothing is sacred.  If you--if something is sacred for you, then you're going to be mediocre.  You're not going to be--not going to get anywhere, get close to the truth.  Not many women can--are interested, black, white, or otherwise, in that kind of a life.  They are much more--they--why would they be?  They're much more interested in sort of conventional, you know, two cars in the driveway, two kids, so forth.  So I sort of, without knowing, I knew myself, at least unconsciously, enough to know that this would have to be a woman capable of appreciating, of liking that, and so I when I look back, aside from the other attributes that she has, I had found a soul mate.  I had found somebody who when I began to question--I questioned everything--nothing is sacred because I question absolutely everything--who would not be intimidated by that, would not be afraid, would not say, "Oh, my goodness, you're going to cross a boundary here.  You're going to get in trouble.  Your gonna--people are not going to like you."  I needed somebody who would understand what I was doing, and would again, would like that, and so I feel kind of blessed that I have--she has been this soul mate for me from the--I can talk over--and she's very formidable intellectually, and we have, in a sense, grown up together.  We got married, really, as kids and so we have all that shared now.  And she is a very brave woman.  In that sense, she is very much like my mother, and asks no quarter and gives no quarter, and I like that.  So who in the hell would walk away from that?  And so I didn't, and I'm glad that I didn't.
Story_ID: 13401
Speaker 1: Her [wife, Rita Steele] parents also had problems with the marriage at the beginning, right?  And then came to--?
Speaker 2: My wife is Jewish.  Her father is a survivor of the Holocaust, who said, "I came to this country and now Hitler's going to finish off my family."  Or--or--"You're going to do the job that Hitler tried to do" and so he just--he was--I love him, I love him to this, to these--as years went on, he came to be somebody I deeply love and admire because he's the most honest man, tell you right straight, you know.  I never could get mad at him because he said no, you know.  "It's not going to happen.  I'm not going to support this and I think Jews should marry other Jews," and that "we've been through hell," and he had a very, sort of, classic--and he had been through hell, and so he had paid his dues, and he had--this was a man who had--and so forth, but it couldn't stop it.  And my wife again--as my mother told me, she said to me many times, "Let me tell you something.  I'm not looking for you to get interracially married.  Interracial marriage is not for everybody; it's for very few people," and she said, "The older I get, the more I realize that it's even for fewer and that there's no reason to take that on and you are taking something on."  And so you know, I had no--I was never--I wasn't raised to have no illusions about this, but again, my wife was put in that position of having to accept to marry me, to leave her family, and she did, and I gave her no credit for it. (laughs) I gave her no credit, and you know, I still don't.  And I knew that her parents were different. A lot of times when interracial get married and there's boom--like my grandparents, in, you know, in five minutes they're back and they were--everything was okay, and I grew up with them and they were great people.  I knew this was a different situation, that it wasn't gonna happen like this.  That--this was--these were people who had been wounded by terrible, historical cataclysms because they were Jews, and so this was a kind of taking--marrying outside of the group was, in a sense, you know, it was beyond betraying the group.  You were diminishing its numbers, and so I knew that, that was the case.  As time went on--it was a long time--I think it was maybe sixteen years before there was a real approach.  My kids were, by this time, like ten years old or so, eight to ten, and then he did it just like he had rejected us.  He came back and--like a man and shook my hand and said, "I was wrong and let's go on from here," and we did and we became--he was--he's quite a character.  We became close.  I've had as much fun with him as I've had with anybody in my life.  I love him.  He's a great man.  I would say to him--I say--because one of his things was--when--was--the Holocaust was over, they had been liberated, they were wandering around Europe and they're trying to find what to do next, and he knew one thing.  He knew he wanted to get to America.  He--Jews were going all over the world.  They were going to Israel.  They were going to South America.  He had family who went to Brazil, so forth.  He held out for America, and so I would always say, "Jack, when you came to America, you came--."  He said, "Because it's a free country."  I said, "It's freer than you thought," and I've learned that myself.  If you want freedom, you canno--you cannot--the boundaries of race and ethnicity are unsustainable in freedom.  Sixty some percent of Jews marry outside the group.  Fifty to sixty percent of Asians marry outside the group.  Hispanics, it's in the thirties and forties that marry outside the group.  Blacks, it was way low, in like four percent.  Now it's up in the--sneaking up into the teens, going toward 20 percent who marry out.  Freedom, the price--with freedom comes the disintegration of these boundaries. You can't maintain them unless you have racism or anti-Semitism.  The reason that we have a group identity is to defend ourselves against white racism and the segregation. As it--as that pales, those boundaries pale.  So, its you know, I've always been in this interesting situation where in my life where on the one hand, there's this--from my own background as a black--wanting greater freedom and this close, sort of, sense of racial identity of blackness, and so forth.  And on the other hand, living in a free country where there aren't really no restrictions, certainly during my lifetime, and where, if you partake of that free society, you know, these boundaries are going to break down whether we want them to or not, and the numbers indicate that they do.
Story_ID: 13402
Speaker 1: At the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].  What was significant about that experience there?  You went to get your PhD, you got your PhD.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it was a good place to get it quick.  You concentrated.  Salt Lake City, Utah, you know, was a shock to me coming from Chicago [Illinois].  That was my background and to come to not just an all-white city, but a city that was Mormon, and at this time, this was when the Mormons still had their, sort of, edict against black people.  Black people were inferior, the Son of Ham, and racism was, therefore, a religiously sanctioned thing. And it was fascinating to me because I was used to just old regular every day racists who would call you a nigger or something.  But here they were absolutely polite.  Religion, again, they did not see themselves as racist.  They saw themselves as practicing their religion, and so there was this, this impersonal quality to it where they would just stare at you.  There was no--there wasn't the visceral hatred.  There was just this idea that you are some other kind of a being, and then if you talked to them about it, it was like, "Well, I'm really sorry that you're the son of Ham (laughs), but you are and nothing I can do about it, and that must be a rough way for you."  So that was a bizarre, sort of, that was the worst, most pernicious, most stunning, inhuman racism I've ever encountered.  You really felt like an animal in the zoo, often.  But again, I--this was a time when, you know, again, we --expectations were for a liberal society.  I wanted to get a degree and I--by this time I knew how America worked, and I knew you had to have one, and so their racism was more of a prod than anything.  There were some other blacks who, you know, couldn't take it and just the same old things that happened in college.  But I knew why I was there.  I was going to get a PhD and if I didn't like it there, that was good because I'd work harder and get it faster and move on, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Now, what are you--what's forming you? Are there other things forming you, you know, during this PhD process because you had left the social sciences to really focus on literature, and so I'm just wondering, you know, was the course of study satisfactory?  What did you do your, you know, your dissertation in and sort--?
Speaker 2: Well, my areas of study were 20th century American fiction, 19th century Russian novel, early 20th century drama, and so I took my prelim's [preliminarys] in all those, and I'm probably forgetting one or so.  So it was just a classic degree in literature in--as a PhD program in literature.  The difference being that for your dissertation, if you were in their writing program, you could write a novel, you could write a creative thing, and so I wrote two novellas and a long short story, and that was my dissertation.
Speaker 1: What was the subject matter on those?
Speaker 2: Well, I look back now. I hope to God no one ever looks them up and reads them.  But they were--one was a, sort of, you know, I was just, I had just admitted to myself that I wanted to be a writer, and so I was in that--you're writing like Richard Wright.  One was a kind of Richard Wright novel.  One was a kind of--who was it?  I forget the other one with that--it was a little more literary, too much by half. Somebody I was enthralled with at the time.  Then the third one, which actually got published as a short story, was sort of like the--my voice and it was about--I had worked in the stockyards in Chicago [Illinois].  I put myself through school that way.  And it was set there and so that's what they were about.  But they were badly done and I pray no (laughs) one ever digs them up.  But that, that time--I must say this, again, it was that a real breather for me.  I had been through all of that race.  Grown up in this sort of crucible of race.  College. Then this other black consciousness movement in East St. Louis [Illinois].  And so here I got into Utah, where there were really no blacks, or very few, and it was the first time where I felt free in my life, and that I could just take stock for a minute and really read things and really develop some knowledge of literature and enjoy that and be expanded by that, and so it's--that's when I really began to seriously understand about literature and writing and quite apart from race, and I thought, "Whew, I'm free. I'm probably not even going to ever write about race.  I'm just going to write about other things," and so forth, and I associated that with living in the West, which I thought had a more milder, sort of, racial tone to it, and so I vowed never to go back and live in the East or the Midwest again, and I haven't. I left Utah and moved to California and I've been here ever since.
Story_ID: 13403
Speaker 1: You got a position teaching at San Jose State [University, San Jose, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And is that what brought you here? I mean to Monterrey [California].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were you--was there a purpose--I mean you said you sought out the West.  You wouldn't of thought--you wouldn't--but just to be clear about this, Salt Lake City [Utah] was not a place you wanted to be at this time.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And even in the freedom you experienced there, you were sort of classed as a black person, the son of Ham, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, totally.  I was--yeah. I mean what else?  I knew that--the--I mean I wasn't in Utah two weeks till I didn't know that I was not going to stay in Utah.  The main things I liked, I'd never been around mountains before.  I'd never been in the open spaces of the West, which I learned to love there.  But I knew I was never going to settle down there and I had my--my son was born there, about six months before I left, and so, I mean, I knew I wasn't going to have children in that community.  So it wasn't even an issue. wasn't even, you know.  Soon as I got close to the end of my dissertation, I began to apply--and this was the time--this was the early '70s [1970], when there was a recession, a retrenchment in academia, where suddenly there were no jobs, and so I was terrified that I was going to have to stay there, and they offered me a job there and I could have stayed there, and I would have had to if I'd had to support my family.  But I applied to over sixty places and I got responses from two, and I got this little letter from San Jose State that said, "Well, you can come here and be interviewed if you want."  So it was not a very warm solicitous letter, but I jumped on the airplane and flew out and presented myself for this interview, and I don't think they liked me much.  I don't think they trusted me as a black.  I felt a little prejudice there, and they would ask me humiliating questions like, "I'm going to give you a sentence and you tell me if this sentence is a fragment or a complete sentence," and I thought these were really directed at my race.  So I left there feeling that I probably wasn't going to get this, and as it turned out, a week later they called me back for another interview, and they needed somebody in exactly the area that I was in.  I had this 20th century fiction and I also had 19th century Russian, and they needed somebody in both of those areas as it turned out.  So they kind of reluctantly hired me and gave me a very hard time the very first years I was there, for no other reason than--again, I think they were suspicious of me because I was black.  And--it was never--I was there many years. It was never a good time there.
Speaker 1: How many years were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there from '74 [1974] to '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and were there other blacks that joined the faculty there [unclear] in your department?
Speaker 2: There were some that came and went on a, sort of, you know, adjunct basis.  There was one other black faculty there with me who was there before I got there, and he was a Stanford [University, Stanford, California] man, and he was there the whole time and we became good friends. So he's the only other one who was tenured for professor.  That's--.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Will Crockett.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were able to get--you got on the tenure track and everything there?  You became tenured?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I was the last--this is how bad it was economically.  I was the last tenure track position in the English Department for ten years.  So I just sort of snuck in under the wire, and again, reluctantly on their part.
Speaker 1: So what was that whole time period?  This '74 [1974] to '91 [1991].  That's a long time.  It's a long time.
Story_ID: 13404
Speaker 1: What was forming you during that time [1974-1991] and what was significant about those years?
Speaker 2: They were very significant.  I was--those years I sort of see that I was growing up.  I had kids.  My son, I discovered as soon as we moved there, was deaf, had been born deaf, profoundly deaf, and this sort of sent, sent our world spinning, for, you know, probably--well, I won't name a number of years, but it certainly was a real--I'm an adult now, and we had to deal with that.  But again, my background suited me well for that.  I knew instinctively that if you--that you don't give in to something like that.  You don't say, "Oh, okay, then you just go to little deaf school and learn some signs, and you know, be happy."  He was my son.  He was--this was the only problem he had.  He couldn't hear, which is a profound problem, but he was perfectly bright, intelligent and we were determined to make sure that he got the best, and so we set to work doing that and e--he was in various programs, and we--fight with the programs.  I reminded myself of my mother [Ruth Steele] back in the days of the civil rights, and so forth, and we got him finally mainstreamed, and by the time he started school, and to make a long story short, he's done very well and graduated from college and on his own and is becoming a writer himself.  Had a daughter a little bit after him, normal hearing.
Story_ID: 13405
Speaker 1: This was a time [1974-1991] when I was, you know, raising kids on an assistant professor's salary and sort of making a life.  San Jose State [University, San Jose, California] is a state school, which means you teach a lot, and so my great frustration there was I was doing so much teaching and it was difficult to find time to write, and so I lost time there, and that become--for me, that became harder and harder to bear, and in the meantime, my wife [Rita Steele] had finished her PhD and done her internship and became a professional psychologist, so that began to help.  And then I was tired of writing little academic articles, you know, and lit crits [literarary critiques] sort of things, and I wanted to really write something out of my own voice, and so I cut back to half time and really began to seriously write, and really put--I'd gotten tenured by this time, and so put everything on the line, and that's sort of what I did.  And 'Content of our Character' was a book that sort of came out of that experience.
Speaker 2: And what was your voice when you started writing in your voice?  What was your voice saying?
Speaker 1: My voice says that, "I'll tell you anything I think.  I want you to trust me because I'll be honest with you.  You may not like it.  You will very often disagree with it, but you'll always know what I really am truly thinking.  You'll know why I think it and hopefully that will be of some value to you."  And that's what I've tried to continue to do.
Speaker 2: 'Content' was controversial.  'The Content of our Character' was controversial.  Can you talk about what the impetus for that was, for the book itself?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, I can talk for--a lot about it.  I think that--this--I had become again--again, I'm somebody who sort of grew up in the--always was connected with the movement of--and where the blacks stru--struggle for freedom was at, and was, you know, very much always preoccupied with that, and so forth. And so I simply began to feel as the '80s [1980s] sort of came on and got into the '80s [1980s], that there'd been dramatic changes in American society.  That racism had truly begun to subside.  That it was not remotely like what it was even in the '70s [1970s].  That there was--that this society was truly--I began to understand that America, as a society, was truly repentant.  They really did.  You know, I won't say they were all out in love with black Americans, but they truly knew they had been wrong and they didn't want to be racist.  That's--they just didn't want that anymore, and that there was a tremendous amount of opportunity suddenly available to people of color, of all kinds.  And I don't just mean that there was affirmative action available.  I mean there was opportunity everywhere.  That if one--the problem was that--knowing how to take advantage of it, and you know, I'd see evidence of that everywhere.  The little office behind--there's a liquor store behind the office I wrote in, early '80s [1980], and a Vietnamese man who had just, you know, one of the boat people.  Just been here like five minutes, bought that store, and two months later--he had hired blacks to clean it out at night. I said, "Wait a minute."  I knew the white guy who owned--he'd bought the store from and I thought the guy was a racist.  I'd never had liked him.  And so it became clear to me that it wasn't about racism anymore.  It was really about know how--it was about having the tools, the ideas, with which--and the real price we had paid for our four centuries of oppression was that we didn't have those ideas nurtured as a par--and central in our culture so that we could, we could depend on them when opportunity opened up. And the people who did have those ideas were just thriving. I mean, I left that office two years later and I saw that guy and I used to help him, you know, sign--figure out papers for City Hall and licenses and so forth, 'cause he didn't know English. And he hadn't been around for a few weeks and he came in one day and I said, "Where you been." He said, "'Nother store. 'Nother store."  He already had--now, by this time, in a three year peiod this man had a million dollars worth of liquor stores. His son is no doubt--what'd he name his son--? I can't--his wife had a new baby. I said, "Congratulations, what's the baby's name?" "Eric." (Laughs) These are people from Vietnam. Eric is no doubt probably now a graduate of UCLA and medical school or something. I began to see in my daughter's class she was in honors and every other kid in the honors section of the school was Vietnamese.  So it just changed--it revolutionized my thinking. I just completely went back down to ground zero and rethought everything in a totally different way.  And I've been doing that ever since.
Story_ID: 13406
Speaker 1: We were talking about 'Content' [of Our Character']and how that, you know, came about.  Were you happy with the result of that?  Your collection of those things?  Or how did you choose?
Speaker 2: You mean with--how so?
Speaker 1: How long--how long over a period were those written? Were they written from '87 [1987] to '91 [1991]?  Over--?
Speaker 2: They--the first one, well it's interesting.  I had written literary criticism, I had written fiction and that was it, you know, and I said--and I remember as the '80s [1980s] crept on, I just--it, you know, had been kind of growing in me, the sense that somebody who really did--I taught black American literature.  I taught black American ideas, I taught African literature, I--you know, I traveled to Africa, I mean, this is, has been my life's work and I began to really sense that things had--the world had shifted--that you know, things do shift.  And I tried to write that up like you write literary criticism, and nobody wanted it.  And then it just occurred to me one day that, no, this is--you know, you need almost a more fictional voice, you need a storytelling voice, a personal narrator who is yourself and you have to be fearless, you have to take risk, you have to tell it--you have to really say what--you know, because as members of a group, particularly as members of the black group, there are prescribed ways for us to think and feel and so forth and--.  We know what we're supposed to say, particularly if whites are around and so forth.  And I knew right away that you couldn't get to what I was trying to get to if you stay within those boundaries and so it was really scary for me, very scary.  I began to just say things that--just say the truth.  I just said, well, who I was.  And you know, knowing full well how black people would react to that.  And you know, I wasn't try to provoke anything.  I still am not but I knew I wanted to--I had to be utterly free, tell you the absolute truth that in my classes blacks almost invariably at the bottom--bottom--things like that.  It means the truth.  They're there.  It's heartbreaking.  It doesn't make me happy that they're there, but they are there and so we've got to understand there's a whole new self-examination that we as black Americans need to do in order to deal with--not with the past and racism--that's the old enemy--but with the future and possibilities and opportunities.  And we, even to this day, have not seriously done that, but we're gonna have to.  And so I began to see that, at that point, and then I found a way to write it in a way that readable--was more readable and to put myself in it and to tell you who I was and stories about myself and to open up my own self as vulnerable. I couldn't ask you to sit there and read me like a teacher lecturing, I had to put my own life in it and make myself vulnerable.  And so in '86 [1986] 'Atlantic Monthly' called up and bought the first one of those and I didn't think it work. I didn't think anybody would be interested in 'em, but suddenly everybody was.  They exploded and 'Harper's Magazine'--I wrote many--some of it, probably three or four for them.  'Commentary Magazine,' descent liberals, conservatives--.  They were in every kind of journal, 'Wilson Quarterly,' 'New York Times Sunday Magazine' --everybody wanted one.  And so then I was--I certainly not expected any of that and then I sort of found myself fairly well-known in that regard and that was another kind of shock.  And I'd intellectually known that I was saying things that would upset particularly black people. I, you know, I knew that, but it was a very different thing to experience anger, to experience people who were upset with you or call you an "Uncle Tom" which is, you know, I mean, is the worst thing you can be called.  So I then went through a fairly long trial by fire and it took me a little while to come through that but it was a trial and it bothered me deeply because I am black, I've never been anything, you know, but black, I'm deeply of the culture and to be punished by having your identity sort of held hostage was very painful, but yet it also was very clear then that I had really hit a nerve.  And no one gets mad at you like that if you haven't hit a nerve, that there isn't some truth in it.  And so it got exhausting and tiring, but I kept going and I wrote more things and more things and I then came to write the other--my last book 'Dream Deferred' where I took a lot of these ideas even further.  And so, you know, I'm in the middle now of another--third book, a similar subject, which you know, I promise will be my last one.  My wife [Rita Steele] says I'm lying, but I think it--I want it to be my last book on race.  And what I really, I hope to take some of these ideas to--their--what feels like a completion at least for now, at least in terms of where we are now.  Having said all that and having gone through what I've gone through, I have never ever, in all of that, doubted that I was right.  I think I was right on the money and I think that in time, all black America will come to see that I was on the money, and others like me.
Story_ID: 13407
Speaker 1: Don't you think that the reaction from the black community had something to do with feeling as if they had been betrayed?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But within the context of that, Mr. Steele, what were you saying?  Can you recount what you were saying?  That's one thing and the other is can you say that the progression, even into your third book, of your ideas--?
Speaker 2: You mean "what was I saying"?
Speaker 1: What were you saying with 'Content' and what were you saying with the 'Dream Deferred,' what are you--what is your transition?
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of tough.  I'll try.  I was saying a lot of things in 'Deferred.'  Excuse me, in the 'Content of our Character.'  I was--but I think I can sum it up which is probably the best thing for me to do by saying that as black Americans, who were all--.
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry.  Let this pass and then start again.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, that as black Americans who came from what we came from, this long, long centuries of racism, victimism, oppressions, so forth--and that we had really done a magnificent thing in the '60s [1960] when we won the Civil Rights--when we won those victories, in '64 [1964] Civil Rights Bill, '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act, so forth.  And that that really was our emancipation, that we had not really had a genuine one before that, but here we did have a genuine emancipation where--because what we got from the larger society, even though it was implied.  Rather it was implicit rather than explicit--was an acknowledge that the government, the United States government couldn't pass those bills without in effect implicitly saying "We were racist and we were wrong".  And proof of that then was that [President Lyndon B.] Johnson jumped up and said "We're going to redeem ourselves and have a great society," and billions of dollars were spent and so forth.  So the thing that stunned me, the insight I had, and it stuns me to this day, and it's at the core of my work, is that we were people who generation after generation after generation after generation were born into oppression.  I was born in oppression.  Born in a segregated ward in the hospital.  Suddenly we were free, not completely--there's racism, there will always be some--but relatively speaking, we all of a sudden had a new problem to deal with as a people--and this is what I was trying to get to in the 'Content of our Character'--we have a new problem.  That problem is not oppression.  That problem is freedom and that we--this calls for really, a--some rather profound self-examination some cultural transformation.  We have to change as a people some of the ways that we see the world, some of the ways we act in the world, some of the ways we pursue our interest in the world.  And that we will not be able to--because again, what I also understood is not about joining, you know, American society, what ever you may think about that.  It's about joining modernity, the modern world.  That people who are in modernity do well.  People who are out of it languish and suffer.  And so I began to see that in a whole different term.  Victimization is just not--we did that thing.  We did that problem already.  We faced that down.  We still have some, but we now live in a world that is ashamed of itself for what it did.  When I was in the '50s [1950], there was no shame.  Racism was perfectly okay.  And that we have our leadership, particularly, has not integrated this new knowledge, this new situation and is still pursuing our interests as though our interests all have to with racism and fighting racism, alright, which I have nothing against.  I think we should always have groups that monitor against racism but that 80-90 percent of it we do at this point has got to be that learning to handle freedom and wealth.  I don't know which book I'm in right now, but I go forward with the ideas that if you, you know, you see this in the Islamic world, you see this in Africa, you see this in every place where there was a colonial power, they left and the people are suddenly free.  What happens is the people who were oppressed, the biggest problem they suddenly have is not oppression, is freedom.  They don't know how to take advantage of it.  You see this--it's in the Islamic world and they develop what I'm calling in my new book "compensatory identities" because all of a sudden they're free and they're still failing.  If you look at Africa, if you look at when they won freedom from Europe--the European powers, the more freedom has lasted, the more they've declined, so there's almost a reverse correlation between freedom and decline.  Well the problem the Africans had was they didn't know how to handle it.  They didn't know what to do.  They didn't have institutions in place.  They didn't have the values systems in place.  They didn't have the knowledge of how you really set--why a parliament is important, of how a free market economy works, of how--why law is the foundation of civilization.  They--none of that infrastructure was there.  The same is true of black America.  We--the same sort of values, the knowledge and skills about how you, of course, believe me, vastly ahead of any other black community on earth, but still it's a lack of knowledge about how to deal with those things.  How to open businesses, how to sustain businesses, how to delay the gratification and give up luxury today in order to make profit.  All these sorts of things are not--why did--would they be there in a people who was oppressed?  The reverse is there in people who have been oppressed.  They don't delay gratification because there's no point in it.  You're not gone get ahead and so you build a culture around that.  And so I began to see all this and began to see that what you, you know, what we have got to take on--whether we like it or whether we don't, we've got to take on this value system of--it comes down.  It doesn't matter what color you are if you have the value system of modernity.  You understand that--how vital education is, how crucial skill development--so all these sorts of things, then you will thrive.  If you still think your problem is racism, if you still think that your problem is racism, guaranteed you will suffer.  There is no way to get ahead on racism.  We already did all you can do there.  And now history has changed and history is calling for something different from black Americans.  Many black Americans are meeting the call.  There are people now who are black CEO's, there are people who are doing very well, thank you, in many areas of American life.  Not because they're black, not because they fight racism, but because they have the skills and the know-how to do it and they've learned marketing, they've learned all of the things that they need to learn in order to thrive in that very competitive, complex, high skilled, high education world.  And if you're in that world, it no longer really cares too much about whether you're black.  It cares about what you can--I lived in Silicon Valley for years, I see that when the need for high-tech people is so intense, they go to India and take their best educated people and bring them here and now they now own companies and are thriving in Silicon Valley.  That's the way America is, that's the beauty of America.  The beauty of America is precisely the fact that it doesn't give a damn about who you are.  It cares about what you have to offer.  It cares about what you have to trade, what skills, can you help me make money in my company? They, they don't--if you can do that, you can be any color on the planet and you will--nobody is going to turn you away.  That's the America we live in today.  That's the actual reality.  It's not a dream, it's here.  There are no people saying that there's, you know, that John Smith can really improve the profit margin of this company, but we're not going to hire him because he's black or he's brown.  They don't do that.  If he can prove it, he's got it.  So this is, you know, my thinking has had to, has simply tried to respond to this new reality that we live in.  And that's what gets me in trouble, because our group is still focused around racism and fighting racism and victimization and so forth.
Story_ID: 13408
Speaker 1: Black America is truly not a monolith, I mean there's a great variety of experiences, you know, and I certainly have interviewed people who were not, who did not grow up in the formative years were not the Civil Rights Era, and yeah, but I still think that racism is a--see this is one of the difficult things, when you say racism is diminished, I've never said it was, you know, extinguished, I've said it was diminished.  It's often heard in the--to the black ears that you're saying it was extinguished; there isn't any and so yeah, there's racism, I run into it at every institution. I run into it on airplanes, I run into it, you know, everywhere every other black would run into it, but it--and sometime--there have been places where it has really hurt my career, especially when I was first starting out.  But I barely--did get the job--I think a lot of the reasons that my applications weren't looked at was because I was black and because one of my areas of studies was black American literature.  And I mean, I could be here all day if I told you all the stories of where I encountered racism in employment and so forth.  Having said all of that, and acknowledging all of that, that it is true; it is more true that I have found opportunities and my point in all of my work is that we have exaggerated the problem of racism and underappreciated the degree of opportunity that is available to us.  And if you're black in America, it will certainly be more difficult for you to take that opportunity that other people and you will run into racism and I think any sane black knows that.  But as somebody who did come from the Civil Rights Movement, so what?  Fight it.  Don't tolerate it.  What other option do we have but to take ourselves forward as individuals and to fight racism.  If I was a person who was somehow intimidated, wouldn't fight racism, then that would be a problem.  If I'm waiting for somebody else to fight that battle, that would be a problem.  And sometimes I think, and I can tell you, all the way back to the days of the Civil Rights, one of the biggest problems my family had, and the other Civil Rights people had is that blacks didn't fight it enough.  When I went to the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] and they wouldn't let me have an apartment because I was black, and the guys says "I just don't rent to blacks."  I went to law school, got a pro-bono lawyer and sued his butt and won.  Now if other blacks did that, landlords would be less likely to do that.  And so, you know, and so--that is, I don't give an inch on racism, but, what the point I'm making is that maybe people don't like Vietnamese people, maybe people that you know, Hispanic--you pick the group.  I don't think the world ever is going to love us.  We have to grow up as a people.  We have to stop waiting for them to like us.  We have to stop waiting for them to love us.  They don't care one way or the other about us and we have to make our way and take our opportunities and book no racism along the way.  And who said, who in the hell said that we came this far and all of a sudden we should expect there to be no racism, that we'll never have to fight again?  No, we don't have to fight the racism, we don't have to go forward as individuals too, and take this opportunity, and invent some new kind of a computer device and come up with some new marketing scheme, and make--and we're going to have to--in other words, we have to get in the competition.  Stop saying that "Oh, give me, you know, let me in this school or that school because of a lower standard".  We are the last people in the world that should be that.  Give me a higher standard, I need to know more.  I have to be more competitive.  And what I'm upset by--with, particularly with the black leadership, is that they spend 98 percent of their time hammering white people and white institutions to give them money and give them racial preferences of one kind or another, and diversity programs here and this, that, and the other there.  And they never ever turn around and look at their own people and say "Why in God's name are you not teaching your child to read"?  How can you have the nerve, the nerve to talk about racism and limited opportunities when your child is five years old and doesn't know the alphabet and doesn't know their numbers, and doesn't know their colors?  And you haven't read to them, and can't repeat a single childhood story that's been told to them, and you want to talk about racism?  You have no right.  Let's get things in perspective.  You can't ask people to be responsible for all--for your difficulties if you take no responsibilities for them.  Do you think that Asian kid doesn't know his numbers and doesn't know his alphabet?  Do you think that white kid doesn't?  What in God's name tells you--that makes you think that you can get away with that?  And then you get mad when he goes to school and they put him in the slow track when he's a very bright kid.  And you have not taken the time?  Look, this is not higher math we're talking here.  I've made this argument since the beginning of my work.  The two are not mutually exclusive.  I will fight racism with myself, my kids, my family, my friends, my race, and I bow to no one in terms of some people who've fought it.  I take a back seat to nobody.  Nobody's fought harder than me.  Nobody's taken more risks to fight it than me but in this day and age, it's about 20 percent of what I need to be doing.  The rest is I need to be figuring out how to seize more opportunity and of course, in my work, my point is to make the point to black Americans that you can now do about what you want to do and yeah, they're not going to love you, so grow the hell up and get ready for that and move on.  And what do you--they're not going to love you.  Do you love them?  Do you love American Indians who suffered more than any of us?  Do you get up in the morning and worry about them and cry, talk about the injustices?  Hell, no.  Why do you think everybody's going to love you?  What you want in this life is freedom, not love.  Freedom, opportunity, much of which you will have to make for yourself.  So when I hear black people talk about racism, I say "Well what the hell else is new?"  Absolutely you're running into racism.  I run into it.  Why wouldn't you run into it? The point is, I want to know how you--I want to know what else you do.  Do--if--you--should--there should be no giving into racism.  That should be absolutely zero tolerance.  On the other hand, what we better focus on more, it seems to me, is to fill--particularly our young people--with a sense of all the vast opportunity that is available to them.  That's the--you hear Civil Rights leaders, this is so sinful, it approaches evil--the leaders of the black race in America today, screaming constantly, relentlessly "racism, racism, racism", "police brutality", "racial profiling," constantly.  All those--who in the hell would be in favor of those things?  Where in God's name do you hear them make the following statements to young black people?  "You have more freedom and opportunity today than 99.9 percent of the people who've ever lived on the planet."  "You can do whatever you want in your life, with your life.  Anything you want is available to you.  And you need to organize your life, not around a God damn racial profiling, but around the opportunity."  What black leader says that?  If he says that, he'll be a black conservative, an "Uncle Tom" and we'll punish him severely.  We'll say he's not black, we'll say he's--we'll talk about him and we'll isolate and marginalize him because our whole strategy now is just basically to cry racism and see what we can get out of the larger society rather than to see what we can do ourselves.  We don't believe in ourselves yet. Until you believe in yourself, nobody can help you.
Story_ID: 13409
Speaker 1: And this is where I become very upset with our leadership is because the biggest problem, I think they have, is that they don't think.  Who is the onus on entirely?
Speaker 2: The onus is on--there are two onuses, I believe.  The onus is on black society to get its act together, get its act together. But the other onus--.
Speaker 1: No, see, you can't get your act together.  You have to become lean and hungry, you have to take it.  You have to go out and take it.  You have to make that and until you take it, you will never get it because other people don't give you a damn thing worth having.  And that's the rule.  I have done a lot of reading recently in history, I'm doing some writing on the Islamic situation. You look at history, you look at the history of Europe.  There's a history of nothing but warfare and power and one group dominating another group, takeover, and you look at the history of the human condition and you see the strong survive and the weak perish.  And if you have ideas that make you less than aggressive, that make you less than fierce, that make you less than ferocious, that make you say "I'm going to wait for the conditions out there to improve before I come", you will languish.  We are in a pos--think that all the suffering that we went through in four centuries, we think it counts.  We think somebody cares about it.  We think somebody's going to give us an extra hand because of it. And I'm here bringing very difficult news, is that that is a childish illusion.  They're not going to--I don't deny--I think--maybe I think racism is worse than you think it is.  What else is new?  Life is tough.  We--and it goes to the strong, valedictory goes to the strong, it goes to the people who just are going to take and are going to have it.  And so the future of black America, I think, is you're going to see in the individuals.  You're going to see individuals peel off from the group and take what they want.  And if rap boys, you know--they're taking what they want.  They don't care about me, they don't care about you, Jesse James, all of you.  I don't care.  I'm getting mine and maybe I'll make a contribution to your organization at some point, you know, to lower my tax bracket, that's the American way.  That's the way that everybody makes it in America.  The rap boys did not wait.  They saw a crack, an opportunity.  They see these white kids want this music.  It feeds into their adolescent rebellion, it's their--you know, they're the Elvis of the day.  They've found that vein, they're riding it.  I'm not obviously a fan of rap music, I'm a jazz man but I have to say power to you.  I'm not one of these people that say let's suppress the vulgarity of the rap industry.  Admittedly, it's vulgar and it's offensive to women, and all that sort of thing but these are red-blooded American boys and girls.  God bless them.  God bless them.  They don't give a damn if--who's racist, who's not.  I just love that.  I mean, they're the perfect metaphor for what we ought to be doing in every area of life.  Why aren't we doing this in education?  Why do we say in education that "Well, we can't perform.  We can't pass these tests."  We've got to get--what are our parents doing?  Why are they not taking these children, as if you know that the day's not going to come when your child's going to be judged by a high stakes test?  What do white people do?  The minute the kid is born, they have a mobile over its crib, they are developing its mind, they are telling it stories, they don't even know if it can see yet.  They got flashcards out.  By the time it's eight months old, they're involved in all these sorts of--taking it swimming, out in the world, everywhere.  By the time that kid gets its first test--. What do we do?  "Shut up.  Be quiet."  You know, I'm with you on racism.  I swear to God.  How the hell could I not be?  But racism ain't the problem.  It's one-tenth of the problem and we are--because we live in a society, we're surrounded by white people, we're ashamed to self--that's why they hate me.  That's why once people get upset with me because I do the self-examination out in front of--the white man.  The white man hears and reads everything I write.  And they say, "Well, you could"--and people write me letters constantly--"Well, you could at least say it just to blacks?"  Well where would you do that at?  And you know, it is--I always say one of the best things that happened to the Jews after the Holocaust is they went away, to Israel, to another country.  If they had had to stay in Germany, and with the German people guilty and shamed, and you know, they'd be spending all their time fighting the Germans but in Israel, they got busy.  They made the desert bloom, they built a great nation.  They built one of the greatest nations in the history of the world in about--less than my lifetime, an unbelievable achievement.  What did the Arabs do?  They mad about victimization all the time.  They ain't built nothing.  Everything they got in the country's imported.  They can't make a spoon, let along a television set--completely backward.  So all they've got left keep themselves constant to do, is give themselves consolation is to hate Jews and hate Americans.  Why do we have [Minister Louis] Farrakhan? Why do we have black militancy today?  It's a consolation for losing.  At least I can hate racism and I can hate white people.  We're developing this culture of consolation and we've--it's the death of us.  We just--people move right on past, people move right on.  Other minorities come in here and just go right on.  And we just stay back behind admiring it.  Never get the point, never get the point and hate anybody that'd tell us the point.  The greatest black mind alive today in the United States of America, you know who that is?  The greatest single mind in the United States today, black; I bet he's not on your list.  Thomas Sowell.  Good, thank God. You may not get him, but I'm glad he's on your list.
Speaker 2: We don't discriminate.
Speaker 1: I'm really glad because there's, if he saw this back in the late '60s [1960] and the early '70s [1970] and he has paid a profound price for it.
Story_ID: 13410
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about your 'Frontline' [public television documentary series] and, you know, the special on Bensonhurst ['Seven Days in Bensonhurst', 1990] and how it came about.
Speaker 2: There was a racial killing in New York City [New York].  A young man by the name of Yusef Hawkins was murdered by four white boys in Bensonhurst, New York [in 1989].  So it created, as you can imagine, it was seen right away as a racial killing.  That he was killed because he was black by these four Italian young men because he had gotten off the subway in an Italian neighborhood and they saw him on a hot summer night and they killed him.  And so this exploded and it brought in all of the sort of major players of the American racial drama, Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton, and even [Minister Louis] Farrakhan gave the eulogy at his funeral and so forth.  His father was constantly interviewed in the media.  Mayor [Edward] Koch was the mayor of the city at that time, tried to make, to console the family.  He was rejected and so it divided the city profoundly.  What we did, as journalists, was simply to go in and try to find the ideas that would explain this drama. We were not there to, you know, convict anybody, or to take sides one way or the other and the trial had not even happened yet when we made the documentary.  But it was a perfect instance of here is blatant racial victimization, whites murdering a black.  And our point was that in today's America--as opposed to the America I grew up in when "Emmett Till was killed.Too bad."--but in today's America, a black being murdered by a white becomes a--creates a whole pool of victims, power and people like Al Sharpton, people like Jesse Jackson, Farrakhan, gravitate there because they sense there's real moral power there that they can use in the larger society.  Whites then are completely thrown back on the defensive because here's now evidence of the racism.  They said racism was really gone and blah, blah, blah.  Here it is.  You can't--a black boy's been killed by whites for no reason that we can tell other than the fact that he was black.  And so there's this they lose moral power and so our point was to sort of use this as a microcosm of America today that there is--this is the tragedies that we're in this kind of backward and forward push and pull when of course, the real problems that then black Americans suffer, bad school systems, bad teachers, broken homes, gangs in the neighborhood, drugs in the neighborhood, etcetera; violence, etcetera, etcetera, go unattended when one of the drama--because people just use these tragedies for the power they can glean and they--it never translates into anything positive for people who suffer.  People who--and this is my big complaint with black leadership for the last twenty, twenty years is that they've done nothing for their people.  They have not really helped their people to develop and become competitive in the modern world.  They themselves have become very wealthy, very fat, very successful.  They have also helped a sort of "in" group of cronies who they can throw contracts to and so forth as Jesse [Jackson] is the master of doing.  But they have not, this has not filtered down to the masses of people who still languish in America's inner cities and so we have a leadership that I call the "grievance industry", a kind of corrupt leadership.  I think you have this leadership in every third world country in the world.  You have it in every African country.  You have it in Islamic countries where you have outside people giving money to a corrupt leadership that then keeps it and never gets that--we're in that model of leadership now.  And I didn't say all of that in the film, but I did say at least the first part, that this is the--these are the games we play and they of course, go nowhere and this boy is still dead.
Speaker 1: Now you refer to yourself as a journalist, do you feel that that's what you have--you said, "We as journalists--."
Speaker 2: Yes.  In that--when I worked for 'Frontline,' that's what I--I am a sort of essay journalist.
Story_ID: 13411
Speaker 1: Can you also talk about the Sally Hemings--? How many have you--?
Speaker 2: I've just done two [documentaries for the public television series 'Frontline'].  The second one I did was called "Jefferson's Blood" [2000] and it was about Thomas Jefferson.  It was truly fascinating because it really gets to--it raises the question "What is race? What was race?"  The facts are fascinating.  Jefferson was a forty something year old man, developed a relationship in Paris [France]--as best the facts demonstrate--with Sally Hemings who was a servant in his home and she was, I think, fifteen at the time.  And this relationship continued for thirty-nine years.  And as they came back to America, there's some suggestion that there was a child conceived in Paris.  That's controversial.  Some people say there was, some people say there wasn't.  His name was Tom.  But at any rate, back in America, we do have clear evidence of four children were--two boys and two girls--were conceived by this union over a period of twenty years.  So the relationship was intimate at least on an off and on basis over that time, until Jefferson finally passed away in the 1820's.  Sally Hemmings was herself a--the granddaughter of such a--her grandmother was a black slave who had a relationship with the slave--the ship owner who brought the slaves over and so Sally's mother was half black and half white.  Sally's mother had a relationship, interestingly, with Jefferson's father-in-law and Sally came out of that union, so Sally was no more than a quarter black and was--the phrase is 'might-near white'--and so they had a relationship.  Then the children of Jefferson and Sally's then were like seven-eighths white, so would not be recognizable as black.  Sally was not really recognizable as a black person in a racial, in the stereotypic image of that.  So how did they live together?  What did they say about Thomas Jefferson, the founder of freedom, the founder of individual freedom, the man who had first given--the first American to really give an articulate argument against slavery?  And there was a southerner who was born with slaves, knew to be wrong, and yet--so the blatant contradictions--and how did he treat these children?  And he didn't treat them, apparently, very well.  He didn't treat them as well as his white children that he had from his--an earlier wife.  He didn't treat them as well as his great white grandchildren from his white daughter, but he did give them many favors over other slaves.  They were house servants, they were taught sort of--they were given trades rather than made to be laborers, and finally he did free them at the very end.  He freed the last two, Madison [Hemings] and Eston [Hemings], and the two boys before that, they had run off.  The other two had run off which meant, which was a way of saying that as best historians can figure it, he gave them a little money and said goodbye and they passed out of Monticello [Virginia] into the white world and became white people, lived that way.  Of the four children, three lived as whites and one tried--one of those tried to live as a black but just found it so difficult and impossible that finally he moved all the way to Wisconsin and became white.  And his name is Eston and it's his line that we now trace the DNA evidence back from contemporary time to Jefferson.  Madison was the only one who was black and who was bitter and wrote a memoir about it and had a kind of love and yet anger at his father and he's the one who really told the story and has written, given us the best record of it.  And his descendants, Madison's descendants, many of whom are in Ohio--very close to where you [interviewer Julieanna Richardson] grew up, that's where most of the descendants are--they have always been very light-skinned and many times many of their number have passed over into the white world and are now gone.  Others have not.  Some have passed over and then come back.  Some have gone away and married whites, divorced, and then come back.  It's, it's, it's an interesting story, back and forth.  So one particular man who did pass over and had nine children with a white woman, who believed he was white. And then when all the controversy around Jefferson came out, his name was mentioned and he was "out-ed", became clear then to his wife and his children.  Because apparently his wife had actually known, but his children now knew, nine of them, that their father was black; he had black blood, that they then had black blood.  So we had an opportunity to meet their family and spend time with them, interview them, and we focused on one particular daughter, and this was one of the daughters who was willing to accept all of this and acknowledge her history.  Others of the children said "You're crazy.  Why would you do this?  What do we have to gain by it?  Keep your mouth shut."  This daughter spoke, spoke on camera to us and so we then sort of--then what is her race?  And she has made some now attempt to get to know her relatives who have lived all their lives as blacks.  And so we have scenes of them meeting, of her and her sisters meeting some of these, some of her relatives who are black and then the kind of tensions there and back and forth and so we--this one character, Amelia, we then at the end of the movie--what race is she?  And you know, our point, race is a very fragile thing.  It's no more than a social concept.  It has no biological grounding.  And than at the very end of the film, we sort of go back to Jefferson and Sally and then there was a huge family reunion at Monticello where, for the very first time, Jeff--the descendants of Jefferson's white children met the descendants of his black children and the question is were they going to be accepted?  And that question, there's some are, some are not, but it's not--unresolved.
Story_ID: 13412
Speaker 1: Where do you fit on cultural identity and whether it's a good or bad thing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we don't really have a very good idea what it is.  You--we use the term freely and loosely, but what is it?  And when you ask people what it is, you get very unspecific, you get very vague answers, very different answers.  You don't get--and so it's difficult to know what cultural identity is and what it comes from, and how it is sustained, but it is a--no group has an identity at all, ever, until it is attacked by another people and has to defend itself.  So the identity is essentially a defensive concept and you maintain a--groups have a sharp identity line when they feel themselves to be under threat.  The minute they--in a free society, I was talking about the Jews earlier--when they come to America, they're no longer in a ghetto in Europe or what--then you begin to see those boundaries break down enter marriage, with other groups and groups disappear and this is the way it's been through human history.  Black America has been a very unassimilatable group for the most part.  And so they've had a stronger sense and they've been under a great deal of assault and attack and so they have a stronger sense of cultural identity.  But if you look at what they would call cultural identity, what would it be?  Do I have, do I share an identity with rappers?  I wasn't formed in that world. I share an identity with the black community in Phoenix, Illinois where I grew up and which was a relatively well-organized society.  And there were fathers in the home, and there was peace in the neighborhood and people were hard-working and honest and so forth.  Is that black culture?  Is rap black culture?  Is, you know, what cultural identity is, I believe, really is a sharply political concept and it is a concept that is designed not for me, but for white people, for the white world.  It's a design, it's a concept that a group will have, they define their cultural identity in a way that wins them an advantage with the larger society.  If black people were not in America surrounded by white people, our identity would be completely different than what it is.
Story_ID: 13413
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about, someone like Stanley Crouch?
Speaker 2: Stanley's a friend of mine, saw him a few months ago.  I like Stanley.  We agree on some things, disagree on others.  I like Stanley for one reason, Stanley's an individual. And what one of my things in campaigns with regard to black life is we have got to become individuals and we have got to be able to tolerate individuals.  And we're very intolerant of individuals at this point in our history.  We enforce a party line on each other that is just more ruthless than the Communist line in Russia.  It all has to do with keeping white people on the hook.  The price we pay for keeping white people on the hook is to destroy individuality in our own group.  When I grew up, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] could debate with Malcolm X and you wouldn't call either one an "Uncle Tom". Today, we--it's you're in the group or you're out.  You're in, you follow the party line or you're a pariah.  So Stanley's undergone some of that and so--but my point is, when you look at people like Stanley Crouch, you're looking at the greatest black Americans.  You're looking at the future.  Those are the ones that are going to take us ahead, not the party line people.  What do they do when the party line dies?  It's, you know, it's people like Crouch who think for themselves, name a bunch of others.  A group, remember, is totally dependent on the imagination and the creativity of its individuals.  Groupthink is dumb.  Individuals are insightful and see the future.  And if you a--a group does not have respect for individuals, there is no worse sign.  And today black America is very intolerant of individuals, punishes them, calls them names, kicks them in the mud.
Speaker 1: Is the white community tolerant of individuals?
Speaker 2: Absolutely the white community is tolerant of individuals.  That's why America is such a great nation is because it's a nation of absolutely extraordinary--from the very beginning of our history--extraordinary individuals who have cut against conventional wisdom over and over and over and over and over again.  It is the secret of the greatness of this society, that we tolerate individuals.  We don't put them in jail, we don't pound a party line on them, we let them talk and they make a contribution, they take us ahead.  Black people have never been more lost than they are today and one of the reasons that they're more lost than they ever were today is because they don't--they killed individuality in their own group.  They will not tolerate it.
Speaker 1: Are you a Republican or a Democrat, or don't you fit in--?
Speaker 2: I don't fit in either category.  I'm independent but I've voted Republican for the most part in recent years.
Speaker 1: Do you, think about it--let me ask you?  I just have--.
Speaker 2: That's another thing we could talk about is the, the, the degree shows the problems that when you have 92 percent of black people voting for [2000 Presidential candidate] Al Gore, for every, any Democratic candidate that runs for President--there could be no dumber political strategy possible because then the Democrats can take you for granted and the Republicans can ignore you.  And so your agenda disappears and for all, for blacks to be this devoted to a Democratic Party at this point in our history is unfathomable, I mean, it's just absolute, it's unbelievably dumb.  They don't have to compete for our vote, the people who run the country don't compete for our vote.  Democrats got us and the Republicans ain't going to ever get it, so they don't care.  So if we don't begin to open our minds and change this victim-focused way of thinking, we are going straight down.  We are just, the world is going to pass us by, it already is.  All you ever--can get from us is a complaint about racism.  How long do you think that's going to fly?  After a while, the question is, "What can you do? Can you create a computer?  Can you come up with a computer chip?  Can you come up with a new marketing scheme?  Can you unfold another way to do business?  Another way to--we've got some changes."  When you have people like me who have grown up wanting--proud of the fact that they are--take their sense of identity from being black, so have studied and talked the literature, who are devoted to the music, who write about it, who celebrated it.  And you say that's an outsider?  That's somebody who's not black?  That's not a statement about me.  That's a statement about the group being lost.  What white writer do you see treated by whites that way (pauses)?  None.  They have all kinds of individual points of view that they all--they don't think about that.  They don't try to wipe the person out and say the person is a pariah, is an enemy of the people.  We're in very, very, very serious trouble. That's all I can say.
Story_ID: 13414
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: First of all, I think I'd like to be known as a good writer.  I care about the writing itself.  Even if I write an op-ed piece, I try to give it enough style, enough truth so that it has, so that it's in some way timeless, has at least a timeless element even though I'm writing about a contemporary event or something.  So I suppose just in terms of my personal vanity, I'd like to--that is something that I'd like to be.  I'd like to be somebody who's seen as having seen a truth that his people needed to understand if they were to go forward.  A difficult truth, a hard truth for them to accept, but who had the courage to go ahead and articulate it anyway.
Speaker 1: And what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: We better change.
Speaker 1: No, this'll stand by. [break in tape]  What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that. I want to be remembered as somebody who took a risk for his own people.  Took a risk of invoking their ire in order to deliver a difficult truth.
