Story_ID: 663483
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I want--we're going to slate the interview first.  So I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Rachel Lucille Swarns [HistoryMaker Rachel Swarns], Rachel is R-A-C-H-E-L, Lucille is L-U-C-I-L-L-E, and Swarns is S-W-A-R-N like Nancy, S like Sam.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: July 10th, 1967 and I believe today's date is--where are we, the 14th, 15th, 15th of January 2014.
Speaker 1: And our location.
Speaker 2: We're in Manhattan, Times Square [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.
Story_ID: 663484
Speaker 1: We have five People magazine-ish questions, short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  How short does the answer have to be?  I love seafood, I love tropical fruits, I love Asian food, Thai, sushi.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say green and kind of rose shades.
Speaker 1: Favorite--okay, (unclear)--favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I love the water.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know I don't have a favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 1: No problem. You know so you grew up around the water really, in some respects, yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 663485
Speaker 1: So I'd like to have you start out, and I'd like to first talk about your mother and if you could have--see, you actually have her middle--her first name is your middle name, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay so can you, you know, give her name and her year of birth and what you know about her background, her family background?
Speaker 2: My mother is Lucille Swarns.  She was born Lucille Smith [Lucille Smith Swarns].  She was born in 1942.  She was born in Nassau, Bahamas, and she was one of--and I'm going to get this wrong--ten children.  Her mother [Elizabeth Smith] was from another island, a tiny little island in the Bahamas called Long Island, and they--her mother, her, her--my mother's grandfather was--owned, owned a little land.  He farmed.  He had a little store in Long Island.  My grandmother moved to Nassau, which was kind of the big city, and she--my grandmother did not have much education, maybe like third grade or something like that.  But she was beautiful.  And so she married a wealthy man and so my mother grew up in her earliest years, very privileged and in a big house.  She still remembers the servants and things like that.  Her--my grandmother married the son of a very wealthy merchant, and my grandfather [Blatchley Smith] had been sent to England for education and, and that kind of thing.  But unfortunately, my grandfather and his brothers did not have their father's zeal.  My great-grandfather owned a lot of property and business and stores in Nassau, but his sons enjoyed living very much, enjoyed the proceeds of their father's work and labor, but they themselves did not produce a whole lot there.  And so when, when my mother's grandfather died, when my grandfather's father died, he left them money but the sons went through it.  And so they ended up being really, really destitute and struggling.  And so that's really why they came to the United States.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story, and this is all around the--
Speaker 2: So my mother came in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so in that ten year period things, you know sort of--
Speaker 2: Dramatically changed for my mother, dramatically.
Speaker 1: Did she share any other stories of sort of growing up or you know was she more raised by her mother than her father, or do you know that kind--or did they both come?  Did both parents?
Speaker 2: I think that my grandfather came first.  There were, there were multiple trips and there were so many children.  I think that they, they did not all come together.  My mother does tell one other interesting story about her time which is a, a funny thing, which is that as a child she loved hurricanes.  And she loved hurricanes which, you know, obviously can be devastating because it brought everyone together.  Everyone had to, you know she had a very large family, you know, many siblings.  But also cousins and you know, extended family.  And people would come and hunker down.  And even though there was this imminent threat, she remembers that as being you know, time when people were together.
Speaker 1: So did she--so she came here when she was how old?
Speaker 2: She was little, she was about maybe eight--
Speaker 1: Eight, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) nine.
Story_ID: 663486
Speaker 1: And does she [Swarns' mother, Lucille Smith Swarns] talk about remembering what it was like to come here, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  They went to Florida first and she talks about a lot of things.  She talks about--well not being aware of segregation and race in the way that the United States framed it at the time.  Florida--they lived in Liberty City [Miami, Florida] and they--and Overtown [Miami, Florida] I think, and they--it was, it was very, very segregated.  And that was a shock, though in fairness, Bahamas has their own complicated racial situation there which it was not like there were not dividing lines there among--and there certainly were among lighter and darker people.  But this kind of legalized system of exclusion was something quite new.  And also the schools were not as good as the ones that she was accustomed to.  And it was really hard living, you know.  They really struggled.  And so they spent time in Miami [Florida] for a while, then they moved to Ohio for a while.  She talks about snow, how she was so excited to see snow for the first time and then she got into the snow and realized oh no, no, I don't like the snow at all.  It's so cold.  And then, and then they ended up in New York, in Staten Island, actually, which is where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--do you know why they came to New York?  Did they ever explain that from, from Ohio?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Blatchley Smith] was Catholic and somehow he had a--or found a connection within the Catholic church.  And I'm not sure why, you know why New York, why that connection there.  But they ended up living on a farm in Staten Island that was run by Dorothy Day, who was now--is now you know perhaps going to be canonized by the Catholic church.  She ran the--social worker, and she had a, a farm, kind of a commune where artistic folks, writers, poets, but also struggling families, lived.  And, and that's where they went.  It was a place where I think my grandfather thought they could start over.
Story_ID: 663487
Speaker 1: So now your, your father.  Can you give his name and his year of birth and what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: My father is Joseph Henry Swarns [Joseph Swarns], and he was born in 1938 in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  And his mother [Ruth Swarns] was from Greensboro, well just outside of Greensboro, North Carolina, a little place called Summerfield [North Carolina].  And my grandmother lived on a farm, there's a tiny, tiny community there.  And again, you know she and her sisters moved to Winston which was the big city at the time.  But their roots really extend quite far back in Summerfield, to--I've been able to trace them back to the 1860s, 1867 in Summerfield.  But they moved Winston-Salem where their--the tobacco factories were flourishing and, and they worked in the tobacco factories there until, you know there was a, a big strike at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston, Salem, North Carolina] and my grandmother and my grandfather--my, my father's, my father's biological father and--so my biological grandfather I never knew.  He and my grandmother split up early on in my father's life.  And so my father doesn't even have very many memories of him.  So technically we're not really Swarnses.  His, his biological father's name was Jesse Saddler [ph.].  But my grandmother remarried and the man that I knew as my grandfather [William Swarns], he and she and her sisters were involved in, in this organizing effort at the, at the tobacco factories.  And it was an effort that failed.  And they were blacklisted.  And they so they couldn't find work and you know it was the 1950s and a lot of people were moving north.  And someone--they knew someone who had moved to Brooklyn [New York] and I think again it was one of those situations where someone moved first and then they followed.  And my father arrived in New York [New York] when he was in middle school going into high school, somewhere about that age.  And he talks about, you know, Winston-Salem as being very, very segregated of course.  But he doesn't remember that as a negative.  He lived--they, they had very little contact with white people at all.  They lived in a very insular, self sufficient black community.  And he has very fond memories of that.  People knew--everyone knew everyone.  His stepfather was--played in the Negro Leagues and because of that, he had a, you know a name, you know, my father.  People were, "Oh," you know and he had older brothers who played baseball too.  And so you know I think--because my grandmother in some ways chafed at that small town life, but for him it was--as a child it was a very warm place and a warm way to grow up.  In fact, he says that he remembers when I think it was a white superintendent came to their school and asked the children to sing the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] and they sang 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' and the guy was not happy (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: So he grew up in, you know I often am amazed a lot of times of cloistered black environments.  You know in, in a segregated community.  There are a lot of positive stories that come out of that.
Speaker 2: Right, right because you could see in one community all the possibilities, right.  You know his, his parents worked in the tobacco factories, but there were doctors and teachers and everyone lived there and I think--and there was a sense of community and of people looking after each other.
Speaker 1: So did, did he talk about their move to New York?  Did he talk--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he still remembers coming in.  I think, I feel like they took the train and just the people, so many people, and how daunting that seemed to him.  And about being in a world that was so, so different, so big and so different from what he knew.  He ultimately completely lost a southern accent.  In fact--but he doesn't have a New York accent either.  He doesn't--he has kind of nothing.  But I think it was--I think he felt kind of dislocated, kind of a bit of an outsider for a while.
Speaker 1: So but they moved to Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: They moved to Brooklyn first and then to Queens, St. Albans, Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, St. Albans, okay, 'cause it's a famous community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663488
Speaker 1: I wanna ask how did they meet, your parents meet?
Speaker 2: They met in Washington, D.C.  My father [Joseph Swarns] was going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] was going to what was then known as D.C. Teachers College [District of Columbia Teachers College], and it's now I guess which has been incorporated into what is the University of the District of Columbia, UDC [Washington, D.C.].  And my father's best friend was going out with my mother's sister.  And so that's how they met.
Story_ID: 663489
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hm, that's a good question.  You know I was talking to my father about this recently.  I, I was born in Springfield Gardens, Queens [New York] and he was asking whether I have any memories of that.  And I, I really don't, not much.  I mean I remember there was a little girl who I played with, Pamela [ph.], and I can kind of remember her a little bit; I have kind of sketchy outlines of the house that we lived in.  But probably I, I most vividly remember when, you know my life in Staten Island [New York].  When we moved to Staten Island when I was about four, five.  And I remember we moved into an apartment first and I vividly remember the apartment and the sunflowers, there was these tall sunflowers that I was afraid of, frankly.  And I remember taking the bus to school and, and then we moved to the house in Staten Island where my parents [Lucille Smith Swarns and Joseph Swarns] still live.
Speaker 1: And you were about how old then at that point?  You, you said you--
Speaker 2: Four or five.
Speaker 1: You were four or five, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 663490
Speaker 1: So the house that you, you were at four and five, how long did you live in that house?
Speaker 2: The house that they ended up buying there, I lived in until I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: So the address and what you, you know can you describe your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I lived in a neighborhood called St. George in Staten Island [New York].  And St. George is the northernmost, it's the northernmost community in Staten Island, people call it the North Shore.  It's right near the ferry [Staten Island Ferry], which takes you to Manhattan [New York].  It's where some of the oldest homes are, it's part of the--one of the oldest settlements there.  So there are really lovely pre-war homes, Victorian homes.  It's also the most diverse part of the island.  And in some ways has some quite poor communities as well.  And my block was a very, you know it was a quiet--it's almost like a cul-de-sac and so lots of trees, lots of these pre-war, single family homes.  Not a lot of traffic, so I remember being able to, you know run in and out outside without you know, my parents worrying.  I could walk to school.  The library was close by, which was a favorite place of mine.  It was, it was very nice, big backyard.  I found--I loved kind of--I was very interested in animals and insects and stuff so I would find snakes and salamanders in the back yard.  So it was like that.
Speaker 1: Never seen a salamander (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They're interesting.
Speaker 1: You are--I'm wondering also--Staten Island I don't think of as where black people typically lived.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean you know you hear Italians.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I can't remember what is it, Greek? But anyway, I know Italians.  So I was just curious at what was that move and how large is the black community, you know or even in St. George or you know--
Speaker 2: It's, it's small.  I think it's bigger now.  When I was there it was small in terms of numbers. I truly don't know.  But small, it largely is you know, it's known as kind of an Italian American community.  It's a Republican stronghold in the city.  Going to school, I was always, you know one of two or three, you know, black kids in a class.  So it was, it was an interesting experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now I was, I was curious about that because I, you know when I, I was looking at your background and I'm like this is--it's just an interesting move and I didn't know if it was--and I looked at the voting records and I mean except for a few instances, it's all Republican.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.  It was my mother's home and she grew up there at a time when I mean they're even far fewer black families than you know when I grew up there.  In Staten Island it's kind of before the bridge, before the Verrazano Bridge [Verrazano-Narrows Bridge] connected the island to Brooklyn [New York].  And her mother [Elizabeth Smith] was there, her siblings were there.  So I think it had great appeal in that way.  I think you know my parents moved there in the early '70s [1970s] and they had both grown up and experienced segregation in you know, both, in the South and instances of racial tension, you know growing up even in the North.  And, but even so I think they were not--I think they grew up at a different time.  I think they were not--they, they, they wanted a place that was--where they would have good schools, where they could buy a house.  My mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] could be close to family and my father [Joseph Swarns] could be relatively close to family.  I don't think they thought much about what it would be like for children growing up in that kind of environment.
Story_ID: 663491
Speaker 1: Your siblings?
Speaker 2: There are two.  I have a sister [Christina Swarns] who is a year younger than me, year and six days, and a sister [Jessica Swarns] who is ten years younger.
Speaker 1: So you're the oldest.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so do you have all the old, older children (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  My poor middle sister for, for years and years and years was, you know, did exactly what I said; it was great.  All the games I organized, and I still actually really remember in middle school [I.S. 61, William A. Morris School, Staten Island, New York] where some--and we went to the same schools, where you know she developed her own, you know she always had her own personality, but where she's more outspoken about, you know her own ideas.  And I remember thinking, wait, wait, different from mine?  Wait (laughter).  I remember that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's true, though. Because I used to tell my--I'm an oldest child (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I would tell them, like--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 663492
Speaker 1: Can you just describe family life in, in your neighborhood [St. George, Staten Island, New York]?  And I would like--before you even do--I'd like you to tell me what, about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well you know my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] stayed, she, she went to school to be a teacher.  And they got married before she finished [District of Columbia Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and she decided that because they could, that she would stay home.  She in fact thought she would--that, that was a, a great luxury, you know, to be able to stay home with your children.  And she thought that's what she would do, though her life actually changed in dramatic ways.  But she was still--she was going to school part of the time when I was growing up, getting her--finishing her bachelor's degree, getting her master's degree.  But mostly she was home with us, that's what I remember.  And so she was a very hands on, she was an educator, you know, and she was a very hands on person.  I remember she was a fight- if anything she was in the schools all the time; I'd be like, "Oh, please mom."  The teachers, I don't know what they thought of her, demanding, demanding, demanding.  Were we doing this, or we were doing that? She made--I have to credit her for making me the writer that I am because we had these stories with spelling words that you had to write, and she made me write them over and over and over again.  And I remember in third grade finally going to my teacher and crying and saying, "Please don't send it home.  Can I do it here? Because she's gonna make me keep writing it over."  She--so I remember you know, summers we, we didn't do much in the way of camp; sometimes we did.  You know like a, a week or something.  But I remember you know, museums and you know, my mother was a wonderful cook.  We'd go to apple orchards and pick apples and strawberries that we'd cook, she'd cook.  We'd cook wonderful things; cookies and all the foods from the islands that I really love.  And you know some of--you know summer to me was you know a lot of--my [maternal] grandmother [Elizabeth Smith] would come and a lot of those--the fruits that she would, you know, sneak in her suitcase when I'm like--I don't know the immigration folks would have been happy, but she brought fish, she brought fruits and you know I really remember that, those--the taste of--that was summer for me was you know when we would have those, those wonderful fruits and things like that.
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  We were--my parents loved music.  They were not musical themselves, but we were.  And they played a lot of music at home.  A lot of Motown for instance, so I can sing almost anything for you.  And we, like I said, they were not musicians or anything, but they got a piano and so we played, I played the piano mostly and then my sister [Christina Swarns] did a little.  She played the flute and I played the clarinet and the bassoon.  So my mother is not--neither of my parents are great dancers, but I do remember them doing their dancing (laughter), which always made us laugh.
Story_ID: 663493
Speaker 1: Talk about your block, you know the block you lived on and who the neigh- you know the look of the block. 'Cause I looked at St. George [Staten Island, New York] and they ca- they have some beautiful homes there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  It was you know like I said, single family homes.  They were--most of them were single.  This particular block had some very distinctive looking houses, our house was not one of those, but you know it was a three bedroom house with one bathroom and the neighbors were pretty much the same.  We were the only black family on the, on the block.  I remember the Ricardis [ph.] across the street, they had a lot of boys.  I had a very good friend who lived up the block whose name was Nicole [ph.], and she died very young.  She had I guess a brain aneurism, I still, I still remember that.  And it was a, it was an interesting--St. George was an interesting mix.  Like I said, we were the only black family.  But there was a German family down the street with a girl our age.  And at school there were Hispanic families.  So there was, there was a, a mix, but you know not, not--certainly not a whole lot of black families.  But it was a, you know it was a--and you know sizeable yards and you know so I just remember kind of running back and forth with friends and friends coming around and you know, the block where those two girls who I was friends with, but you know down the street there were others.  And so I remember just a lot of kind of, of back and forth and outside time you know, running around.
Story_ID: 663494
Speaker 1: And how would you describe yourself as a young person?
Speaker 2: I think I was a--kind of a serious person.  I think I, I really--I read a lot.  I think, I think I was prob- I certainly was confident when it came to my younger sister [Christina Swarns], I certainly thought I knew everything when it came to, you know, in the house when who knew what among the children.  But I don't know, I don't, I don't think I would describe myself as enormously outgoing.  You know I had friends, but I was definitely the more--I always--I was the kid who always had a book with her.  I'd go to a--you know my cousin's birthday party and bring a book and she'd go like, "(Makes sound) That's, that's Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Swarns]."
Speaker 1: So you had a quiet demeanor.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: So if books were your outlet in many ways, what was going on inside your head and what, what kind of things were you reading and, and where were those, you know taking you in many ways?  'Cause you know sometimes people live inside their, their heads.
Speaker 2: I really, you know I read a lot of Nancy Drew, actually.  I loved to get those books.  I read a lot of, you know, I actually just bought my niece a Madeleine L'Engle book called 'The Wrinkle in Time' [sic. 'A Wrinkle in Time'].  I read a lot of kind of science fiction-y, magical kind of books.  I read a lot of--my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] because of her background, was a big Anglophile, so I loved, you know 'Wuthering Heights' [Emily Bronte] and 'Jane Eyre' [Charlotte Bronte] and all of that.  I loved going places.  I think--that's really--I, I loved going places and I went--when I was older I got on planes, but when I was younger I went in my head.
Story_ID: 663495
Speaker 1: Talk about school.  So your elementary school.  So your mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] is very involved in your education and she's taking parenting very seriously you know, obviously.  So, so where, where are you going to school?
Speaker 2: I went to P.S. 16 [P.S. 16, John J. Driscoll School, Staten Island, New York], which was just a few blocks away from where we lived [in St. George, Staten Island, New York].  And it was a public school.  It did not have the best scores, which my mother looked at very carefully, but they did at the time--it's now out of favor, but they did tracking.  And so they tracked students according to their ability and you know their, their scores or whatever.  And my mother saw that in the highest tracked classes the scores were quite high.  And she was convinced that her daughters would certainly be there, so she thought it would be worth, you know taking a gamble with it.
Speaker 1: Also, what did she do then?  You're saying that she got you--
Speaker 2: So when, when they moved there, that school that I went to, if you looked at the numbers, did not seem like such a great school.  But because the children--and they, they, they tracked children according to, you know, their scores or whatever.  She could see that those children in the, in what they call I don't know, I don't even remember what--the highest tier classes did very well.  She just felt confident that we would do well enough coming in and continue to do well enough to be in those classes.  And that, you know, even though the school overall didn't look so good, those classes looked very good.
Speaker 1: So, so she was right then, right?
Speaker 2: She was right.
Speaker 1: She was right, okay.
Speaker 2: I got a very good education there.
Speaker 1: So how--so you had a public school education.
Speaker 2: Entirely.
Speaker 1: And a very good education.  So tell me whether just--teachers, I know you said to your third grade teacher.  Did you particularly like your third grade teacher?
Speaker 2: I think my mother did not particularly like that teacher (laughter).  I remember my fourth and fifth grade teachers.  I think that's Mr. Burnstein [ph.] and Ms. Laruso [ph.].  The band teacher also, Larry Larizano [ph.] was a, a real important person because we were so involved in, in music.  But you know my fourth grade teacher was very interested in, in the city and in, in newspapers.  Actually he had us read newspapers.  And in city government and just in life in the city.  And my fifth grade teacher Ms. Laruso was very interested in, in world cultures.  And that interested me enormously.  So I, I really had very good experiences with my teachers.
Speaker 1: Now when did you start playing the clarinet?  What age then?  'Cause you said you played the--
Speaker 2: I played the piano first.  I was not a good clarinet player.  Probably I would say maybe second or third grade.  And I switched to the bassoon when I was in middle school [I.S. 61, William A. Morris School, Staten Island, New York].  And I was not a great bassoon player either.  I was a, a quite good piano player and singer.  And I could--you know so I could read music and--but the piano was my strength of the--I could, I could kind of go along with the clarinet and the bassoon.  Anyway with bassoons, there were so few of them.  If you did anything, it was okay (laughter).  But really the piano was my strongest point, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. And you started you said in second.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Story_ID: 663496
Speaker 1: I would also like to know just family life.  Are there any, like you know chores or you know, or holidays or you know, I mean church.  You, you went to Catholic--
Speaker 2: We actually didn't.  You know my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] was raised in the Catholic church, but when I was growing up she drifted away.  And so I did not do all the sacraments, I did not go to Catholic school.  And in fact did not do all of those things until I was an adult and decided to.  So church was not a big part of my growing up.
Speaker 1: But what about holidays and things like that?  Or you know you have family also.
Speaker 2: Lots, yes, yes.  So holidays, you know were just really big family affairs.  As I mentioned, my mother's one of ten kids and so I had uncles, many, many cousins as well as you know my father's [Joseph Swarns] family in Queens [New York].  And so I remember we would go to Queens sometimes people--for some reason my parents' house was particularly for her family and her younger brothers, a center of--and it still is.  It's where everyone seemed to come.  And so there was, there was always--there were always lots and lots of people.
Speaker 1: So you grew up around a lot of cousins.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So which were the biggest holidays, Christmas, Thanksgiving?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Christmas and Thanksgiving.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so everyone would sort of gather and--
Speaker 2: There were never--they, they would never say no.  It was never too crowded.  Even now I say, "Mom, you don't have room--." "No, there's room."  (Laughter) It's like, "No, there isn't."
Speaker 1: So she liked the holidays.
Story_ID: 663497
Speaker 1: What about your father [Joseph Swarns]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm hearing, I'm not hearing as much about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, yeah well he really--and, and something he I think regrets much later in life.  But he worked a ton.  And so you know my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] as a, as a black woman at that time, had you know it was quite a privilege to be able to be a housewife and to stay home with your kids.  But the price was that my father worked and worked and worked.  And there were times where he would leave early in the morning before I woke up and would come back after I went to sleep.  In fact I remember he, he worked at an air conditioning company in Manhattan [New York] for a while and then decided to go into business for himself.  And he bought a couple of laundromats in Brooklyn [New York].  And I--over time he sold them.  And I remember when--and he became a real estate broker.  He kind of had different phases of his professional life.  But I remember when he finally--you know it was really when he was running his own business that it was just so much work.  And I remember when he sold them and you know was transitioning into this new life and that he was all of a sudden more present.  And I remember it being jarring because I wasn't used to him being there and I wasn't used to him weighing in.  And in a way I found it kind of like, well wait a minute, you know, who are you to come and tell us what to do now?
Speaker 1: Now how old were you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You know it must have been--I must have been, yeah, it must have been more kind of middle school [I.S. 61, William A. Morris School, Staten Island, New York] going into high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Because I mean really I know a little bit about the laundromat business and you have to watch it--
Speaker 2: It really was. It was kind of relentless kind of work.
Speaker 1: And actually sometimes the returns were small.
Speaker 2: And they, and they were.  And I think that's why he finally got out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so really--he was entrepreneurial.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: In his, in his dealings, okay.
Speaker 2: And both of them were very I feel very lucky in this, that they were very broad in their thinking.  You know my mother came from the Caribbean and so there was always--I grew up knowing there was a world out there.  And my father, even though my father never traveled much really until I think he met my mother, outside the country.  They had--he had a great interest in kind of the world and in political events.  We were you know, a two newspaper family.  We got The New York Times and the Staten Island Advance.  They were always listening to radio.  They were taking us to cultural events about Paul Robeson.  I remember going to hear Margaret Mead speak once at something.  They were--and, and they provided as I think probably a lot of African Americans families did, counter narratives to, you know, the, the overarching narratives sometimes.  I remember vividly for instance in school when the Iranian crisis, the hostage crisis took place.  And I remember of course all the coverage and--but I also remember from my parents which is what I, which I rarely heard of in school and rarely read about, was about the shah [Mohammad Reza Pahlavi] and what a, a dictatorial leader he was.  And so they--I, I really appreciate that they, they helped me to think broadly and they exposed me at a young age to a range of kind of cultural things and intellectual things even though they were not--my father never finished college.  He left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] after a year or so, he ran out of money.  My mother did get a master's degree in, in education.  But you know, they, you know they didn't go to--you know like in a New York [New York] literary sense, go to salons or think that they were very--they encouraged intellectual life.
Speaker 1: They were aspirational, too, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: And wanting, wanting--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --better things for their--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --their, their girls [Swarns and her sisters, Christina Swarns and Jessica Swarns].
Story_ID: 663498
Speaker 1: I want to ask you because you had referenced it.  And I'm wondering at what point that began, if it was a little later.  But the realizing that you're very much in the minority, you know.  At a time--and you know you're, you're coming along--and that's why I'm saying you're one of our younger, younger ones.  You're coming at a time when you, you know you're at the tail end, really, of the Civil Rights Movement.  And so you were growing up during, during that time period.  But I'm just wondering, not with, you know we're not in a post-racial society (unclear).  But what, what are the, what are the incidences?  What was difficult?  You know you said about being in a, you know, a largely white community, and actually in a, a city that is really quite, you know, so diverse.  So what, what, what, what were the things--and did that happen after you know, fifth grade?
Speaker 2: I--one of my earliest memories was being on a school bus, and this is probably when we first moved to Staten Island [New York].  And a little girl said, "Oh, you look like a spider" because I had--my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] had me in all of the braids.  And you know, it, it was, it was, it was an interesting and complicated existence for a little girl like me, frankly.  Because the one hand, it was a--you know there's no--this was a world quite different from what my parents--there was no segregation.  Everyone--all, all of my friends because I was the only one in a lot of these classes, were, were white.  You know I went and spent sleepovers, they slept over at my house, you know.  That was, I was very much accepted in that way.  But, but at the same time there were those kinds of things where someone might say, "Oh, what's up with your hair?"  Or there were places in Staten Island, particularly when I was older, where you felt like you couldn't or shouldn't probably go; you might avoid because you might think you might not be welcome.
Speaker 1: What, what places?
Speaker 2: There was a neighborhood called Rosebank [Staten Island, New York], which is--if you take Bay Street out toward the Verrazano Bridge [Verrazano-Narrows Bridge], and it's a community that was just known to be not welcoming and that maybe someone might throw bottles at you or, or something like that.  So there was this kind of--it was this kind of duality because you know I was on the one hand quite accepted.  On the other hand, you knew that you could venture only so far and, and be, and be confident that you would be okay, you know.
Story_ID: 663499
Speaker 1: I want to ask you 'cause I'm a little curious about this.  Someone could mistake you because of your skin color, as not--they wouldn't necessarily say you were African American.  You could be Hispanic, you could be--I mean you could be a variety of things cause you're, you know you have lighter skin.  So was there--was that, you know maybe your hair wasn't straight at that point.
Speaker 2: Right, no so it wasn't.  Though you know those kinds of issues were--there were--classes used to--and color issues.  My mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] you know, is very fair and you know my father's [Joseph Swarns] quite dark and we ended up somewhere in between.  But there was--
Speaker 1: So your mother's--could your mother in another time period have passed?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Not passed, but on her birth certificate for instance, it describes her as mixed race.  And they--in, in, in the Bahamas if you know that little island where they come from [Long Island, Bahamas], it's a very--it's, it's known as a mixed race community.  And you know with some of the kind of negatives that come with that.  It was a kind of decidedly, purposefully mixed race community where there was a lot of intermarriage and a lot of separation, frankly.  My grandfather [Blatchley Smith] even though my grandmother [Elizabeth Smith], my grandmother was--my grandmother was, was, was very, very light.  But the, the son of the wealthy man she married was, was darker.  But he was very much, you know, color struck as they said.  He, he didn't want the children playing with darker skinned children.  And it's one of those things I always think it must have been some form of rebellion that all of the girls married dark men.
Speaker 1: You know because that's interesting, you know 'cause in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] they called the brown paper bag test.
Speaker 2: Right, and my--it's interesting because my parents you know went to university then in, in D.C. were very much aware of that.  And did not embrace that in any way, shape or form.  And well my father was dark anyway.  My mother never, never did.  I, I--and I think her mother didn't either.  But, but--
Speaker 1: But, it has other complications.
Speaker 2: It does, and so for instance in the community where I was growing up [St. George, Staten Island, New York], you know so some of the, the black students there didn't like me.  I had the, you know the Oreo syndrome.  The way I talked, the way I looked, you know there were girls always threatening to beat me up, black girls.  And my mother I remember wanting to walk me to school.  I was like, you know, "Frankly, it's worse.  If you come it's worse, I'd rather get beat up."  I never did.  But so I was, I was kind of navigating a bunch of, a bunch of things.  And, and color was part of that.
Speaker 1: You know too--it's really interesting.  I mean it's complicated because the color has given privilege.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know but at the same time, your--you know it also--I've heard people a little older than you talking about how they, you know, they wanted to have a 'fro and you know they got it from both sides, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Darker, darker skin women will say that you'd have an easier time with (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right. Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So it's still, you know that's--it's interesting the, the age and still--
Speaker 2: Right, how this--yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's still an issue.
Speaker 2: It is yeah, to a certain degree (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So but--
Story_ID: 663500
Speaker 1: Did she have--like this is what I'm--you know the other thing I'm curious about is your mother's [Lucille Smith Swarns] messaging as someone of you know, Caribbean descent.  Was there messaging in the household, or what kind of messaging existed that may have said that we are different than you know, regular, I don't want to say regular black Americans.
Speaker 2: Regular--no, they didn't.  And in fact I always felt like, like my family--I don't know you know because there is of course in New York [New York] there's plenty of it.  That Caribbean, African American divide.  I always felt like I was explaining to you know my Caribbean friends, no, no, no you don't get it, or explaining to--no, no, no.  You don't get it.  But within my house there wasn't any of that.  We were--I didn't even--she didn't even kind of--there was no--we were just black people.  I, I like to--we were just black people.  The Caribbean thing was not something that--and also because she came when she was so young herself.  So really the most strongest influences that I felt like I got was you know, food, songs, stories.  But there was none of this kind of separation, and maybe because you know she, she chose to marry, you know, an African American man and they, they both had a kind of, you know they, they, they both thought that you know--were interested in kind of the issues of black people here and abroad.  And they did, they thought they were, they were, these were commonalities; they were not kind of divisive.  But outside of my house though, I you know increasingly became aware that actually you know, this we're all together thing was not always what I encountered.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's very--you know it has a--and it's not, it's interesting even now how I've heard young people recently say that you know schools are actually admitting non-slave as the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right.  Well you know it's so interesting.  You know I remember reading about, and I think it was Professor Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and some others who looked at some of the elite institutions and who the black students were.  And, and finding that many of them were you know, children of immigrants or immigrants themselves.  And you know I talked to my sister about it.  It's funny because actually even though I did not grow up in a family that, you know, focused very much on, on that.  In the end, a lot of my friends ended up being like me, though.  I ended up having a lot of friends who as later in life, you know in high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and onward, who were children of, of immigrants.  Whether from the English speaking Caribbean or Spanish speaking Caribbean because I think there was, you know, there were similarities that really kind of connected us.  Very strict--part of it--there's so many similar--I always tell people there are--the differences are, at least in my family, there's so many similarities.  Crazy strict parents, you know you can have some southern--my, my father's family did--I had crazy strict parents.  One Caribbean, one, one African American one.  Real focus on education and on work.  I think sometimes folks in the Caribbean community want to take that for themselves, but my, you know, grandmother [Ruth Swarns] ultimately on my father's side, got her associate's degree.  She was working as an employment counselor for the labor department [New York State Department of Labor], and was very proud of that.  And education was very important to her and to my father [Joseph Swarns].  And even though he didn't finish college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you know, he studied math and he, I remember he was--my mother was crazy in writing the stories over again.  He had the blackboard and we would be doing all this math.  I was like, oh my gosh, I can't escape it from one side or the other.  Education I think--and, and if you look historically speaking I think education are really important strands for, for both communities.  But I did find that you know, that as I grew older that I, I found commonalities with children of immigrants a lot.
Speaker 1: How about the, the food?  Did you eat peas and rice?  Okay, so okay--
Speaker 2: But I love all of it 'cause--fried chicken and collard greens and my, 'cause my both, both of my grandmothers were fabulous cooks.  And so I got the best of everything.  So I love soul food and sweet potatoes and even I mean, you know chitlins and nobody makes chitlins anymore (laughter).  But my mother learned how to do all of this, you know, as well as you know, coconut candy.  You know johnny cake, grouper, you know all of that stuff.
Speaker 1: So when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Plantains.
Speaker 1: Plantains.
Speaker 2: Which I could eat every day.
Speaker 1: Right. You do?
Speaker 2: I could, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It would not be good for my waistline.
Story_ID: 663501
Speaker 1: Middle school was from what year to year? Sixth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So sixth to n- sixth, sixth, seventh and eighth, yeah.
Speaker 1: And eighth, okay and you were--
Speaker 2: In Stanton Island [New York].  I went to I.S. 61 [I.S. 61, William A. Morris School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is your mother [Lucille Smith Swarns], had she started back to work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother started back to work when I was, yeah in, in middle school.  And she started back to work as a substitute teacher and I think probably by the time I was in high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], she was actually teaching full time.  And I, I still remember the real debates and arguments raging about my mother's return to work and you know, my father [Joseph Swarns] was a very unreformed macho man.  Though he is so reformed now, it's like unbelievable the transformation. They both had a transformation.  But I remember that was, you know, that was--he--it was hard for him to decide that you know he could cope with that.  And my mother you know who went from, you know, thinking that she would be a housewife for the rest of her life, ended up becoming, you know, a superintendent in the New York City school system [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education].  So she had quite a rise.  But it was, it was after you know, later in life, you know, after her children were mostly grown.
Speaker 1: So by that time, though really your sister [Christina Swarns] and you are in middle school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know that she says, you know I've got it, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now what are--who are your parents' friends at this point and you know are you growing up or is it more family?
Speaker 2: It's mostly family.
Speaker 1: It's family, okay.
Speaker 2: Almost all family.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  And so summers you said they weren't--you didn't do camping or you don't think--
Speaker 2: Not much, not much.  We were mostly at home and did stuff at home.  We would go sometimes you know back to visit--to the Bahamas and we would go sometimes I remember drives to North Carolina when my father still had family there.  And we would do camp, but not the way people do camp.  It was--we--I, I know we spent many, many summers without camp.
Speaker 1: So are you--when you went to the Bahamas, who were you visiting?  Were you visiting Nassau [Bahamas] or would you--
Speaker 2: Nassau.  No, in fact I never went--we didn't go to Long Island [Bahamas].  In fact we've only recent--in recent years gone back to Long Island.
Speaker 1: And where is Long Island located?
Speaker 2: It's in the Bahamas too.  The Bahamas is tons of tiny little islands.  And it's maybe a half hour flight from Nassau.  It's a tiny little, tiny little place.
Speaker 1: So it's, it's very rural, then?
Speaker 2: It is really small and I hesitate as a journalist to give a number, but thousands of people, maybe like three thousand people.  I think they got electricity fairly you know, in the past ten, fifteen, twenty years.  It's a very small community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really? Wow. So when you look and see where you're, you know, your family came from.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663502
Speaker 1: Okay, so I want to talk about--because you started I think in high school.  Or let me ask you when did you start your interest in writing?  I know reading, did reading lead to writing?
Speaker 2: Right. I always loved writing.  In fact, I in elementary school [P.S. 16, John J. Driscoll School, Staten Island, New York] thought I was such a good writer that I would give stories to my friends as gifts, my poor friends suffering these, you know, little short stories that I wrote.  So I, I always knew that I wanted to be a writer.  I thought I wanted to write fiction, that's really who--'cause that's what I love to read.  It was only in high school that I started thinking about journalism.  I went to Stuyvesant High School, which is in Manhattan [New York].  And I took the ferry [Staten Island Ferry].
Speaker 1: Now to get into Stuyvesant, you have to take a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a, it's a--yeah it's one of the specialized high schools.  You take an exam to get in.  And the funny thing is that Stuyvesant is a math, science school, so how I got in there, I have no idea because math and science are not strong suits at all.  But they actually were at the time wonderful in the humanities too and I really loved languages and I had started taking Spanish in middle school [I.S. 61, William A. Morris School, Staten Island, New York] and continued there.  And wonderful writing teachers and in my junior year if you were kind of far enough along and your grades were good enough, you could take a semester out and work somewhere.  And I worked--took a semester working at a publication which was called New Youth Connections [YCteen], which was a monthly newspaper that was kind of written for and by teenagers and distributed in the high schools in New York City [New York, New York].  And that's really what introduced me to journalism.
Speaker 1: Now this program, how did it work?  You're saying that you had a semester out, so you--'cause I saw a recent program in Atlanta [Georgia], but it wasn't--it was more science.  But they--so how did it work and where did you go?
Speaker 2: So basically I had a semester where I did not, I didn't go to school.  I went to New Youth Communications [sic.] every day and they had offices in the city.  And I--you know we put out this newspaper and that's what I did for, I think it was the fall semester of my junior year.
Speaker 1: So the students were specially chosen from different schools.
Speaker 2: Right, you could, you could choose what kind of internship you wanted.  And I was interested in writing and so that was the one that I applied for and was accepted for.
Story_ID: 663503
Speaker 1: So I wanna ask, because you know you were talking about work, you know, working for the newspaper [New Youth Connections; YCteen] and I don't know what kind of issues you were covering.  Were they cover- were you covering issues of concern to young people or I mean or were you following the issues that were being reported?
Speaker 2: It's kind of a mix, you know I wrote articles about college tuition, you know how you know students could, you know manage just kind of sort that out.  I wrote--there were a lot of issues of police brutality, you know at the time.  And I wrote about young people getting active and protesting about issues.  I met and interviewed Desmond Tutu actually, and so I had an early connection to, to South Africa.  And it was, it was a really--it was a great experience.  I was you know there were adults you know who actually put the newspaper together.  But they gave us a lot of independence in terms of I was, you know I think managing editor of the paper and so we had news meetings and we, you know debated the issues.  I learned to type there and you know it was, it was a, it was a really, really good experience.
Speaker 1: And I have read that the offices were located at West 22nd Street.
Speaker 2: I think that's right, that's right.  And they're still around today, Youth Communications [sic. Youth Communication, New York, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: And that, you know this--it was you know it's been a program that's been in existence.
Speaker 2: Yeah for, for many years now.
Speaker 1: For many years. I think--
Speaker 2: The guy who ran it, Keith Hefner, got you know, one of these genius grants [MacArthur Fellowship] and it's been--what was wonderful about it was that it really brought together students from all over the city, all you know, you know enormous ethnic and class diversity in, in one place.
Speaker 1: You know now that I, I see here it actually began--you were in the program I think in 1985.  But it began in 1981, so it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, so it was still young, okay, interesting.
Speaker 1: It was, it was still a--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a new, new program.
Story_ID: 663504
Speaker 1: You know but around this time, 'cause I'm thinking you know these are, this is the mid-'80s [1980s], that you're in and you know what are you aware about what's going on sort of in the outside community?  This is the time of Re- (unclear).
Speaker 2: Reagan. Yes, very much aware of that.
Speaker 1: You know what are--and you know you live in a Republican stronghold [St. George, Staten Island, New York] and there are people who loved him, but the black community--
Speaker 2: Right, did not, right.
Speaker 1: So what, what discussions are hearing?  And then also we have Reverend Jackson's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] presidential campaign.  And I, you know it may be that those are not even issues, but I'm just wondering what were the issues that you were hearing even around the dinner table?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah certainly I remember you know, my parents [Lucille Smith Swarns and Joseph Swarns] were Democrats and you know, they're black people, but not fans of, of Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  I remember the ketchup, vegetable thing (laughter).  I--
Speaker 1: You mean his statement about (unclear) the ketchup, the vegetables (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  You know I remember you know again as I said in New York City [New York, New York] as well, there was a lot of concerns about police brutality in the black community.  A lot of you know, killings of people by police and concerns about that kind of thing.  So you know I was kind of aware of that at the same time as you know, I was--you know being an intern [at Youth Communication, New York, New York] and you know in high school and wishing I could date, except my parents wouldn't let me.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no dating, no, they were very--that's why--that's really where I bonded with those Caribbean girls 'cause they were like, "Oh, yeah, no, no, no."  And--
Speaker 1: You mean they said you could date at eighteen, is that it?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know if they ever actually formally put a year on it, but there was no--there was just no--there was no dating.  There was no dating.  We had a crazy curfew compared to other people.
Speaker 1: What was your curfew?
Speaker 2: It was ten o'clock.  You know to be a senior in high school and have a ten o'clock curfew was--so you know, but I was in the, you know I was in the orchestra.  And they did, you know my parents were--as a, as a parent now, I marvel at the amount of freedom they gave me.  Because you know, I went to Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] during the battle days in New York where there was a lot of crime and concern about crime.  I was a thirteen year old, getting up, walking to the ferry [Staten Island Ferry], taking an hour commute to school every day.  You know back, you know one way.  So you know two hours back and forth.  On the subways and you know, they--I think maybe it was a different time too.  But, but they, they were willing to give me a lot of room in some ways and then no room in others (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well they, but that--for that, that was education.
Speaker 2: That's right and that's really what they said. You know, they, they said, "Education, education, education; boys later," (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true.  You might (unclear).  Good girls like boys.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 663505
Speaker 1: So you graduate.  Where are you thinking you're going to be, going to--
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: --to college.
Speaker 2: I only applied to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], which I think devastated my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] who was fine about my going to Howard University, but I think wanted to be able to say that I got into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and decided to go to Howard University.  But I knew really what I wanted to do and I--after all of these years of being the only one, I felt like it was really important for me to do this.  And, and I felt, you know at Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], imagine people are like what are you doing?  Shouldn't you be thinking of other things?  But I just was convinced that I knew what I wanted and that I would get the kind of education that I needed and, and more.  And, and the more was important.
Speaker 1: Did you go visit, or was it your father's description, or--
Speaker 2: Actually, my father [Joseph Swarns] never talked a whole lot about Howard, actually.  I remember going to my grandmother's [Ruth Swarns] house and finding some of his old notebooks and stuff from there.  And I think, in high school, and I think that was the first time--I think in some ways there's a--it was--he--some of his best friends in life came from Howard.  But at the same time I think it was a hard thing because he had to leave and I think that was a hard, a hard thing.  So I mean I did grow up with stories about the apartment that they lived in and how they, they shoveled the coal into the furnace.  They, they had a little part time job, made a little money that way.  But no they didn't, they didn't try to--he never--well you know there are some Howard alums where you know--and I knew people like that whose parents and grandparents and they were, they knew that that's where they were going, or at least their parents really--and they never--they really left it open.  But like I said, I think there was a part of my mother that just wanted to be able to say she--but I think it was the best decision I, I made.
Speaker 1: Did your friends, were your friends going--I mean I've heard of other people making decisions like this, but were your friends going to--
Speaker 2: No.  Were my friends going to Howard?
Speaker 1: To Howard.
Speaker 2: No.  No, they were going to Cornell [Cornell university, Ithaca, New York] or you know they were--no, they did the traditional--even, even, even my black friends.  I don't--I think I was the only one I knew at Stuyvesant who decided to go to a historically black college [HBCU].
Speaker 1: Did you--so did you go visit first?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You did, okay.  And can you talk about the visit?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a whole lot about that.
Speaker 1: Did your parent take you--did your parents take you or where--
Speaker 2: Maybe I didn't visit.  No I must have visited.  I, I, you know I truly don't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 663506
Speaker 1: So you decide you're going.  Your mother is--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She might argue with me about that, but that's how I, I felt she felt.
Speaker 1: Well no, (unclear). So when you go there, talk about why it was the best experience.  Because this is--you're saying I just needed another--I needed to not be so isolated.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  It was, it was really important for me.  And you know it was a place where I didn't have to explain myself.  I did--no one's asking me what happens to your skin in the summertime?  Will you tan too?  You know I, I just didn't have to explain and I liked--you know at a place like Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] of course, race and history are a lot of the conversations.  But it didn't have to be.  It just kind of--everyone, you know it was just--you could, you could just let it go for a bit sometimes too.  And, and that was a nice, that was a nice feeling.  And it was also the kind of place where there were you know, whole range of black people from all over the country, from all kinds of, you know, economic stations of life.  From, from all over the world.  And so you know I was meeting with--I guess I would describe--I guess we were, I guess we were middle class.  It's so hard to--we were, you know my parents [Lucille Smith Swarns and Joseph Swarns] didn't make a whole lot of money, though.  I mean we were middle class, we were aspirationally middle class for sure.  In terms of income, I don't know what we would have been.  But I met people at Howard who, you know, wow I had never known that there were--these were wealthy black people who I, I had never kind of--and as well as you know, people you know from Africa, from the Caribbean who had spent their--not like me, who were born here and had family, but who had grown up in these places.  And, and it was, it was great, it was great.
Speaker 1: So you entered in nineteen eighty--
Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Nine [1989], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Did I?  No, '85 [1985], '85 [1985] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-five [1985], okay.
Speaker 2: Graduated in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 663507
Speaker 1: Was Dean Dates [HistoryMaker Jannette L. Dates], was sh- who was head of the communications department [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You know I did liberal arts.  I was not a, I was not a communications major.  I knew, it was actually funny.  I had done--I'd been on someone's radio show, you know I did a lot of--you know a surprising amount of radio and TV for a young person because of this experience I had at New Youth Connections [YCteen].  And this guy had gone to Columbia's journalism school, and I really wanted to go to Columbia's journalism school, grad school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].  And he told me that they would never accept anyone who did not have a liberal arts background.  And so I said, "Okay, that's fine."  I know that I want to be a journalist now, and I'm just gonna go and get a liberal arts degree and, and somewhere along the way I, I realized that that wasn't the case.  But, but I was a Spanish major and what they call black diaspora minor, which was kind of African American, Caribbean African studies.  And--but I always knew, you know, I wanted to be a journalist so I worked at the, at the student newspaper [The Hilltop] and as a reporter, as an editor.  And they--the--I'm still--some of the faculty that I'm closest to are in the school of communications [Cathy Hughes School of Communications, Washington, D.C.] 'cause they kind of adopted me.  They saw that I was very serious about what I was doing.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the faculty that mentored you?
Speaker 2: Dr. Kaggwa, who's still there, was a dean and--
Speaker 1: Is that, was that his first name?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Kaggwa from Ghana I think.  And, and then you know the history and Spanish side, Vincent Peloso [Vincent C. Peloso] was in the black diaspora area, but with a strong emphasis on Latin American studies.  And, and then the language side of things.  Some of the language teachers I was really, you know--and I've seen kind of over the years too.
Story_ID: 663508
Speaker 1: So how would you describe your four years there?
Speaker 2: Great, great.  I studied abroad.  I, I spent a semester in Bogota, Colombia and again my parents, you know this was a time when they were--I mean they were kidnapping you.  And the Bogota people are like (unclear).  You know I was an editor at the student newspaper [The Hilltop].  You know I was in the honors program.  One of the great things, you know it was a side benefit, but I, I benefitted enormously from it in retrospect, was coming from Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I got a free ride.  I have no debt.  They covered my education entirely.  And so--and probably Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] wouldn't have done that, mom [Lucille Smith Swarns].  So but no it was really wonderful.  I felt like I had a great you know it was, it was just really rich in so many ways.  Both in terms of the education and in terms of me as a person.
Speaker 1: Did you--would you say that you deepened yourself as a, a black person, or--you are more validated?  I mean I'm just--
Speaker 2: I think it--I guess it, it's hard to put into words.  I think I always felt a sense of outsiderness.  And I wasn't an outsider anymore there.  And I felt it gave me a sense of grounding that even though you know, as a minority in a lot of respects you are an outsider.  It just, it, it, it made me feel like I belong somewhere.  And in growing up I think my parents also you know, their--the way they, they--the way they viewed themselves also kind of had this outsiderness too, which perhaps I picked up on.  You know my father [Joseph Swarns] I think often felt that as an African American man, an African American man, African American doesn't always leave my lips so easily because I--it's, you know it's new-ish.  I always feel like I'm going to be that--I hope I won't--that colored lady who won't change, you know.  I feel like I'm black, but he, he always felt like he didn't belong, you know; that this country didn't accept him; that this was, you know that this was a country that rejected him and, and, and black people.  And I think probably maybe my mother's [Lucille Smith Swarns], part of my mother's appeal to him was that she came from a country, a black country [Bahamas] where they were--but, but they both had I think a sense of being outside of things.  And in some ways you know as an outsider, you kind of--it gives you a kind of critical sense of--I mean critical meaning like not being critical, but being able to evaluate something in a different way than if you're an insider.  But, but Howard gave me that, gave me a different feeling.  And, and, and I, you know I think that that was important.
Speaker 1: So you, you did well academically.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) A's.
Speaker 2: Very, yeah.  We, we were not allowed--there was no room for--we were not allowed to have bad grades, ever.  And you know my parents were very rigorous and strict, but I appreciate--in college I appreciated it because I had very, I had very good study habits (laughter).  I did, you know so--
Speaker 1: So socially, what was--was it better socially though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).  Howard is, Howard is great socially, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear). Okay. You remember when (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right, oh yeah, no, no, we're away.  They didn't like the boyfriends, but they had to accept them.
Story_ID: 663509
Speaker 1: So during that time, though what are you doing during summers?  I know you spent the time in Bogota [Colombia], but what do you--
Speaker 2: So Bogota was actually during a fall semester.  So during that first summer I worked at the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] in Harlem [New York, New York].  And then I had internships--
Speaker 1: Now was Mr. Tatum [Wilbert Tatum], he was still alive at that point.
Speaker 2: Though I had virtually no interaction.  I was, you know--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, yes.  I went to Cuba that first summer after freshman year too.  I found a group of journalists that was going and went.  I--and the second--my--the summers after my sophomore and junior year I had internships at The Wall Street Journal.
Speaker 1: So did you enjoy those?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I couldn't believe people would pay me for writing.
Speaker 1: And did you--were, were those through special programs?
Speaker 2: They--no, they just you know the journalism school like a lot of journalism schools, had you know they'd have career fairs and they'd direct you to other places that were having career fairs.  And, and I can't even remember where I met the recruiter, the guy who was the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] bureau chief who hired me.  I think it was not at a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] career fair, but it was just at one of those places where they were looking for interns, yeah.
Story_ID: 663510
Speaker 1: So when you graduate [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you--what are your thoughts at that point about where you're going to work or where you're going to live?
Speaker 2: I really wanted to--you know I wanted to be a journalist and I wanted to work overseas.  That's really what I wanted to do; I wanted to work in Latin America.  And so I wanted to go to Florida where I could use my language skills and, and then you know, find a way to become a foreign correspondent.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got hired.
Speaker 2: St. Petersburg Times [Tampa Bay Times], and I worked in their Tampa [Florida] office for two years.  And then I got hired by the Miami Herald.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where I spent four years.
Speaker 1: So that's pretty (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it hard because now newspapers are not starting to change yet--
Speaker 2: Not then, not then, not then.  I mean it's so dramatically different obviously from the way it is now.  But you know the St. Petersburg Times was, was known as kind of a writer's paper.  And a great place for young people.  And you know it was, it was a--I enjoyed being there.
Speaker 1: You know because I think I have read that it was the, the executive editor was a man named Clifton, Douglas Clifton.
Speaker 2: At the Herald.
Speaker 1: At the Herald (unclear).  Okay.  But when you say it was a--so how was it to be a little cub reporter?  Is that what they call you, cub reporters?
Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear) young.  It was great fun, it really was.  I mean I--
Speaker 1: So you were assigned to the metro desk, or--
Speaker 2: So I was in their Tampa office, so you know responsible, which was responsible for news in Tampa.  And I was initially a general assignment reporter, which meant I write whatever was happening in a given day.  And then in my second year I became a courts reporter, criminal courts reporter where I covered criminal cases.
Speaker 1: What did you find was important, you know to learn?  'Cause isn't it also--how do you get the inside scoop and you know, and hanging around the courthouse, or city hall and how to get the respect or you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean so how did you--
Speaker 2: It was challenging.  Courts was challenging because we were competing with the Tampa Tribune, which had you know, I forget, maybe two you know, criminal courts reporter and, and I was the only one.  So I wrote you know, two and three stories a day sometimes.  But you know I've always been lucky in that people tend to feel comfortable talking to me.  I--one of my biggest stories at the St. Pete Times was there was a guy who, a prosecutor who I knew from covering him, who was arrested and charged with taking a bribe.  And he talked to me actually about it, and I got subpoenaed, it was a whole thing.  So you know, it, it, it was a lot of work but it was really fun and I was young and I--the, you know--I really liked writing.  And you know I really--the one thing I kept from my younger days of you know thinking I wanted to be a novelist was that I, I really liked evocative writing, you know.  And so for instance, I never wanted to work at The New York Times.  If you had asked me then whether I wanted to work at The New York Times, I would have told you absolutely not.  I thought--I grew up reading and I thought it was boring.  People weren't allowed to write in a way that I thought you know, made you feel, see, hear anything.  And so I had no interest in working for The New York Times, um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.
Story_ID: 663511
Speaker 1: So you're saying after that you then go to the Miami Herald, and that's where Douglas Clifton writes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clifton, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they, they--under his I think there, they won a lot of Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize].
Speaker 2: We won a Pulitzer for Hurricane Andrew for sure, and I mean but the Herald, it wouldn't have just been him.  And frankly by the time I got to the Herald in '91 [1991], some would have said that our glory days were behind us.  The '80s [1980s] were--Iran-Contra [Iran-Contra Affair], they won a Pulitzer for.  I mean the Herald was a, a--it was a time when there were--in the country there were very, very strong regional papers and the Herald was one of them.  And one of the great appeals of a place like the Herald was one--for someone like me was that A, you're in Miami [Florida] which is, you know, such an international place.  And you don't have to go anywhere and you are almost, you know, somewhere else.  You know Spanish is widely spoke, I could speak Spanish all day long.  Also the Herald viewed the Caribbean as something that it covered as a matter of course.  So as a metro, working for metro they--you would go--I went to Haiti, I went to Guantanamo Bay [Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba] when we weren't holding terrorists there, we were holding refugees there.  It was, it was a great place for someone who really cared about Latin America and wanted to be a foreign correspondent to work.
Story_ID: 663512
Speaker 1: So did you in that, in the process, what are you learning about reporting and who is mentoring you, and, and is it--are there a lot of women, you know, we're coming to a point there are a lot of women in the newsroom.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a good number of women in the newsroom.  And there were a couple of people at the Herald [Miami Herald] who were helpful.  Sydney Freedberg [Sydney P. Freedberg] who probably by now has three Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize], had two I think maybe then.  And she sat near me.  And you know she was a very accomplished person; I was a--I, I was hired as a police reporter.  And quite frankly I was out of my league initially when I got there.  I had, I had very good clips as they say, my articles were very good because I was a really strong writer.  And also I tended to look at you know, at how things worked and, and looking behind things, not just what was seen.  You know just the news of the day.  So my clips were very strong in that way.  But I was not the strongest hustler in terms of you know, you know I, I just wasn't.
Speaker 1: Getting behind, getting, getting behind?
Speaker 2: Well just--I think I was--I had a, I had a more leisurely way (laughter).  Even though you know, I, I was a good deadline writer.  Like I said, I was writing two and three stories a day.  But I, I sometimes saw stories as--back then as, as a whole in and of themselves.  I did not kind of follow where they led and I didn't think about the next one.  This one leads to this and what follows that.  I, I just did not--I wrote my story, there, okay.  I'm gonna write another story.  So she was, she was really helpful.  One of the most important lessons I learned as a journalist I learned from her.  I had gotten a tip from someone, and I even forget how the tip came, that a white police officer had raped a young black woman.  And I was new, I didn't know anybody, I didn't know how I could figure it out.  Florida has very good public record laws.  So I requested and got the documents; but they were all redacted and you know I couldn't figure out that--I, I found out the name of the officer, but I think that's what I knew, I knew the name of the officer.  And I knew that he was on leave, but everything was redacted about it.  Even, you know, he was on leave but you know, even why he was on leave.  And I went to my editor and I said to him, "You know what?  I got this tip; I need some time, you know to try and see if I can get the story."  He was like, "Are you kidding?  You know, are the--you are the new police reporter, you're not gonna take two weeks to, you know, dive into something that we don't even know what's going to come of it.  No way."  So I remember going back to my desk feeling so discouraged and Sydney must have overheard me, or maybe I had mentioned it to her.  And she asked me what happened.  I said, "Well you know, oh well."  She said, "Did he tell you what to do after work?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Did he tell you what to do on the weekends?"  I said, "Well if I'm not working, no."  She said, "You can do as much or as little as you want about this story."  And it was the most empowering thing that anyone ever told me.  It was about kind of being able to set your own agenda within the parameters of what--so during the day I wrote about shootings and whatever.  And then on the weekends I, I figured out where this was, this incident supposedly occurred.  I went--I, I handed out my card.  She said, "Have you done everything?"  I was like, "No."  She was like, "Do everything."  And finally one day I had the case number.  I called the police department [Miami Police Department], the records unit and I said, "I've got case number blah, blah, blah, blah, and I'm just looking for the, the address of the incident."  And the person looked it up and laughed.  I remember he was a man, he laughed.  He said, "Who are you?"  And you can't lie about who you are.  I said, "I'm with the Miami Herald," and he gave me the information.  And I went, I found the woman and it was a banner head--you know, story across the front page.  And it was really--it was just really empowering because it told me A, that you know my instincts, I shouldn't, you know underestimate my instincts.  And that there's always a way, whether your editor believes in you or not, there's a way.
Story_ID: 663513
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She [Sydney P. Freedberg] had high standards, then?
Speaker 2: Very high standards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very high standards (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you say you worked all the time, was it to get your stories right?
Speaker 2: To get my stories right, I was single, I had time, I cared, you know.
Speaker 1: So what is the newsroom you're in?  It's the--no black or minorities in the newsroom?
Speaker 2: Not many, not many black reporters.  A decent number of Hispanic reporters.  The Miami Herald at that time had difficult relations with the largely Cuban community there.  There was a--there was a (speaking Spanish), "No lo creo Miami Herald," (unclear) what was it, "No lo creo." It was we don't believe the Miami Herald campaign where people were--the coverage of the, of Cuba and of the Cuban American community was often criticized there.  And you know, I think the black community didn't love the Herald either.  So it was, you know, complicated in that respect.  But I mean it was very interesting to write about, though, because of its complexities.
Speaker 1: Well this is also giving you another view of the world too in some respects, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, certainly, certainly.
Speaker 1: I mean you're, you're writing about--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Certainly much more about--I mean I knew in an academic sense obviously, and I had spent time in Bogota [Colombia] and obviously the English speaking Caribbean, some from my own family.  And I knew Cuba in an academic way, but kind of how it played out in the exile politics was something that was entirely new.  And also, you know the Cuban community and the black community did not always--it was quite a tense relationship there too.
Story_ID: 663514
Speaker 1: Now you were there [Miami Herald] how long, then?
Speaker 2: I was there from '89 [1989]--I'm sorry, '91 [1991] to '95 [1995].  I took a year off to get a master's degree [from the University of Kent at Canterbury; University of Kent, Canterbury, England].  I did a--
Speaker 1: Now I was interested, why was the master's, you know--
Speaker 2: I applied for a Rotary fellowship [Rotary Foundation].  There was a, a kind of Rotary fellowship where they would cover your graduate studies overseas, and I got one and they let me go.
Speaker 1: But you started I thought international--
Speaker 2: Relations, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go to Columbia University (unclear) [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah in the end, in the end I thought actually, I'm doing this, I don't need a journalism degree.  What I really want is more understanding of the area that I'm interested in, which you know at the time was, you know, doing kind of foreign work, so--
Speaker 1: So you, were you thinking that you wanted to be a foreign correspondent at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is what you--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I was working toward.
Speaker 1: Were there are lot of--even the--I mean I don't want to say even, but Guantanamo Bay [Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba], I mean that coverage, you mentioned Haiti.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know this is a lot of the sort of international issues (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: That are affecting actually people of color.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, amongst that.
Story_ID: 663515
Speaker 1: So what do you do when you--why do you leave the Mi- ?  Or is this--
Speaker 2: The Times got in touch with me and so even though I said I'd never work for them, they persuaded me that I could, I could write.  And also I had a, a friend, and I, I started reading The Times more carefully.  And I could see that they were letting people write in ways that were different from when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: So how did they contact you?  Was it--I mean are you at this point, the other person I have for you--are you active in any NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], or any of them?
Speaker 2: I was a member of NABJ, but not, not hugely active, but a member.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your jobs, did they ever come through NABJ?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all your jobs came from applying, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So (unclear), the Herald, the Herald actually had offered me a job out of college also.  I had worked--when I was at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I worked part time in my senior year at Knight Ridder's Washington [D.C.] bureau, and Knight Ridder owned the Herald.  And I was interested in the Herald obviously because of Miami [Florida] and Latin American stuff.  They offered me a job, though, out of school in what was a neighbor section, it was a weekly section.  And I just thought frankly that it--what they did wasn't very interesting and I didn't think it was like I was gonna get, you know, meaningful experience there.  So I decided to go to St. Pete Times.  But they had kind of followed my work, and I kept in touch too with the people, with the recruiters and stuff.  And so when they actually had a cops opening, they got in touch and I said sure.  The Times had, and still does, different newspapers, had people who they knew at different newspapers.  So there was a woman actually at--who worked in the features section who passed along my name to someone there.
Speaker 1: Do you know who, who that was?
Speaker 2: Think it was Ally Brecker [ph.].  And also there had been a number of people who had been hired.  The St. Petersburg Times [Tampa Bay Times] and the Miami Herald were feeder papers for The Washington Post and The New York Times anyway.  So The New York Times had hired a number of really good reporters from those papers.  And so she somehow I guess, I feel like she may have been the first person, or she's the first person I knew who had mentioned my name and then some people who I knew who would be gone from the St. Pete Times mentioned my name.  And, and they got in touch when I came back from--I think I may have even been in touch with them before I went to England to do my graduate degree [at the University of Kent at Canterbury; University of Kent, Canterbury, England], or even during that time.  I think they may have even written to me during that time.  And I--the, the, the Miami Herald paid me while I was--paid my salary while I was on leave.  And so I felt like I owed them a year, you know which was typical in those situations.  But you know I--in fact I think they offered me a job early, like so maybe in the Spring of 2005 and I agreed to take it as long as they could wait for me to do it, to come in December so that I could honor, feel like I honored my--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, so what year are we in?
Speaker 2: I started in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995].  You said 2005.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah so '95 [1995], '95 [1995], no, no, '95 [1995], 1995.
Story_ID: 663516
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so 1995 is when you returned from, from--
Speaker 2: So I returned, I think I was overse- I did my graduate work in '93 [1993], '94 [1994], and I returned in the fall of '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did you study?
Speaker 2: I studied at the University of Kent [University of Kent at Canterbury; University of Kent], which is in Canterbury [England].
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy your time there in England? (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was great.  I had a very wonderful time.
Speaker 1: It had become a what--international--
Speaker 2: Very, and the school was very international.  And you know I traveled a lot; it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Where'd you travel, you traveled to Europe?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you get this offer.  You--what are they saying?  What, what did they say with the offer?
Speaker 2: They say that they will offer me a job in metro.  They know that you know I have a, a real interest and some experience by now in working overseas.  And that I was probably gonna go into one of the, the bureaus, one of the city bureaus.  And so initially actually the, the metro editor who hired me was also a Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] alum.  He liked that I was a Stuyvesant alum.  He also liked that I was a, you know I was a real New Yorker, born and raised in the city.  They were really trying to expand the city coverage.  And so he's like, "You're from Queens [New York], I'll send you to Queens."  I was like, "You don't know.  I spent four years, please don't send me to Queens."  And also I still you know, had my interest in, in Spanish and the language.  And I really--I wanted to go to the Bronx [New York], and that's where they ultimately sent me.
Speaker 1: So how is their system?  Because they have a whole system, right?  I'm told, okay that they have a system.
Speaker 2: Of hiring?
Speaker 1: Not just of hiring, but also of making you a New York Times person.
Speaker 2: Person.
Speaker 1: Now is that not true?  Maybe, maybe that was someone older who had been there, but I--
Speaker 2: Maybe.  Yeah I don't, I don't, I don't think so.  I mean in fact you know one of the things that they said they liked and, and really has held true was that they liked, they liked the way I wrote.  They liked--they, they never tried to homogenize me or you know, they, they thought that that was a strength.  And yes I, I didn't feel like there was a, you know, a New York Times-zation of me.
Speaker 1: So you came--I had--
Speaker 2: There may, yeah there may have been, I may have been under, under previous more, yeah more rigid regimes than the one I, I was hired by Joe Lelyveld [Joseph Lelyveld], so--
Speaker 1: And so can you describe your time, you know at The Times [The New York Times] because now you get there--
Speaker 2: Almost twenty years actually, a long time.
Speaker 1: Almost twenty years--wow, you look so young.
Speaker 2: I was young, I was twenty-seven when they offered me the job--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --so it's been a long time.
Speaker 1: A long time, wow.  Yeah, you're--okay baby (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 663517
Speaker 1: Can you describe the time until you get married, which is four years later, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your husband--
Speaker 2: Was a journalist too.  We met at the Miami Herald right before I left.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's how--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Because he had also been at The New York Times before, then he was at The Washington Post--
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: And then he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we met at the Herald and six months later I left to take the job at The Times [The New York Times].  And so--and we were both very similar.  He is from New York [New York], from the Bronx.  One American born parent, one Caribbean born parent.  And you know we were both real newspaper people, so we had that in common.  So we did a lot of back and forth and he finally left the Herald to take a job at the Daily News [New York Daily News] so that he could be in New York and we could be together.
Speaker 1: So his name is Ca--
Speaker 2: Cauvin [Henri Cauvin] is how it's pronounced, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, so he is, is he--cause he's fair skinned too.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So he's--
Speaker 2: Well he's, but he's actually biracial.  His mother [Anne Cauvin] is Irish American and his father [Louis Cauvin] is Haitian American, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So Cauvin is the---
Speaker 2: Is the Haitian, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is the Haitian name, okay I see, okay.  Have you spent a fair amount of time in Haiti?
Speaker 2: You know we haven't.  In fact he went back--he had gone as a child when he was, you know a real--like maybe five and didn't go back again until the earthquake actually.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 663518
Speaker 1: Okay so what are your first four--four years like there [The New York Times]?  Because in 1999 you get married [to Henri Cauvin] and you also (unclear) (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, go to--yeah, go off to South Africa.  No, wonderful.  Again I, I feel like I have had--you know I've been very lucky.
Speaker 1: So was this a seamless transition? Okay--
Speaker 2: It really worked. It really worked very well.
Speaker 1: But all that time you were kind of covering the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, so I was assigned to cover the Bronx and I did cover the Bronx for a while.  So I started in December of 1995 and I think there was--I think my first assignment was like on one of these awful cold days, and my editor said, "We'd love to send the Miami Herald reporter out to cover the coldest day of the year."  So I think--so I did, you know and I did the kind--it was general assignment.  I did, you know--there was a lot of debate about the death penalty because the Bronx DA [district attorney] was looking like he was reluctant to impose it.  I, I did a lot of stories like that.  I did feature stories around the city.  In the fall of my first year, I also--well I should back up.  I pitched national stories, which they let me do.  They let me do a national story.  I was interested about during one of these refuge crises, crises in, in Florida.  You know a number of Haitian and Cuban children had been resettled here and I was interested in following what had happened to them.  And they let me do that.  They sent me on some national assignments.  They sent me--I think that was a presidential election year--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --so they sent me on the campaign trail with the Republican candidates.  And in the fall of my first year there they asked whether I would go to Russia and to fill in.  And so they sent me to Russia for a month, which was amazing.  And so I had a really rich--
Speaker 1: So what were you covering in Russia then?
Speaker 2: The correspondents had gone on vacation, and so they just said, you know, "Go to Russia and write stories."  So--
Speaker 1: Well what stories do you write?  What is happening?
Speaker 2: So you know, so yeah it's a little bit daunting 'cause of course I speak no Russian.  I have no Russia--I mean of all the places to send me, I was kind of like--okay this is an unusual place.  You know I really did not have a mandate.  I just--he just told me to write stories.  The thing that was happening there was that Boris Yeltsin was getting heart surgery.  And so one of the stories I wrote actually was about access to that kind of surgery and it was--and I wrote about--it ended up being a front page story.  I wrote about homeless being expelled from Moscow [Russia].  I wrote about an old university that was set up for third world students and what had happened to it.  You know but basically you know I had to kind of find stories to write while I was there, and it was great, they were wise.  They sent me in October when it wasn't too cold (laughter).  So I had a--I mean, so you know I had a great first year.
Story_ID: 663519
Speaker 1: Who are you looking at in--you know when you're new to a new institution and maybe you've read about it, though, there's--are there people there that you know you really look up to and you know are sort of eager to meet, or you know--
Speaker 2: I was--one of my, my, my husband [Henri Cauvin] might say it's a, a fault.  Well not a fault but a--I, I didn't--you know I was one of these--my husband is a, a journalist who knows journalists.  Like he is--he knows you know--I, I knew all the Latin American writers, but they weren't at the, you know at the office in New York, Manhattan [New York, New York].  But you know my husband knew--but he went to journalism school [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] too.  He knew history, and he knew organizationally--
Speaker 1: I see--
Speaker 2: --whereas I just really wanted to write stories.  I, I didn't really know kind of--in fact in my first few months I got a call from a guy who said, "Hey, you know I'm So and So and I'd like to set up lunch." And I was like, "Who?"  And it was, you know, one of the assistant managing editors.  That was how--I just really wasn't you know, I was not--I didn't--yeah I was not, not, not very clueless (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But there's--no, no and I really was--it's, it's very nice that he actually decided to take me to lunch after that, you know.  So no I, I just really cared about you know the writing and getting abroad somehow.
Speaker 1: Because there are a lot of like well known names, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you know there's--well there are a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, there were.  And I--Bill Keller was a foreign editor at the time.  Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd] was an AME [assistant managing editor] at the time.  He sent me flowers when I decided to come because The Washington Post had also offered me a job. So I was weighing the two--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's nice.
Speaker 2: --newspapers, where to go.  And so Gerald is quite a character, though, so you know he was a--like kind of prickly.  Very smart, kind of prickly guy.  So you never quite knew whether he was cheering you on or, or not.  So I wasn't sure all the time.  But you know Mike (Unclear) was the metro editor for a period of time.  Joyce Purnick was the metro editor for a period of time.  Matt Purdy [Matthew Purdy] was my--one of the best editors I had there who was my direct editor.  But I really--I think I was a young person, but I had a lot of interests and I also you know, from Sydney Freedberg [Sydney P.Freedberg] knew that I didn't have to wait for someone to you know--I was trying things.  I wanted to write for the Weekend Review [sic. Week in Review], and so I'd get in touch with someone you know, and pitch.  I wanted--I was interested in the arts and so I would be--my beat after I think I was there for a year, was social services where I wrote about child welfare and welfare reform.  But I was also writing about theater for the arts section.  It was very open--they were very open.
Speaker 1: Now that doesn't happen every place.  You know the--
Speaker 2: It doesn't happen every place and it doesn't even always happen there.  But they were open to it.  And I had--when I was hired, there were a number of--they hired a lot of people that year.  New York Newsday had closed.  They hired a couple of people from the Herald who came, started at, you know, a few weeks before me.  There were a lot of new, young people, some of them really you know older, young, young but you know maybe in their early thirties, but quite accomplished with Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize] and Polk Awards [George Polk Award in Journalism] and in a lot of ways I saw what they were doing, you know.  And they were not restricting themselves to, okay, you know I write about the Bronx [New York], or I cover this.  They were--you know one of the great things about being at a place like The New York Times is all the things that you can do, and they were taking advantage of that and I kind of used them as a model.
Story_ID: 663520
Speaker 1: Talk about your appointment, because you became the bureau chief, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were you hired in 1999 to be the bureau chief? That's--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in South Africa, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So they sent me to Russia and to Cuba.  So I had done those two stints as foreign assignments.  And I really thought--well after going to Russia, which I really enjoyed, I'd never thought about going to Russia.  You know I thought maybe that's what they were thinking about for me, would they send me to Russia?  I was still interested in Latin America, of course which I kind of felt like I had been preparing myself for.  So South Africa was completely out of the blue.  I remember the foreign editor taking me to lunch and saying, "That's what we're thinking."  And I was like, "Really?"  I, I just never, I never expected that.  I had not--I just--I had never thought about it before.  But I said absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But it's one thing to be a correspondent, it's another thing to be a bureau chief.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or am I wrong about that?  Because, I mean--
Speaker 2: You know in a way, but you know these were--yes and no.  A bureau chief--there were positions that carried a bureau chief stature.  Even though what your actual duties were, were very different from--have, have little difference from a correspondent.  And for some reason, the Johannesburg [South Africa] position was a bureau chief's job.  Really you're a bureau chief of no one, though.  I mean you know there was not--there, there were not multiple people there.  I mean there had been multiple people, but usually it was a husband and wife thing; it wasn't like you were--I mean there were staff, but it wasn't like you were running a--it was not like being bureau chief in Paris [France] or London [England] where you have five or six people.
Speaker 1: So that has been historic, historic, that it was small.  So it was usually one or two?  So if it was two, it was a couple.
Speaker 2: Usually.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So did your--
Speaker 2: So my husband [Henri Cauvin] then was at the Daily News [New York Daily News].  And they hired him as a freelancer, as a contract writer.  So he went with--
Speaker 1: The Times [The New York Times] hired--
Speaker 2: The Times hired him as a contract writer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when we went, he went as a contract writer.
Speaker 1: So you went, you went both together.
Speaker 2: Together, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what are you finding about the South Africa that you were in, because at this point--there's a lot of crime, right?
Speaker 1: There's a lot of crime.  And I--we covered southern Africa, so it was about eleven countries in the region.  So you had South Africa, which was in the midst of this kind of transformation from apartheid.  But we had a new president, Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was, you know, off the political scene, Thabo Mbeki was his successor.  And so you had you know the business of kind of racial and economic transformation was kind of squarely on the agenda of how to make the benefits, the economic benefits of democracy real to the, you know, large majority of the people; where, who, you know were still largely marginalized.  We had a civil war in Angola.  We had--
Speaker 2: Mugabe [Robert Mugabe].
Speaker 1: Right, civil conflict in Zimbabwe.  You know, interesting stories in Mozambique, Zambia--we had coups in Madagascar (laughter).  You know it was a, a really interesting time to be there.
Speaker 2: (Cough) So do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]--
Speaker 2: AIDS--
Speaker 1: --a huge AIDS--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw that (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --a huge, huge story obviously.
Story_ID: 663521
Speaker 1: So how do you work there, then [for The New York Times]?  Are you travelling around during this time--
Speaker 2: A ton, yes a ton.  Because there are ten countries, so you were on the road a lot.  Though South Africa--we were based in South Africa and South Africa is a big story, so obviously a lot of the time you're spending writing about South Africa.
Speaker 1: So did you start with really focusing on South Africa first before you started traveling?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: That would be, you know, make sense.  How did you like the city [Johannesburg, South Africa] and you know, and the country, you know during the time that you were there?  This is the--you haven't been out of the country this long a period at this point to, to, to live.
Speaker 2: No, no, the longest I had lived abroad at that point was a year [at the University of Kent at Canterbury; University of Kent, Canterbury, England], and we were there for three and a half years.  So that was the longest for sure.  You know it's a fascinating, it's just a really, really fascinating and interesting country to cover.  And a hard place.  You know people, people--you know it was such--I often wished that I could have seen it before.  You know because history was so much present in everyone's lives.  You would have the--at you know, out at a restaurant with someone and you're having a regular conversation.  And then somehow some you know, astonishing, terrible story comes out because people lived during astonishing and terribly difficult times.  And it was surreal in that way because you know South Africa is in many ways enormously western, enormously wealthy by, you know, certainly by African standards.  So you know when my parents [Lucille Smith Swarns and Joseph Swarns] came to visit, I said, "Be prepared, think Westchester [Westchester County, New York]."  I mean it--you know malls and any kind of western food that you would like, the fanciest restaurants, stores.  I mean you could feel like a minority--I could feel as a black person like a minority often in places where--the neighborhood where I lived, in the places where you might shop or go to eat.  And so you had these enormous inequities.  And, and, and people who were trying to reconcile kind of this history with you know, moving forward.  And it was really, really interesting and complicated.  In the end in some ways actually, we preferred Zimbabwe because Zimbabwe, even though you know there's obviously, it was going through its own difficulties, it had made this transition.  And even though with the leadership, there was all this kind of you know, kind of race division and, and there were--
Speaker 1: You're talking about Mugabe [Robert Mugabe]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but among people, they were--they, they had, they had moved on.  It was--South Africa I felt often was--apartheid was so close and so near and the, the pain and the damage, psychic damage, was so real and palpable.  It was a kind of tense place to be.  Whereas Zimbabwe in a lot of ways, you know this had--they had been independent and they'd had majority rule since 1980.  It was race for, for you know your professional Zimbabweans was--I mean it was a real thing and there were these real inequities there still too in terms of the economy.  But it wasn't as present and in your face in the way it was in South Africa.  And in some ways Zimbabwe was more relaxing in that way, where it just wasn't--even, even though a lot of the coverage was about that, it wasn't what people were dealing with so much.
Speaker 1: Well that's because Mugabe really said, "Go away, white people."
Speaker 2: Right, right, and that, that brought that up.  No, right.  But also too, the white minority in, in--it was a smaller white population anyway.  And they actually had a, a good period of co-existence where it was--they allowed the white farmers to control that sector of the economy and you know, Africans controlled the government and you know they were trying to kind of build out.  But it just--you know twenty odd years makes a difference, you know.  We were in South Africa you know, four years after you know, the first elected black president [Nelson Mandela]. And it was still quite raw, I felt like (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 663522
Speaker 1: But you know the other thing I was sort of fascinated with was your work in Angola. And only--I have to say this because one of the people that we've interviewed for our archives is Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] who you know really was running with--in the previous time, running in the '70s [1970s] that you know with the Angola (unclear).
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: And so I was wondering about your coverage, you know at this point because a lot of what I've read is a, you know, were the same, almost the same people still around or these divisions.  So what was happening?  Can you describe what was happening in Angola and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what were the issues you were dealing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --dealing with and covering [for The New York Times]?
Speaker 2: So you know there was a long running civil war and you know the rebels had been funded by South Africa and by the United States.  And it was a hard war to cover because the government wouldn't give us much access to where the fighting was happening.  So you can basically travel where the UN [United Nations] would take you.  So you'd kind of hear about the war through refugees who were fleeing a place where the fighting was happening.  But it's a, it's a really--it's a fascinating--and Mozambique as well, really fascinating.  These are Portuguese colonies.  So quite a different flavor to them than the English speaking colonies.  And I, I really enjoyed covering them.  Some of these cities were--I mean it's hard to imagine you know the civil war going on for so long, but some of them, the, the entire, you know there's a city called Cuito [Cuito Cuanavale, Angola] where literally almost every building is you know, bullet holes and I mean it's just the devastation of so many years of war.  It's, it's remarkable to see.  But it was, it was really--it was fascinating.  And the war ended, actually, you know Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] was killed while we were there.  And so we also were writing about kind of the transition from you know a war economy to a peace economy.  And, and the big story in Angola too was oil because they had a lot of it and it was of enormous interest to the United States.
Speaker 1: So they had found that oil during their time there, is that right.  Okay, 'cause I remember 'cause that was gonna bring a new revenue source to the, to the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, more of it.
Speaker 1: Did you ever--were you ever in fear of anything?  I mean during your time there, or it was relatively easy to get around and sort of cover.  I mean was there any of that, and then what, what relationship do you have with the state department [U.S. Department of State], you know when you are a journalist?
Speaker 2: I don't think there was ever any time where I felt like I was in danger, I'm thinking here, but I don't think so, no.  And with the state department, we typically had briefings with you know, you know the desk specialist before we left.  And then at the embassies it kind of varied, you know, some were more helpful than others in terms of the American embassy.  And then sometimes while we were there if you had an assistant secretary of state who was particularly engaged, then we might have dealings with them as well, but not a, not a whole lot.
Story_ID: 663523
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this because with Angola, I mean the things that you were reporting about, were--were you reporting about the ANC [African National Congress] and the, you know the difference between them and the United Democratic Movement and the New National Party.
Speaker 2: There's a lot of that in the politics in South Africa, yeah.
Speaker 1: How, how were you finding the real sort of stories of--that's right, I'm sorry, that's in South Africa.  But how were you finding, you know, out what was really true and what was going on and, and how did you do that?  You know what were your sources and how do you--
Speaker 2: You know we, I mean we do kind of work, you know we always do.  We read as much as we could so we had these countries to cover.  We read all, you know, we had the newspapers from the different countries.  We had stringers, you know people, freelancers who worked with us who sometimes would write in with ideas and suggestions.  And then you know when you went, you would, you know, stumble across stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: So the bureau chief before, is there a transition from one bureau chief to the other?
Speaker 2: Not, not in a formal way, no, no.  You know one thing I forgot to tell you which I, I really--this is kind of going back, but I forgot one of the things I did, and this was, this was at the Miami Herald, was I covered the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots.  When you asked whether I ever felt like I was in danger, it was like when did I feel like I was in danger?  And the L.A. riots I did.  But I mention that because if you ever see the video of Rodney King in the, can't we all get along speech, you'll see me there with these big glasses right behind him, scribbling down.  And people at the Miami Herald laughed because I was scribbling furiously as my editor said at one of the most taped events ever.  But no, I didn't feel like I was in danger when I was there, no I don't think so.
Speaker 1: So what did--how is that, the, the, the bureau chief position viewed in the hierarchy of The New York Times, or is that--
Speaker 2: It was, it's one of--it was one of the plum foreign positions in part because of who had had it before.  In part because of the story which you know because American history and apartheid and those kind of commonalities had enormous resonance, right.  But also some of the most important people at the paper had made their names there.
Speaker 1: So who's that?
Speaker 2: So Joe Lelyveld [Joseph Lelyveld] who was editor of the paper and was the one who sent me to South Africa, worked there twice and won a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] with a book ['Move Your Shadow: South Africa, Black and White' ] there.  Bill Keller, you know, covered the transition you know when Mandela [Nelson Mandela] became president.  It was, it was always--it was just one of these--it was a very high pro- among foreign assignments, it was a very high profile--
Speaker 1: But the--
Speaker 2: --foreign assignment.
Story_ID: 663524
Speaker 1: Okay but Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Swarns] this is the thing.  You have to participate in the telling because, you know, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And yet everything--this is--I want you to--I mean has everything that you've said is all smooth sailing.  I mean except the one thing with the editor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I should say--
Speaker 1: --you know who told you, you should--
Speaker 2: And, well and I should back up to say--
Speaker 1: Because I think that that--that can't be--
Speaker 2: That can't be--no and actually in South Africa it wasn't.  And I, and I was the first black South Africa correspondent for the paper, which again was not--I don't even think--well it couldn't have happened--you know it, it was one of those things that it couldn't have happened before the end of apartheid because I don't know that they would have allowed it.  Though there were black reporters who--from The Times who went, but it wasn't something that the paper made much note of.  It was just something that happened.  But no it wasn't always smooth sailing and I should say particularly--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  And, I should say, particularly, and actually this is a good place to talk about that.  I actually had I think a very--I was, I was very lucky I think in that I was not--as someone who's not kind of a you know, political person, as someone who just--you know I, I, I managed to kind of avoid a lot of trouble and pitfalls.  But when I was in South Africa during my--during the second half of my time there, maybe not even the second half of, maybe a quarter of the second half there, I had some real, real challenges with one of the editors in New York [New York] and I'd rather not say who.  But it was enormously, enormously difficult, enormously difficult.  It was the first time in my career where I felt like someone was actively undermining me.  Where I literally had to save you know, every note, every piece of paper.  You know it was--in some ways I mean--and, and I have to say that for someone who had kind of gone about her career assuming that, you know if you work hard and you're a good person and blah, blah, everything will be fine.  This was a real awakening.  And you know, and there are plenty of people who will tell you at The New York Times that you know my career is not usual, is not typical.  That it's difficult and hard and there are a lot of sharp elbows and all of that.  Until my time there, I really must say I, I managed to avoid that.  But this was really difficult.  I was in lucky--I did some of my best work during that time.  I was lucky in that I think I had been at the paper for long enough that people knew my work and knew me.  And so that what he was saying had less influence than it might have if I had been a new person without a reputation and without being well known.  But it, it, it truly changed in a big way how I viewed editors and management I think.  I think it made me more skeptical, more suspicious, more--when I came back from--he ultimately--it wasn't just me, it was a lot of people.  And I mean so many people complained, in fact the publisher once you know, when you came back from--on home leave, you'd have you know, a meeting with the publisher and he said, "So, how about that guy?"  And I said, "You know, if you're asking me, I think you already know."  And he knew.  And so the guy was removed.  But it was one of those almost scarring experiences.  I think it, it has made me profoundly suspicious of people.  You know I don't--I, I think up to that point I think I really did think that people for the most part I, I believed you know, that--and, and I think it just made me wonder about agendas and where people are coming from in a way that I didn't before.
Speaker 1: So you were trusting, really (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so.
Story_ID: 663525
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was he doing?  I mean what was the--was he questioning your writing?
Speaker 2: I mean, questioning my writing--
Speaker 1: Your sto--
Speaker 2: --trying to undermine my you know, trying to you know, deep six projects that I was working on, high profile work.  Even trying to question I mean expenses, you know.  It was really, it was really awful.  And again, nothing ever came of it because I really I, I was always above board.  I'm like, really? I am exact, I am exactly who I am.  And I was never doing anything, you know, underhanded or anything.  But he was really on a mission.  And it was--to this day I'm not sure why.  I, I am not sure why.  And like I said, you know, I wasn't the only one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) was someone speaking to him?  Maybe there--was there any of that?  I mean I'm wondering--the thing--but when you say he wasn't--I mean you still were turn--he was--was he rejecting any of your articles or--
Speaker 2: He tried, he tried, he tried.  I had done this--we worked on this project on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and he tried to say that the best piece that I wrote was no good and that it couldn't run, and I--because it had been under the previous regime, everything was done pretty much.  It was almost laid out on the page, so I said how could it be so fatally flawed if it wasn't before?  You know if there's something that I need to do, I can do that.  But I actually--when that came up, you know one of the copy editors said you know, kind of gave me a little bird's warning there's some concerns about this.  I just felt--by then I had had enough bad experiences and I actually--I sent, I sent a note to Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd] who was the managing editor at the time and I said, "I know that this is a little unorthodox, but I'd like you to do me a favor.  I'd like you to read this story.  I, I hope that I'm just--you'll just have an enjoyable read and nothing will come of it.  But I'd like you to just read it and let me know what you think."  And he did and he said, "It's a great story."  I said, "Okay, fine.  Thank you."  And, and then this editor said, "This story is fatally flawed.  I know that the higher ups are no longer interested in this series and you just have to make peace with the fact that it's just not going to run.  It's, you know, after 9/11 [September 11, 2001] and there's less interest and I, you know I really tried."  I said, you know well, you know actually I was on home leave, I think there was interest.  I met with him.  I said, "Well if you think that it would help, because I think there was interest, I'd be happy to talk to them about it because I'd like to advocate for it.  I think they were interested."  He was like, "You would go over my head?"  I was like, "You just said they weren't interested.  I'm saying I think they would be and I'd love to fight for the story."  And he's ranting and raving, "How dare you?"  I said, "You know what?"  I said, "This is too weird for me now.  I am going to send the--," I had already sent the story.  But I said, "I'm going to send the story to Gerald Boyd and see what he thinks."  And with--it was just--it was so awful.  Within like twenty minutes after that, I got an email from this copy editor saying, "So and So is running over to the masthead with your story."  And then that--after that crazy conversation--the story can't run because it's so flawed, how dare you talk to anyone else?  I got an email, which I should have saved.  "It is a beautiful story with--it is lyrical, it is blah, blah, blah, blah."  And I think he didn't know that I--I don't know, he didn't know perhaps that I had advocates higher than him.  He did manage to kill another story that I cared about, but not one that I managed--not, not one that I cared about as much as this.  But after that, he pretty much left me alone.  I think he thought that, okay, it's not gonna work.  She has advocates and let me turn my evil presence to others (laughter).  But, but like I said it has really--when I came to Washington [D.C.], I joked but only, only partly, that I felt like with my new editors that I was so--I felt like you know, an abused child; that I was so grateful but also so, so grateful for any--for ordinary treatment.  But like I said it also really did change how I viewed people.
Speaker 1: Did that go on for how long?  You were there--
Speaker 2: Probably--well there were, there were a number of changes in the editing structure while I was there [The New York Times], so it was probably the better portion of a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But like I said the irony was that you know I had probably my best year there.  He, he left me alone after that; they nominated my coverage for a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize].  I had, I had a very good year, but it was awful.
Story_ID: 663526
Speaker 1: So what was your husband [Henri Cauvin] saying about this, because he was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was (laughter)--well the funny thing was--
Speaker 1: He's thinking from a different perspective.
Speaker 2: Right.  It was, oh, it was just awful.  In fact, when we were coming back, part of the reason he decided to go to The Washington Post was that he couldn't stomach--he felt like they, they--
Speaker 1: Hostile?
Speaker 2: Well just that he was angry.  He felt like yes, Gerald [Gerald M. Boyd] had defended me, but that the higher ups [at The New York Times] knew about this guy and they let it go on for too long.  That was kind of part of--there were a number of other reasons that were more compelling for him to make the decision that he made, but it really did--it was you know--
Speaker 1: So when you came back then--this is a typical rotation.
Speaker 2: Right, so you do a three to four year tour, and then you either go to another foreign posting, or you come back.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you while you were there [South Africa], did you have any contact with [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, right?
Speaker 2: Of course, yes, yes she lived very close to us, yes, yes.  So we saw her--
Speaker 1: Charlayne Hunter-Gault.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, we saw them both quite a bit, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause she had spent a lot of time there.
Speaker 2: A lot of time.
Speaker 1: But they've left, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my understanding they've left, yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought because maybe of the crime.
Speaker 2: No, no I don't think so, I don't think so.  I, I'm not sure.  You know they had always split their time there between Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and--but I don't think it was because of the crime.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come back and then what is your assignment when you come back? 'Cause this is two thousand (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I come back and, in 2003 and I'm--I guess I am thirty--
Story_ID: 663527
Speaker 1: You missed, you missed 9/11 [September 11, 2001].
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: I was just thinking because you, I see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: I was looking at Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd] won a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] for--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 1: --for 9/11 coverage, but you missed that.
Speaker 2: I missed that; I remember that very vividly.  I, I was going to get a massage and my, my--one of my colleagues [at The New York Times] actually who was in Paris [France], we had been working on this AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] project together.  I remember I was driving through the parking lot.  He was like, "You might want to--something weird is going on." There was this plane and we were both trying to figure out what was going on.  And turned around and came back.  And so I saw the second tower [World Trade Center, New York, New York] fall on TV, which I remember thinking, well is that--are they replaying, are they replay- and then you real- it was just the most surreal thing.  And one thing I didn't mention about my time--my growing--my childhood is that my family like a lot of black New Yorkers, really the path was through government civil service, that kind of thing.  So teachers--but I also have fire fighters.  And one of the most agonizing things that we just couldn't get in touch with, you know two of my cousins for days, you know.  But it was a very strange thing to be out of the country for that.  My mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] walked across the Brooklyn Bridge, you know I think--did she lose a shoe or a heel broke or something with her shoes.  So it was a very strange time to be away from the place you grew up.
Story_ID: 663528
Speaker 1: Now had you had children by this time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Cough) Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. But when you talk about what--next--I got to South Africa when I was thirty-two.  I was thirty-five, and it was funny because when people thought about--I remember talking to Gerald [Gerald M. Boyd] and Howell Raines about my coming and I always thought you know, these guys think I'm fixed--I'm not twenty-seven forever, you know.  I, you know I wanna have kids, I got to you know--I've been here a while now.  So really a part of the decision was, you know we needed to be back because I needed to get pregnant (laughter), I wanted to have kids, you know.
Speaker 1: You know, you know the other thing that--and this may not be as relevant, but you had done a, a series or you had done a feature on sustainable development.
Speaker 2: I covered a conference.
Speaker 1: Right, I see, okay.  Okay, so anyway when you come back [from South Africa], the other thing when you come back or maybe before you get back, there's a Jayson Blair incident.
Speaker 2: It was right around when I came back, yes.
Speaker 1: Because this--
Speaker 2: And that was something.  And I came back to the Washington [D.C.] bureau.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about this?
Speaker 2: It was really--
Speaker 1: So you go to Washington bureau.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You don't come back to--
Speaker 2: No, I go to the Washington bureau.
Speaker 1: Because your husband [Henri Cauvin]--
Speaker 2: Husband got the job at The Washington Post.  And at the time the Washington bureau chief was Jill Abramson who's now, you know the editor of the paper.  But then was in open warfare with Howell Raines who was the executive editor of the paper.
Speaker 1: So your editor was in open warfare with--
Speaker 2: I said, I used to joke with people, "This feels like Africa; we're in a rebel held territory right here."  I mean people were--so there was--
Speaker 1: What were the issues, though?
Speaker 2: What was happening was that the folks in Washington felt that Howell was trying to undermine the leadership in Washington, and it was also--and a lot of people felt undermining the coverage.  They felt that this was also--you remember Judith Miller, who people felt that we had not written adequately or, you know, seriously enough to investigate whether there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and that other reporters who were raising questions about it were being squelched.  There were a whole lot of concerns that folks in Washington had about the leadership and, and so it was--and then so you've got that going on.  And then this Jayson Blair thing.  And it was just, it was unbelievable.  It was really--you know it was just not something as a journalist you'd ever expect at a place like The New York Times.
Speaker 1: Well Jayson Blair, I mean you didn't--'cause see when things like that happen to people of color, then I mean 'cause it had been the Janet--
Speaker 2: Janet Cooke.
Speaker 1: Cooke, and I remember thinking--
Speaker 2: The Washington Post.
Speaker 1: --that that affected me as a black female, even though I wasn't a journalist or anything.  And so, so what was this--so can you describe the Jayson Blair and--
Speaker 2: So what happened was that Jayson Blair was a very young reporter who got promoted to national and basically he was, you know, making stuff up.  He was both plagiarizing and making things up.  And eventually he got caught.  And I had been at the paper for long enough and was established enough that I did not feel like this in any way affected me.  But what was offensive to many of us was you know, this idea that because he was black, you know they cut corners in some way for him, or also this crazy notion that Gerald Boyd had shielded and protected him, which we were like, "Are you--," it just simply--and that was really--and you know A, it was simply not true.  And B, it was really offensive just because he happens to be the black managing editor.  So he's the guy who--I mean it's just--and that was frustrating.
Speaker 1: Because he, he got a lot of flak.
Speaker 2: Yes and, and, and wrongfully so.  He, he should not have.  He, he did not have some sustained, nurturing relationship with this guy; he did not.
Speaker 1: So, so but he had to resign.
Speaker 2: But they--yep, they both did.
Speaker 1: And both, and Howell Raines, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They both did.
Story_ID: 663529
Speaker 1: There's this battle going on between D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and New York [New York] and then they lose out.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I mean this is--
Speaker 2: I mean it's dramatic, unprecedented, historic stuff (laughter); really remarkable in the history of the paper [The New York Times].
Speaker 1: So did they do an internal investigation?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did an internal investigation--they reported what they found.  They were like--probably I mean it was thousands of words, you know.  And you know I guess and the most critical thing that came up was that there were people who warned that there was something wrong and, and the guy [Jayson Blair] still got promoted.
Speaker 1: I see.  So that, that--okay.  So did you--so I mean because he had been a mentor to your--I mean in some respects.  You know he had--I mean he had--
Speaker 2: He was not--not, not a mentor in the like--
Speaker 1: Warm and cuddly.
Speaker 2: Warm and cuddly or day to day kind of advice, but I always did feel like--
Speaker 1: He was fair.
Speaker 2: He was fair and that he was someone I could call on, I did.  I felt like he was, he was--I felt like he was looking out for me, even if I, I might never hear from Gerald [Gerald M. Boyd] for like a year or something, but I felt like, I felt like I could trust him and that he had my best interest at heart.
Speaker 1: So what happened to them?  What happened, what's happened to Gerald and what has happened to Howell?
Speaker 2: You know they obviously were forced to leave the paper.  Gerald wrote a book ['My Times in Black and White: Race and Power at The New York Times'] about his time as a journalist and you know he died of lung cancer several years ago, which was, you know--yeah.
Speaker 1: And then what about Howell Raines?
Speaker 2: And Howell you know, I--you know, to be honest with you, I'm not sure what Howell is doing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: He's, you know, writes--
Story_ID: 663530
Speaker 1: So then you come back.  So there's this war going on there [The New York Times], but how is the, how is the Washington [D.C.] bureau?
Speaker 2: The Washington bureau was great.  They were, there was a lot of camaraderie in that rebel hell territory.  No, it was, it was, it was an unusual fit for me.  I don't think, I don't think of myself so much as an institutional reporter, but the people were wonderful and I thought you know this was some way for me to stretch as a reporter.  I had not done political reporting and anyway I thought it was going to be interesting to do that.  And, and also you know there were just some wonderful, wonderful people there and really talented, really smart people.  It was a great place to work.
Speaker 1: But what was--what were you covering at the--
Speaker 2: So initially when I was hired, I was covering kind of immigration as it intersected kind of with the War on Terror.  So I did--you know there were all these roundups of you know, Arab American and Muslim American men, and so I wrote about that kind of thing; people being held.
Speaker 1: Guantanamo [Naval Station Guantanamo Bay, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba].
Speaker 2: In Guantanamo or you know, without charge, as material witnesses, things like that.  So for a while I ended up focusing on that.  Then as, as time went on, immigration itself became, you know immigration as a national issue for the country, became more of an issue in terms of efforts on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] to legalize illegal immigrants, and also you had all of a sudden for the first time this outpouring of demonstrations and marches by primarily Hispanic Americans, you know, calling for a change in, in the law.  And so that became, you know, a big focus of my coverage.  And then you know I did some more political--I covered the Democratic primaries, presidential primaries in 2004, and then I had a baby [Gabriel Cauvin], so I came back and did, I did some--just domestic policy stuff.  Some housing stuff, some--
Speaker 1: Well 2004 was there--wasn't that--that's Bush [President George Walker Bush] and--
Speaker 2: Kerry [John Kerry].
Speaker 1: --and Kerry.
Story_ID: 663531
Speaker 1: You know that made me sad about Gerald Boy- [Gerald M. Boyd].  I mean when you just--that made me--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, 'cause--you don't get that high (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very sad.  He was young, he was young.
Speaker 1: --you don't get that high either, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep.
Speaker 1: Has there been another--there is one now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is now, yeah Dean Baquet.
Speaker 1: Okay that's right.  Yeah we're supposed to be doing him.
Speaker 2: That's great.  Yeah he's, he's interesting, he's interesting.  He's got a really interesting family story.
Speaker 1: You know what is fascinating is I don't think the world at large does not know--The New York Times, they should (unclear).  There have been an amazing number of people through the organization who either are still there or were--have been there for a long time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or they've been in positions.  I mean people don't know that, they would never--okay sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no you're absolutely right.  Sometimes I go--but this is newspapers generally--I go to places where I was interviewing people of color and they say, "They're not gonna let you say that."  And I'd say, "Wait.  They'll let me say--," but you know there's a whole history of course where you know, where we weren't covered.  And so it stems from--but, but there has been a lot of change, obviously.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but that I mean this is--you know 'cause I didn't know that either.  So, so you--so you--so you covered--you said--
Speaker 2: The Democratic primaries, yes.  And so I covered Dick Gephardt who flamed out in Iowa.  And I said always have to thank him because then I could go home and, and get pregnant (laughter), which is what I did.
Speaker 1: So you took--how long did you take off?  Did you take off--
Speaker 2: I took a year for my--with my first [Gabriel Cauvin].
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: Yeah I did.
Speaker 1: You were like your mother [Lucille Smith Swarns].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think I always had this--
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: --thing about whether, you know I--because she had stayed home, whether I should and was back and forth.  And I, I thought that I wanted, I wanted to--we actually--one of the great things about being overseas is that we saved up a ton of money and I wanted to, I wanted to save up enough that I, if I wanted to stay home for four years, at least until they were in elementary school, then I could do that.  In the end you know I, I didn't.  I took a year off and I, I went back to work and all of that savings went to a nanny (laughter).  But, but I did feel that, that, that was--I benefitted enormously from having a mother who was, was home and present with me.
Speaker 1: Because I do, I do agree with that even though I, you know I don't have kids, I've been professional.  But I think there's a tradeoff.  But I--you know because in the telling of your story, your mother--you're like, your champion.  But also you know this is a different time too I think.  Because policies have--
Speaker 2: Right, it, it's certainly easier.
Speaker 1: You're not going to be put aside, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And actually you know I, I should say too when I, when I went back after my son was born, I went back part time.  And I've, I've never gotten back full time.  And The Times--
Speaker 1: So you're still part time?
Speaker 2: I am still part time.  And The Times has been I must say, enormously supportive of that.  They have--I think you know I talked to someone once about this kind of decision, you know as a journalist and a professional woman.  And when I was thinking about it, you know there were older women who said, "Don't do that; you're going to get mommy tracked, be careful."  And I thought what does that mean, you know?  What does that mean actually?  What matters to me is being able to do the work that I, that matters to me and, and to have time with my family.  And if I can do both, I don't know, maybe you can call mommy track; that sounds just like a satisfying life to me.  And, and I don't feel--well, I mean has it limited me?  I think if I wanted--I couldn't be part time and cover the White House, for instance.  I couldn't be part time and cover [U.S.] Congress.  I'm, I'm okay about that.  And I'm also someone who's worked there long enough and has enough experience and stature there that those are things that I could do if I wanted to go back.  And there may be a time when I decide that that's something I wanna do.  But they have--you know they have really--I've been creative and they've been creative and, and found ways for me to do really meaningful, substantive work.  And, and still work four days a week.
Speaker 1: So four, okay four days a week.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's hard to do--I know it's barely part time.  People say part time, but for a place like The New York Times, it's not a small thing.  It's not three days, you couldn't really do it unless you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You (unclear), you do--so Friday, Friday--
Speaker 2: Mondays.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mondays you're off Mondays, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Fridays are hard because of the weekend.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You're always working toward the weekend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, okay.
Speaker 2: It's hard.
Story_ID: 663532
Speaker 1: So your husband's [Henri Cauvin] working there [The New York Times] also, right?
Speaker 2: So, right and so we spent ten years in Washington [D.C.] and--
Speaker 1: It doesn't seem like ten, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so after covering immigration, there was a, you know, another presidential election.  I did issues, kind of issues reporting on the--during the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], McCain [John McCain] election.  And then--
Speaker 1: So explain to me that, that the issues reporting.
Speaker 2: So you know when I had the Democratic--when I was covering the Democratic primaries for the 2004 election year, literally I was on a plane following a candidate [Dick Gephardt] all the time.  This time I wrote about specific issues.  So I wrote about Obama and affirmative action.  I wrote a lot about race and gender because you had a black presidential candidate and we had a, a woman [Sarah Palin] who was a VP candidate.  So that's a lot of what I, I wrote about.  And when Obama won that election, they asked me whether I would write--whether I would cover the first lady [Michelle Obama] and her first year in office, yeah.
Speaker 1: I found that interesting because you said that usually you know they don't--
Speaker 2: They don't do that.
Speaker 1: They don't do that.
Speaker 2: And I had mixed feelings about it.  I have to be honest, because--
Speaker 1: That sounds like the mommy track.
Speaker 2: It does, even to me who I'm, I'm like--but it did sound a little girly to me.  I was like okay.  And so I did have mixed feelings about it because you know I'm someone who's done a lot of different things, so covering the first lady, I was kind of like--but you know my friends said to me, "Don't think of it like that.  This is history."  And so I said, "Okay, you know; it's true.  It is history.  And I'm gonna see."  And, and it was really interesting.  It was, it was very, very interesting to write about her and her first year.  And--
Speaker 1: So you were assigned to her after the successful election.
Speaker 2: After the election, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent--I, I, I covered her during her first year in the White House.  And a number of newspapers did the same thing, you know with the thinking that this is a family and a woman who would be written about for generations and that we should, we should write about her and focus on her and that family.  And, and it was very interesting, but really you know I ended up writing a book out of that time.  And that--
Speaker 1: 'American Tapestry' ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns].
Speaker 2: --ended up being probably the most meaningful thing for me personally to come out of that time.
Story_ID: 663533
Speaker 1: So when you, when you're covering her, are you covering her as a woman and a black person, or are you--
Speaker 2: Covering her as first lady, covering her as a mother, covering her as a black first lady.  You know, and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause she had to get used to that position (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right she did, she did.  And, and it was probably the most challenging time to cover her because she had had such a difficult experience with the media during the campaign that she and her staff were really super, super, super, super careful, super cautious and really try to avoid us as much as possible.  And you know their media strategy was to pretty much circumvent the you know, The New York Times, you know The Washington Post, and to focus their energies on women's magazines, people magazines, celebrity kind of magazines.  And as a reporter it was enormously frustrating.  As strategy it was quite successful.  And you know I remember talking to a political strategist complaining about this, you know she's giving interviews to People.  You know there she is in Essence and you know on the cover of you know Oprah's magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine] and you know.  And, and you know and why isn't she being kind of more serious and, and you know--what's, what's--sit down with The New York Times.  Let's talk about some serious things.  And this political strategist said to me a really interesting thing.  And she said, "You know, you're not thinking necessarily about you know, what is really influential."  She said, "The picture of Michelle Obama and those girls [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama] on the cover of People magazine in the White House [Washington, D.C.] is going to have more influence in a far broader swath of the United States than your article will.  Just that image of that black family in that place, in that magazine."  And I thought you know what?  She's right, she's right.  And, and she really wanted to soften her image and you know, to be the mom in chief, though you know in her early days she was a little more frank about her own you know, discomfort with it.  She did one meeting, you know she was talking to some kids and a little girl raised her hand and said you know, "I wanna be first lady just like you when I grow up."  And she said, "It doesn't pay much," (laughter).  She doesn't do that kind of thing anymore.  But you know, I think it was obviously you know, a transition for her, too.
Speaker 1: No, 'cause I mean no one had done that before.
Speaker 2: Right. And you know, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her mother [Marian Shields Robinson] moving and it all worked out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: There were little bits about that, but like how could the mother move?  And it's all worked out.  So they're, they've been very, very successful--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 663534
Speaker 1: What I understood when I was just preparing for this, you had, you had said that you had wanted--you did the article ['In First Lady's Roots, a Complex Path from Slavery,' Rachel L. Swarns and Jodi Kantor] and you know, you, you actually hired a genealogist [Megan Smolenyak].
Speaker 2: The Times [The New York Times], The Times--we asked The Times.  And actually it wasn't for me.  We--one of my colleagues right before the inauguration was doing an article about the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and his rainbow family and decided well we don't know much about Michelle [Michelle Obama].  So we asked a genealogist to, you know, do some research.  And you know we didn't give her enough time and so she didn't come up with anything you know, substantive for that story.  But you know the genealogist kept working and working and working.  And then she came back to us and said in September of that first year they were in the White House and said, "You won't believe, you know, what I've come up with."
Speaker 1: So you know what's interesting--'cause that's how genealogists are, they get--
Speaker 2: They get hooked.  I know.
Speaker 1: It doesn't matter what you say or not.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And so was she a person--I just, just--was it a, was it a person who had covered the black community before, or knew?
Speaker 2: She, she was a genealogist and she was very familiar with, you know, the complexities and challenges of, of African American genealogy.  And so she knew I think even more than we did when we asked her to look, that this was not gonna be a kind of quick and easy kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So what, what--how does the book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] materialize?  Because you've said that you first wrote an article, right?  And then that sort of--
Speaker 2: Led to--
Speaker 1: And then a publisher--
Speaker 2: Contacted me, right.
Speaker 1: HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] contacted you.  So can you tell the story from that point?
Speaker 2: Right, so the article that ran in October of 2009, the first year the Obamas was in--were in the White House.  That article was about the first lady's great-great-great-grandmother whose name was Melvinia [Melvinia Shields], and she was a slave girl valued at $475.  And her great-great-great-grandfather who was a white man [Charles Marion Shields] whose identity was a mystery.  And you know this was news to the first lady herself.  And a day after the article appeared, I got an email from an editor at HarperCollins saying, "That's really cool, what about a book about her whole family tree?"  I was like, oh I, you know I had really--in fact I, I really did not think seriously about it.  I told my husband [Henri Cauvin] I didn't think there was any way that we could, could make it work.  You know you have to take an unpaid leave and you know, I, I'd never written a book before.  I had no idea what, you know what would such a book--what would such a book say?  What would it be?  And--but you know doing that research for the article, it was the first time that I had actually spent time doing historical research trying to find out more about Melvinia and Melvinia's son [Dolphus Shields] and, and the family as they moved from the South, north.  And it was compelling and remains compelling to me in ways that I never expected.  And my husband said, "You know I think you have to do it."  And so I did and it was really amazing.  I think if I had come across this work--well you know I don't know.  The, the foreign stuff was such a pull, I don't know.  But if I had come across this passion earlier in life, if I might have changed; I might have, yeah I don't know, gotten a Ph.D. in history or something.  It's so compelling (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you know--
Story_ID: 663535
Speaker 1: You know what I was thinking because I mean first of all you had minored in--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I won't say African American studies [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --but the--you know, you had minored in that. And then the other thing is--but I want you to talk about--before I go on to that question, the process (cough).  So you've done this article ['In First Lady's Roots, a Complex Path from Slavery,' Rachel L. Swarns and Jodi Kantor]; you're sort of fascinated by this story.  The publisher HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] comes in, and they said they'd like you to do it; you talk with your husband [Henri Cauvin]--
Speaker 2: What do you do as a practical?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well people said, "Well you need an agent."  So I was like, "I don't have an agent."  A friend of mine had an agent.  Another friend suggested another one, you know.  I met with an agent, settled on one and that agent said, "Okay, let's meet with some publishers.  Not just this one, but let's, let's meet with some publishers.  Write me a letter about what you think this book might be."  And really, I was kind of like, what do I even say?  I don't know.  It will be interesting, whatever we find.  And so I went on a series of meetings with publishers and the more--and I said, "I, I'm doing this but I'm not sure I'm prepared to write this book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns]. I'm not sure I'm--." "Let's, let's see what the interest is at least."  And there was a good amount of interest.  And so you know the more I talked to people about it, the more I thought you know, maybe I do wanna do this.  And in the end, the publishers that we met with, it was HarperCollins who made the offer and, and so I ended up getting started.  I took a, a leave from The Times [The New York Times] in January of 2010 and, and spent two years basically working on it.
Speaker 1: So you basically took a home leave, and you then dedicated your whole life--
Speaker 2: I cobbled together--I had a decent advance and you know I got a lot of--I was lucky again.  I got a lot of institutional support, like you know the Wilson Center [Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, D.C.] for here in--not here in--I think of myself in Washington [D.C.]--and Washington funded me and Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] gave me an office and a research assistant.  I got a, a Fletcher Fellowship which covered me for a little while too.  So I was able to kind of cobble enough stuff together.  And The Times committed to taking me back, which was important.  And so I was able to kind of fund the work.  I knew I wasn't gonna get rich, but I, I just wanted--had to pay the mortgage, so--
Speaker 1: So you did this until--and so were you sure how you were--your process for even how you were gonna do your research?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I mean you know I knew--you know I knew we had written the story.  I knew that I was interested in following up on some of the unanswered questions if we--could we find out who the first lady's white ancestors were?  I mean that was something that I was interested--there's DNA testing now.  I was interested in, you know finding what else there was, what other stories there were in other branches of her family tree.  And so you know I just you know the genealogist [Megan Smolenyak] had done a lot of work, and you know we had the, the frames of kind of names of people and I didn't know how much the first lady [Michelle Obama] would cooperate or not.  And--
Speaker 1: Did she?
Speaker 2: She did not.  She has a firm policy of not cooperating with book projects.  You know she's gonna write her own book.  But you know so I just had no idea.  But I, I went and I, I traveled and I researched and I--members of her family were helpful.  And you know as I, as I went along, kind of it began to kind of fall in place.
Story_ID: 663536
Speaker 1: So you never had anyone from the White House inquire about this?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I kept in, I kept in touch with them regularly, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You kept in--you did.
Speaker 2: I did.  I let them know, you know--you know it's a weird thing.  You know she's the first lady [Michelle Obama], she's a public figure.  But I also recognize it's a very strange thing to have someone you don't know to be doing this kind of work about you.  And you know her staff knew me from the time that you know, I had spent covering her.  But it's still you know, that's--it's an unusual thing.  So you know as I went along I kept them up to--
Speaker 1: Them apprised.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So were they fascinated, or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --about what you were finding.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even though they didn't participate, you really had silently their blessings 'cause they didn't, they didn't try to--I mean cause they're--I read a story about Barack Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] brother, you know recently.  You know like he has a brother [Malik Obama].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That wasn't such a--you know there have been these--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And, or a friend, another friend, you know and so, so there wasn't that kind of thing.  They were, they were--you were handling it in a respectful way.
Speaker 2: I was definitely.  They knew I was handling it in a respectful way.  I think there was some anxiety about books in general because this was a book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] that was gonna come out in an election year.  And so I think there were some--if--I think that in an ideal world, they would have preferred that it come out after the election just because it was a process that they couldn't control and they didn't know what would come out of it.  So I think they would have preferred that it not come out when it came out.  But in the end, I think they found it very interesting.
Speaker 1: Interesting because it tells a, you know, a whole sort of--I mean it's not--it's history, right?
Speaker 2: It's history, it's history.
Speaker 1: And it's not controversial.
Speaker 2: No, no it was not in any way controversial.  It was just really fascinating and really--her story but also you know, the American story really.
Speaker 1: So who, who was most helpful to you?  Because there were people that--I mean you're interviewing both her white and black ancestors--
Speaker 2: Right, right, and, and yeah her cousins.
Speaker 1: And you know you--you know the, the things that you've--like you mentioned DNA testing.  So who was DNA tested?  That was--cause I--
Speaker 2: So yeah, so what I ended up, yeah so what I ended up doing is we were able to--I knew who--well firstly you don't ask the first lady for her DNA, right.  She's probably not gonna give it to you.  All right, but I knew who her great-grandfather was, Melvinia's son.  And I hoped--what I hoped was that perhaps I could find some relatives who were distant enough and curious enough to agree.  And I was able to do that.  So Melvinia's [Melvinia Shields]--the slave girl lived in Georgia and her son Dolphus [Dolphus Shields] moved to Birmingham [Alabama].  And it was his descendants who moved north.  And like many families, many African American families, the family split.  One, one side went to Chicago [Illinois], one side went to Cleveland [Ohio].  And the Cleveland folks agreed to do DNA testing.  And as well as an aunt of the first lady.  And, and then in terms of the, the white descendants, the historical records suggested that the son [Charles Marion Shields] of Melvinia's owner [Henry Wells Shields] was likely the father of Melvinia's son.  She appeared living next to him after the war [Civil War] in the 1870 census.  She continued to have biracial children after the war ended when she was a free person.  He was, you know, a few years older than her; it was roughly the right age.  So I tracked down his descendants and was able to persuade some of them to do testing.  And it turned out--
Speaker 1: This is the Shields, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So Mrs. Obama's mother, her maiden name was Shields [Marian Shields Robinson].  And so the DNA testing showed that the black Shields and the white Shields were related in fact, so--
Speaker 1: That's exciting.
Speaker 2: It was exciting.
Speaker 1: It's like finding your--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: A puzzle.
Speaker 2: It was.  And it reminded--you know one of the things you know--
Speaker 1: Gold.
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and one of the great things about this kind of research--and frustrating things about it--is that it is like that.  I mean you--it is like detective work in a way.  You find bits and pieces and trying to make sense of it and to get the full story, some of which you'll never get because so much is lost.  But when you get something like that, that's--
Speaker 1: Awfully exciting.
Speaker 2: --that's really something, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 663537
Speaker 1: Now what about--I noticed in your book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] --I mean you have a lot of footnotes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know it's--you don't even necessarily you know with a lot of books, find footnotes.  I mean there is, I don't know, it seemed like thirty pages.  So was that advised that you, you know you do that just so you could--
Speaker 2: Well yeah it's like because it was historical, you know.  It was, you know it was a serious history and I wanted it to be--you know it's not an academic book.  But you know also even though it wasn't controversial, it is a first lady [Michelle Obama] and you wanna make sure that you've got everything right.  And so I wanted to make everything clear; where I got information from.  And also to, you know, for people who might be interested in you know, pieces of the history itself, you know.
Speaker 1: Right. Because you also are doing scholarly commentary.  You--you're, you're putting--
Speaker 2: Yes, context to the--
Speaker 1: --context to the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, to the life.
Speaker 1: You weren't just telling the story.
Speaker 2: No, of the family, that's right.
Speaker 1: You were putting context in there.
Speaker 2: And really I wanted to tell--her story to me reflected so much of the American story and I wanted to show kind of not only her journey, but the country's journey too in that story.
Speaker 1: So are you--when, when all was said and done, what are some of the things that you've said surprised you?  You know that you said--or that--I think you said, "You know I, I continued to be surprised--I continue--," I may not have the--you continued to be something.  I may not have it right, but you said even to- today.
Speaker 2: Well there are always new things that are, you know, coming up.  You know I, I don't think it's, it's definitive because you know I only had so much time.  And even, you know since it was published, people have sent photographs, people of--different branches of--I know this, I know that.  I don't know.  I mean I, I don't know that it was so surprising.  And in some ways that's part of the power of it.  It was in some ways just the most ordinary of American stories, you know.  This is, you know the history of so many African American and you know white American families.  But there was great power I think in--we know these stories and the kind of, you know, large sweep historical narrative, but the people and their lives and putting names to them in a way that African Americans still struggle to do; I still struggle to do in kind of tracing people back, has a real power to it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--okay so you're talking about a sweet spot.  But I, I personally--I don't even know if I would--Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Swarns] if I were you, were saying that it's such an ordinary story.  It's a story that is not known.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean people really don't understand it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(cough) in its full context.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how much it, it touches so many people.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's probably.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.
Speaker 1: (Cough).
Story_ID: 663538
Speaker 1: The book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] was published in 2012.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that's two, really two years ago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so did you spend a year really traveling and speaking and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, um-hm. Yeah I traveled all around the country, you know.  It was fun.
Speaker 1: So that was all in election--it was--you were traveling.
Speaker 2: So two thousand--let me think about this, let's see.  Yes, the book came out in 2012, that's right.  So I was right; during the election, yes, yeah, that's right.  Yeah, because it came out in, in June.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Before election was in November, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So okay, so they felt okay at some point, you know during it, or (unclear) really nervous.
Speaker 2: Well I think you know, felt okay about what?
Speaker 1: The book.
Speaker 2: Well I, you know I think once it came out they felt okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Or the people's reaction like okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, once, yeah.  And you know I made sure that, you know, that she--the first lady [Michelle Obama] and her staff had copies before it actually came out, you know.  I sort of felt like you know, she should read it before it's in Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.], you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know so they had a, a couple of weeks before it actually hit the book stores (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 663539
Speaker 1: So where are you right now in your life?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You know because now--when did you, you have your--so your first child's name is?
Speaker 2: Gabriel [Gabriel Cauvin].
Speaker 1: Gabriel and okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then so a girl.
Speaker 2: No, Gabriel.  Gabriel, a boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two boys.
Speaker 1: You have two boys?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And second one is Julian [Julian Cauvin].
Speaker 1: So their ages right now?
Speaker 2: Right now they are six and nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I can't get--you know because you were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for those ten years.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I keep looking at--you look so young (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I was thinking like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so where are you right now, though, in, in your life?  Because what precipitated the move back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: So they contacted us out of the blue, The Times [The New York Times] did and said, "You know if we make you a columnist and hire your husband [Henri Cauvin], would you guys come to New York?"  And you know we had thought about it.  You know my husband is from New York too, and you know our parents are here; we have siblings here.  And we, we were always kind of on the fence.  We're gonna move to New York maybe, maybe we're not.  And we finally were thinking well maybe by not deciding, we've sort of decided to live in D.C.  But this opportunity came up and we thought, well, you know, when--with newspapers being as kind of disastrous as they are, when would such an opportunity good for both of us come up again?  And so we decided to come back.
Story_ID: 663540
Speaker 1: --Worried about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I feel like The Times [The New York Times]--it feels strong to me.
Speaker 1: Oh good, well let's hope you're right (laughter); let's hope you're right.  But yes, I, no I definitely was concerned about that.  I, you know, you know I, I--I'm a civil servant's daughter, so you know I want to make sure that I was gonna have a job at the end.  I also thought, thought that in this environment it probably was good to have something else too.  Maybe it would give me more options down the road.  So--
Speaker 2: So and do you think the book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] helped with the idea of being a columnist?
Speaker 1: I think so.  I think actually in coming back to The Times after that, I think it helped me enormously as a writer I think.
Speaker 2: So you came back in what--
Speaker 1: So I came back in January of 2012.
Speaker 2: Two thousand twelve [2012].
Speaker 1: And I--
Speaker 2: Oh wait. No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You did? So you were doing your book tour at the same--
Speaker 1: So, while I was at work, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, because the book didn't come out until June of 2012.  So I came back in January of 2012 and I started as a member of a, a team of reporters that doesn't exist anymore.  But it was called the how we live team.  And really it was a group of reporters that was just writing about how people live.  And I was writing about kind of demographics and the American family.  And it was--I think that the experience of writing the book and the experience of writing longer form narrative, really helped me, you know.  It, it changed things.  I, I wrote, I wrote longer, much longer pieces than I had done in a long time.  And, and, and for me, you know articles that were very meaningful.  So I think it--I think it has helped.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) give me an example.
Speaker 1: So I wrote for instance, like I said I focused on, on family.  And so I wrote about--a story about developmentally disabled people who had been institutionalized for decades, who were finally returning to community living, to families, to group homes and what that transition was like.  I wrote about adoption.  I traveled to Guatemala and wrote about a family that had been trying to adopt a child for five years and, and traveling back and forth.  I wrote about a, a Russian child that was adopted who was--who died in unusual circumstances, and how this death affected this family and, and how it played out in Russia.  And really just--I wrote about Asian Americans and, and, and marriage and how marriage choices are changing.  I wrote about gay marriage.  But really it was some of that year of 2010 I think was one of my best years at the paper.  I think certainly I think--
Speaker 2: You mean 2012.
Speaker 1: Two thousand twelve [2012], that's right.  That year of 2012 was one of my best years at the paper.  And I think, I think writing the book helped that.  And I think having such a good year.  I'd, I'd always thought about being a columnist and have had conversations with them about it over time.  So they knew that, you know, this would, might be something that was appealing to me.  But I think, I think the book definitely did help.
Story_ID: 663541
Speaker 1: So where are y- I wanna go back to the question about where you are, you know at this stage, you know of your life and, and what you--I mean even though you've been here twenty years, you're still, you know, you're young.  So it would be different if you were--if I were asking you twenty more years--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and because this is--I ask this because this is something you knew you wanted to do.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And sometimes people then, you know, lose interest.
Speaker 2: And change, yeah.  No, I mean I'm writing a column now, which is new.  It's completely different; it's a great challenge as a writer.  And I'm really enjoying it, I'm writing--
Speaker 1: So you have to find your book--or you--
Speaker 2: No I think--you know I'm working on it, you know.
Speaker 1: Find your voice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it takes time.  But I'm, I'm enjoying that.  And you know some people talk about going into editing; I never want to be an editor, never, never.  People say, "You'll change."  I was like, "No, no.  I really won't."  But I'd love to write another book for sure.  You know once my editors and husband [Henri Cauvin] forget the hard times we had [with 'American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns] (laughter).  It's hard writing a book.
Speaker 1: But you've forgotten them, so--
Speaker 2: There you go, yeah.  No I really would.  You know again, history.  I, I really feel like it was just so--I'm just, I'm really into 19th century history.  I wanna--when I came back, you know my editor said, "Well how does this work you did translate into what you're doing now?"  I said, "You know I did--," it's hard for me--well I can certainly see it as a writer, but in terms of the subject matter, it's harder for me to see--it doesn't easily translate into newspaper writing 'cause I really am so interested in 19th century, and early 20th century.  But I, I'm always looking for ways.  I think even in this column I'll find ways.  And I think that if I were going to--if I won the lottery, then I think that's probably what I would do.  I would--
Speaker 1: You would just write.
Speaker 2: I would just write books, I would.  But there's not a way to really sustain that unless you are lucky enough to have a best seller.  So what a lot of people do at The Times [The New York Times] is they write a book and they work for four or five years and they write another book.  I think--and that seems like a path that might be satisfying for me.
Story_ID: 663542
Speaker 1: So what do you want--when you look back you know over your life, at least we had some you know, little (unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You wanted some rough spots there, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I didn't want rough spots, but I mean--
Speaker 2: But there were real ones.
Speaker 1: You know I mean I wanted to have because you know people stand at the end of the things when they've been through it, it's not just like operating you know that way.  So you--so I'd like to ask you if you had to do it over again, would you do anything differently?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything that I would do differently; I really can't.  I think that I've, I've been lucky to you know be able to see and, and to do so many interesting things.  You know it was enormously meaningful.  I, I almost take it for granted sometimes.  I have a picture of myself and my husband [Henri Cauvin] with the Obamas [Michelle Obama and HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  They have an annual Christmas party at the White House [Washington, D.C.] for journalists and--poor people.  I mean they stand and pose for these photos, you think, oh no.  But for my--and you know I spent time at the White House and I've, you know I've met--traveled on Air Force One, I've you know interviewed presidents, et cetera.  And I, you know it's part of my work; it's what I do.  But you know I take it for granted and I--when I took that picture, I sent it to my mother [Lucille Smith Swarns] and it was so meaningful to them.  My uncle said, "You know, they came to this country with almost nothing."  And he said, "I, I never, ever imagined that you know, one of our children would be standing next to a president in the White House."  And so I feel sometimes when I, you know step back and think about it, you know that's, that's, that is something.  You know most of the time it's just what I, you know it's just what I've done, but I've been very lucky (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) quintessentially American dream story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663543
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the field of journalism and how it has changed and so how--in this, in this course of time, you know not--I mean people who were much older have seen, you know, the change and came into it.  But how, how--what do you feel about the change?  Because new--I mean in the meantime, some people say New York Times [The New York Times] is the only newspaper left standing.
Speaker 2: I know, it's dramatic.  You know I, I joke sometimes that you know my kids [Gabriel Cauvin and Julian Cauvin] will be teenagers, in high school and say, "Have you seen the newspaper?  I have some at my house," you know.  Who knows whether we will--how long will we have paper?  I don't know.  It's been dramatic how it's changed.  When I got into the newspaper business, it was a reliable, steady way to earn a living, for a career.  To be in your mid-forties at this time in journalism is in some ways a scary place to be, particularly if you're a parent.  We always think, my husband [Henri Cauvin] and I, a two parent newspaper family.  What have we done to you children?  So much has changed.  You know I--my first experience at a newspaper was at the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] where we had manual typewriters, okay.  And now we have online, multiplatform kind of storytelling.  And some of it is really exciting, what we can do.  But some of it is scary because so--the industry has been contracting so much.  I have so--I know so many people who are without work and who thought they were going to be journalists for their careers, and they're not, and are really struggling to figure out what's next.  And everyone says, "You have to have a plan B, you know."  I'm not sure exactly what you know, mine would be.  I'm hoping, you know, I'm hoping to keep doing what I'm doing.  But there are fewer and fewer places where you can keep doing what I'm doing.  So when I go to universities sometimes, it's hard for me to talk about my twenty years in journalism because how many places have foreign bureaus?  How many places have budgets where they're gonna send a young reporter, you know, across the country to cover something?  You know it just--it just--there are just fewer and fewer.  How many places are, are going to say, "Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Swarns] spend four months writing about one adoption case?"  I mean it's just--it's just--it's changed dramatically.  On the other hand, I do feel like there is still, maybe not as big as we would like, but still an audience for the kind of work that is meaningful to me, that goes deep, that makes people come to life and helps people to step into someone's shoes and really explain something in a deep and thoughtful way.  There is I think still an audience for that.  But I'm not sure how big it is and I'm not sure how, you know, the, you know whether the economic model can sustain itself.
Speaker 1: So what do you think the new world of journalism is because now blogs, people--I mean--
Speaker 2: Everyone's a journalist, right.  You know--
Speaker 1: And some of these blogs are getting paid a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually you know a lot of New York Times reporters are leaving, you know.  They go to websites and, and things like that, you know.  Which you know wouldn't have happened before.  People are experimenting and in some ways some, some people have taken some risks.  You know I, I know people who have left newspapers for some of these startups and are out of jobs now.  But some people might do really well and it's a really fluid, complicated, uncertain world out there.
Story_ID: 663544
Speaker 1: But can you talk about the role of journalism in our society?  Because actually I mean it's been such a central part of our society--
Speaker 2: Of course, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and other societies, so I mean if the blogs--well anyway I don't wanna comment, but I just--
Speaker 2: I just feel like it's so important.  I feel like to understand--we, we in terms of history, we write the first draft of history.  It's--we are the resource that historians use, you know.  If we stop writing about things, you know it's, it's--we, we, we watch government, even though we do it less and less.  We watch state government, we watch local government.  It's so important; it's so important.  And, and we play an important explanatory role in terms of how things work, as well as just sometimes just liven up your day by you know, writing something really funny or you know--so you know I know a lot of people, young people in particular, I know they don't read newspapers.  Whenever I go, I say, "How many of you--?" They're like--but they read online and maybe it will just be a different vehicle.  But I think what we do remains enormously important to a society.  And, and you know and particularly when I think about you know, foreign work which is really important.  You know Americans are notably insular, and newspapers are sometimes the place where you know, people learn about what else is out there.  And I think that's really important and, and there are fewer and fewer newspapers doing that.
Story_ID: 663545
Speaker 1: Now what are your hopes and concerns about the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, that's a tough one.  You know I--
Speaker 1: You have two black boys [Gabriel Cauvin and Julian Cauvin].
Speaker 2: I do, I do, I do.  You know we are in such an interesting time.  I am grateful to have two children who will have spent eight years of their existence with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and know that that is possible.  You know that is--I didn't think it was possible.  I, I remember--I, I just didn't.  I, I never--it took me a long time to think it would--I think I was in October probably before I was really, really thinking it was gonna happen.  For them it's never gonna be that kind of thing.  So that's, that's an enormous gift.  On the other hand, if you look at the numbers, it's--we are struggling.  If you look at the numbers of children growing out, growing up in single parent households.  What's happened to marriage?  I mean the--you know, poverty.  I mean we have made so much progress, but there is so much to do, so much to do.  So and you know I've, I, you know I, I came after--I grew up after the Civil Rights Movement and I am one of those people who benefitted enormously from the struggle, enormously.  Doors that--I mean I have had so many doors opened to me.  But I also think we run the risk of amnesia, you know, and of forgetting.  And I think that some people say that you know in fact when I was talking to agents about this book ['American Tapestry: The Story of the Black, White and Multiracial Ancestors of Michelle Obama,' Rachel L. Swarns], "Slavery? Kind of nichey."  Nichey?  How nichey is slavery?  It's only the American experience.  It's not niche-y.  But I think some people would like to not think about it.  It's so important to think about.  It's one of the things I have taken away from this experience with this book is that all of us as Americans need to think about it.  But black people, we really need to think about it; we need to go, we need to reclaim those stories and reclaim our, our people and our people's stories.  And because I think it really--you know I was--when I was doing the book, I was looking for a time for who in Mrs. Obama's [Michelle Obama] family was--if I could find among the first to vote.  And it was many efforts that I made that just kind of didn't go anywhere.  But I was in Chicago [Illinois] and she had family in North Carolina.  And I found a, a book of voter registration records from 1867, North Carolina.  And looked and, and didn't find her.  But I found my great-great-great-grandfather who had registered to vote in 1867.  And I still remember that day and how I felt when I saw his name.  It didn't say much about him, just that he was in his forties and that he registered to vote.  Didn't say whether he did vote or who he voted for.  But the first thing I did was call my father [Joseph Swarns], you know I told you my father has felt like an outsider.  And like this is not his country.  And I said--you know, it's our country.  As soon as we could, we were participating, so.
Speaker 1: Well, it's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very meaningful.
Story_ID: 663546
Speaker 1: And I think that, I think that for people who given our history, have felt like outsiders, that that's critical.  And I think it's, you know--and I, I just think it's one of the things that you know because it's old stuff and whatever, it's, it's long ago, but it's not.  So I think you know those kinds of stories, and these kinds of stories that you're gathering, are, are so important.  So I feel like you know, we are at a place where so much possibilities, so much promise, but so many problems too.  And you know I wanna raise my boys [Gabriel Cauvin and Julian Cauvin] you know, they're very privileged young men, or will be.  And--but I want them to understand that that's not the whole picture and that we have an obligation to do what we can.  You know and as journalists, you know of course that's not--well the journalist, black, you know American, black American journalists in the 21st century, that's not kind of what we do.  Of course historically speaking, that is absolutely what black journalist did, they were, you know advocacy was--it, it was entirely what people did because there was no one--Ida B. Wells wrote about lynchings because nobody was writing about them.  And it's, it's not a role that black journalists, that we see ourselves playing today because we are journalists and we are impartial and we keep ourselves a distance from what we're covering.  And we're not advocates in any way.  And I, I don't see myself as an advocate in, in you know I'm, I'm a journalist you know.  I, I tell stories.  But there's, but there's power to the stories that we tell.  And we sometimes tell stories and find stories that are different.  And introduce people who might not be seen otherwise.  And you know what has always mattered to me really regardless of who I'm writing about, whether or not it's black people or white people or anyone, is to make them real and tangible to people.  And I think that you know, perhaps it's not an advocacy role, it's not.  I mean as a journalist, that's not what we do.  But I think that if I bring some understanding, then you know then that's, that's important and that's meaningful.  And, and who I am and, and, and where I came from informs that I think.
Story_ID: 663547
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't--I'm, I'm too young to have a legacy (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) No, you've been there [The New York Times] twenty years. (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know, I don't know.  I guess you know I, I guess I would hope that Sydney Freedberg's [Sydney P. Freedberg] message to me that I can impart to someone else, that, it's possible, you know.  That was the most powerful thing.  It's possible.  It may not be easy, but it's possible.  So if my life in any way, like I said I don't think of myself--shows what's possible and encourages someone because of that, then that would be meaningful I guess.
Story_ID: 663548
Speaker 1: And then what about the legacy of your generation, of black Americans?  At the end of the day, where would--
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting when you think about--because you know again, I don't think of myself often in a historical context.  Though I am obviously interested in history.  I was talking to someone recently, I did a panel at the American Historical Association this month and I was talking to a guy who said twenty years.  How, how many black--you know black reporters, how many black female reporters have been at the paper for that long, or have done those things?  And I, I don't know.  I, I just never thought about it that way.  We have--my generation we have a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], that's not too bad; black first lady [Michelle Obama], that's not too bad.  I think you know, it's--I, I--you know I don't know that I have a good answer to that 'cause I think so much of the story is unfinished.  You know I think that obviously we've made a lot of progress, but I also think that there's so much that is yet to be done.  On the other hand, you know I think for young people and even you know, for people younger than us, perhaps you know so much of what is astonishing to us is normal.  And so you know I, I'm hopeful that our experiences lead to a place where you know little girls don't grow up feeling so much like I did, like an outsider perhaps.  You know I sometimes joke with people that I feel like I'm an education to people--I feel like I'm always--I always was--what was nice about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] again is that I didn't feel like I had to be--but you know, sometimes you know you're coming into contact with people who have no idea; who've never met a black person or not really, never really talked.  And so I feel like just being who we are and being out there is, you know, I don't know.  Maybe it just makes it a little easier for, for young people than it was.
