Story_ID: 155952
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: George Irving Shirley, G-E-O-R-G-E, I-R-V-I-N-G, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 18th, 1934, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Can we pause a second? (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, okay, we're back again.  So you were born April 18th, 1934, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: All right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: Well, I started professional life as a high school music teacher in the Detroit [Michigan] Public Schools in 1955, at [Sidney D.] Miller High School.  Then--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm just looking for a general occupation--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so teacher, teacher, performer.
Speaker 2: Okay, music teacher and performer.
Speaker 1: Music teacher and performer.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your, would you say, I guess a distinction that could be made is that you're a, a music professor at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: That's right. I'm an emeritus professor--
Speaker 2: Emeritus, right.
Speaker 1: --Of music, specialty, voice, at the University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre, and Dance.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Good question.  Today is June, it's, is it the 10th?
Speaker 2: I think it's the 10th, yeah.  June 10th, the year?
Speaker 1: 2010.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are presently in the studio that I have been using.  It's a studio of a colleague of mine, Shirley Verett, who's on leave at present.  And since I am an emeritus professor, I have no home of my own, so I've been using her studio.  This is at the School of Music, Theater, and Dance, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor campus.
Story_ID: 155953
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say fish of any, almost any variety.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Can't say that I do.  I'd have, if I thought about it longer, I probably would come up with something but not something that just pops into my head that I would use on the spur of the moment.
Story_ID: 155954
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Daisy, D-A-I-S-Y, Bell, that was her maiden name, B-E-L-L, Shirley, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what is her date of birth and place, place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born September 22nd, 1900.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: In Huntington, H-U-N-T-I-N-G-T-O-N, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know, about your mother's ancestors on that side of the family.  How far back can you trace them, and are there any stories that--
Speaker 2: I know my grandmother, who was part Native American, I believe of the Choctaw tribe, or maybe one quarter.  My knowledge of my grand, her, her, my mother's father is much more--much less complete than that.  I think that he was from Yazoo City, Mississippi, I think.  He was a coal miner who was killed in an accident in the mine.  My grandmother never remarried.  She had eight children and eventually followed them to the North and lived her last years in Michigan, first in Mount Clemens and then the last year of her life with her eldest child, my Aunt Addie [ph.], in Detroit.  When we first came to Detroit my parents worked in private, and I couldn't live with them, so I spent the first summer with my grandmother in Mount Clemens.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was either Candice, C-A-N-D-I-C-E, or Kansas, K-A-N-S-A-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, alright, so you, you never seen it spelled out or written out?
Speaker 2: Well, I've seen it spelled both ways (laughter).  I think that the pronunciation of it, my family sort of fudged whether it was Kansas or Candice, but I've seen it spelled both ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The last name was Hubbard, H-U-B-B-A-R-D.  I have a whole family of relatives named Hubbard who live out in Mount Clemens.  And I've been to one of the family reunions a number of years ago.  But they've done quite a bit of genealogy, genealogical research on that side of the family.  And one of the things that I wanna do in retirement is to follow through on that and learn more about my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about your grandfather?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Marshel, M-A-R-S-H-E-L, Bell, B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he, he was born in Yazoo City, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I wouldn't swear to it, but that seems to be sort of the general knowledge or least what I remember someone telling me.
Speaker 1: So are, are there any stories from your mother's side about what was going on during slavery or Reconstruction or?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Again, my, I've heard my aunts, who are all gone now, my mother say that they saw, I think, one photograph of my grandmother's mother, who was standing next to something that looked like a TB--a teepee.  I was just looking at what I have before that.  Evidently, there was, that evidently this woman was the child of a Dutchman and a Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is--I have some things on the computer that I, I can send you to, to maybe flesh this out.  But the child of the Dutchman and a Native American was the mother of my grandmother.  My, my, my grandmother had very strong Native American features, strong cheekbones, a nose, hair that was very long.  And she could have really been, if she had been dressed in Native American garb, you'd sworn that she was Native American.  So what I'll do is send you some information on, on that--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --to flesh it out (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 155955
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Daisy Bell Shirley] grow up in, in Huntington, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Along with her brothers and sisters.  Two of her brothers fought in the first World War [World War One, WWI].  Again, the eldest child was my Aunt Addie [ph.].  I can't, I, I don't know--I think the next child was my Uncle Ed.  Again, I can send you the rundown of all of these names and their--any information I have on them.  But all of the children eventually moved to the North, and as I said, my moth--my grandmother [Candace Hubbard] followed them, lived in--they moved to Indianapolis [Indiana].  They moved to Detroit [Michigan].  I don't think any of them moved to Chicago [Illinois].  But Indianapolis and Detroit seemed to be the, the places where they wound up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, there's probably some rail line or some, some, some reason that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --That route was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that Indianapolis seemed to be the initial draw with the exception of the fact that I think my Aunt Addie, for whatever reason, came to Detroit, possibly because of the industry that existed at that time. That probably drew her.  She eventually married a man who I think, who worked I believe in the, the automobile industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe Pappy did, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did your mother have any stories about growing up in Huntington and, and about the move to the North?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, after her father [Marshel Bell] died, I believe that her mother did, her mother might have married again.  As I said before, she didn't, but there was a relationship with someone else that didn't work out.  And it was at that point, I think, that people started to move. Maybe some of, maybe some of the older kids had gone already to the North.  But when that relationship didn't work out, then it was at that point I believe that my grandmother decided to move from Huntington.  But they--I visited Huntington only once.  That, that was when I was--I went down with my parents--I must have been about eight years old, so my recollection of it is fairly vague.  She didn't really talk much about life in Huntington.  At, at one point my mother and her sister--I can't remember whether my Aunt Mabel [ph.] was older--I think my Aunt Mabel was probably the sister, the sibling who was a year or two older than my mother--they went to, I think, Missouri to work in private at some point as, as maids.  And at one point, my mother I think maybe had one year of college, at Shorter College [Little Rock, Arkansas].  She spoke of her experience at Shorter College, but it was only one year.
Speaker 1: That's in Little Rock, yeah.
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know how long she worked in private.
Speaker 1: Now, now when you say in private, are you saying that she was a live-in worker--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --With--
Speaker 2: Right, with a family.
Speaker 1: --With a family or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  She and my Aunt Mabel did that.  But I don't know how, again, how, what the length of time was, but this was the case.  And I don't know how that factored in, where that slots into her eventually moving north to Indianapolis, where she met my father [Irving Shirley].
Story_ID: 155956
Speaker 1: Alright, now let me go to your father's side then.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Irving, I-R-V-I-N-G, Ewing, E-W-I-N-G, Shirley, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y.  And there's a little sidebar (laughter) to his middle name.  In, in Kentucky, they pronounced Ewing "Eurin" (laughter).  And indeed, actually, it was spelled that way I think on his birth certificate, E-U-R-I-N.  But when my dad (laughter) went North and he encountered the other word that sounds like that, he decided that he was going to change the spelling of his name.  So he spelled, he spelled it, E-W-I-N-G, Ewing.  But, whenever you go to Kentucky, whenever I'm around my relatives, the older ones in particular, it's Eurin (laughter), so Irving Ewing Shirley.  (Laughter) and he was born in Summer Shade, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: What, what year was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in, he was, he was born July 22nd, 1900.  My parents were born two months to the day apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Summer Shade, Kentucky, now where is Summer Shade?
Speaker 2: Summer Shade, Kentucky, is about maybe twenty minutes or so from Glasgow, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, now everybody knows where Glasgow (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, maybe (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I don't, I don't think--I'm just being funny.  Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: It's in the western part of the state.  If you go through Cincinnati [Ohio], south into Kentucky, you come to the cave area.  And then you turn, I, I guess you turn east from the cave area, Horse Cave and what have you, and eventually you'll wind up in Glasgow.
Speaker 1: Now there's a university or something in Glasgow, Kentucky, isn't it?  I think I've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know--
Speaker 1: --state (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --whether there's a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --university there or not. No, I'm not quite sure of that.  But it's a little town, has--I was there a couple of years ago for a reunion, a family reunion.  And the farm where, the farm that we used to visit, we used to go down almost every summer to visit with one of the brothers that stayed on the land.  My father's family numbered fourteen, and he was in the second half of that group.  I think he had two siblings, yes, or maybe three that were younger than he.  Both my parents outlasted their siblings.  My dad was six months short of completing a hundred years when he passed away.  And my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley] was ninety years old when she passed away.  So there were fourteen in my dad's family.  My grandfather's name was George.  My grandmother's name was Lue Settie, that's capital L-U-E, and then capital S-E-T-T-I-E.  And I'm trying to think of her maiden name--Ray, R-A-Y, Lue Settie Ray.
Speaker 1: Was there a story behind her name, Lue Settie?
Speaker 2: Not that I know.  There may very well be, but I, I, I, I don't know it.  My grandfather passed away in the 1930s, but I remember seeing him.  He must have--I must have been about three years old when I saw him, 'cause I think he passed, passed away in about 1938 or so.  I, I, again, I can send you, I have the particulars of that that I can send you.
Story_ID: 155957
Speaker 1: But, but, but the [paternal] family acquired land down there [Summer Shade, Kentucky].  They, they--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they had their own land.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father [Irving Shirley], my--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --grandfather [George Shirley] was a tobacco farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was their source of income.  When we start, started going to Kentucky, there were two brothers who stayed on the land.  All the rest of the children left and went north.  The story behind that, other than the fact that it was probably, it was probable that they might have done so anyway.  It was the fact that the eldest son was named Bee, B-E-E, was accused of stealing a bicycle at some point.  My dad and his siblings swore that Bee had only borrowed the bike.  I think he had been working somewhere, and he'd borrowed the bike, but he was accused of stealing it.  And when the authorities arrested him, my grandfather didn't stand up, didn't argue in favor of Bee, the story that Bee had borrowed the bike.  And he said well, basically, if he did this, then he's gotta serve his time.  So Bee was jailed, and he was killed in a fight while he was in jail, which created a terrible situation in the family because all the children, as far as I can tell, had been supportive of Bee.  And so they, their feelings for their father were poisoned by that situation.  And I think that my grandmother [Lue Settie Ray Shirley] was, well, she certainly was deeply affected by this.  I don't know what that did in terms of her relationship, her feelings for her husband.  So a lot of the children decided, you know, when they got old enough that they would take off and go north.  And again, many of them wound up in Indianapolis [Indiana]. Some went to Chicago [Illinois].  So, again, my grandfather passed away in the mid to late thirties [1930s].  My grandmother, again, lasted into her nineties.  But we would--the, the, the two, the two sons that stayed on the land, my Uncle Tom and Uncle Corbett [ph.].  And when we started going to Kentucky, that I, that, the years that I can remember, Uncle Corbett initially lived in the farmhouse and on the land that my dad had grown up on.  My Uncle Tom lived in the second farm that had been purchased by my grand, my, my grandparents, and that's the house that I knew best.  And that house was sold by one of Uncle Tom's children maybe about ten years, twelve years ago now, again, to the apparent consternation of his siblings.  But he sold it to a white family.  And I've, when I've been to, back to Summer Shade--been there a couple of times in recent years--I've always gone over to visit that farm. I mean I, I, I loved that space, that, that, that farm.  The old farmhouse was torn down by the fellow who purchased it, and a new one was built in another sector of the acreage.  But that's, that experience of visiting Kentucky and getting to know my country cousins, was, was a wonderful experience for me.
Speaker 1: Is, is there a family tradition as to how the land was acquired or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, I, I, I couldn't, I assume that, that through his labors, my grandfather was able to purchase this land and was very successful raising a family of fourteen, raising tobacco.  They were self-sustaining. I mean they, they had certainly their garden.  And Uncle Tom continued as, and Uncle Corbett, continued to farm their lands.  Uncle Corbett passed away just a few years ago.  He had a long life as well.  He lived to be 102, but he passed on before my, my dad did.  And both Corbett and Tom had fairly large families.
Story_ID: 155958
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father [Irving Shirley] have a chance to go to school and--
Speaker 2: My dad had about a fifth grade education.  On the trips to Kentucky, I had a chance to go to school 'cause my cousins were still in school when I was out, when I got out for the summer.  And so I would go with them on occasion to the same school that my dad went to, the one-room schoolhouse in Summer Shade [Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: No, it was probably something like P.S. 1 or 2 or 3 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they numbered them like that?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think so, and that was the black school.  I remember sitting in that school once and thinking, gee whiz, I know more than the teacher that's teaching my cousins 'cause there were some misspellings that they were given.  It was a young teacher, young black teacher. I thought, wow (laughter), but that's what they had.
Speaker 1: So this is in the thirties [1930s] or early, early forties [1940s].
Speaker 2: This was thirties [1930s] and early forties [1940s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is--eventually your father went, moved to Indianapolis [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes, he came up to Indianapolis, I think straight away, when he decided to leave.  He was actually supposed to be drafted in, in 1917, but just before the event, the war [World War One, WWI] ended.  So, he was, he was saved from that. And he moved up at some point, probably in his early twenties, to Indianapolis.  I don't know exactly when he came.  I know it's there that he met my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley].
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story as to how they met or how they fell in love?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know how they met, whether it was in church or what, but they did, and they married.  They both worked for a while in private as maid and butler.  At one point, my dad was working for an official of the Maytag Company as chauffeur and butler.  And in that capacity he traveled around a lot, around the country.  I remember, after I came along, his, he worked for the, he worked for the Maytag Company.  And he lost the job through some dispute with one of the supervisors or his boss.  And it was at that time that he decided to move to Detroit [Michigan], to take a job in the automobile industry.
Speaker 1: About ha--were, were you born by that, that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was--I was born in '34 [1934], and my parents moved to Detroit either in 1940--I'd say, probably in 1940. I was about six.
Story_ID: 155959
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how many--can, can you name your, your siblings and tell us where you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm it (laughter).  I have no siblings.  My parents were married in 1925, and through possible ignorance of how pregnancies worked, the, their first child was aborted.  My parents wanted children, both of them coming from large families.  They would have had more than just one child, but maybe there were some complications of some sort, but my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley] lost the child.  And that gave her problems to a point where she felt and my dad [Irving Shirley] felt that they probably would never be able to have children.  Well, I came along nine years later, and I was born by caesarian section.  My Aunt Mabel [ph.], who I mentioned earlier, my wife's, I mean my mother's, my mother's sister, worked for one of the leading obstetricians in Indianapolis [Indiana].  And, a man named Karl, doctor named Karl Ruddell at St. Vincent's Hospital [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And she worked for the Ruddell family in private as a maid.  And so Ruddell agreed to perform the operation.
Speaker 1: So otherwise it would have been impossible to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she couldn't have had a child--
Speaker 1: --even born by caesarian section--
Speaker 2: --through a regular, right. She wouldn't have been able to have a child normally.
Story_ID: 155960
Speaker 1: With [Dr. Karl] Ruddell agreeing to do that, that led to my being the first black baby born at St. Vincent's Hospital in Indianapolis [Indiana], since St. Vincent's was, I guess, Catholic hospital.
Speaker 2: Okay, the first black man--
Speaker 1: My mother [Daisy Bell Shirley]--
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: --my mother said that the, the nuns all (laughter) came around to see this black child who had, never seen a black baby before.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, well, tell us, when you can, you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, their, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 1: I'd say probably I'm split evenly (laughter), right down the middle.  My mother was a very loving person.  She was compassionate.  She was very spiritual.  She loved being connected to people.  I think that I--I know that I have those traits.  She was not one to give up easily.  She, at some, one point, got tired of cleaning people's houses and put herself through secretarial school, Lewis Business College [sic., Lewis College of Business] in Detroit [Michigan] was a black-owned business.  And my mom decided that she was going to go to school, scrape up the money somehow and do this and learn to be a secretary. Took shorthand, typing.  Matter of fact, I learned, I taught myself to touch, to touch type using her books that she brought home from her lessons.  She loved to sing, and she loved to recite poetry.  As a matter of fact, my dad [Irving Shirley] also was a musician.  He and his brothers used to play for dances down in [Summer Shade] Kentucky there on the farm.  My dad could play piano, fiddle, and guitar all by ear.  He couldn't, didn't read music, but he could hear something and then play it in almost any key.  When we were in Indianapolis, I started singing with my parents when I was about four.  And we would travel from church to church giving programs for afternoon teas and what have you.  And my mother would sing. My dad would play the piano and accompany her and me.  Matter of fact, I have a copy of a program from about 1938 on which I sang.
Speaker 2: That's interesting then.
Speaker 1: The, they, they entered me in my very first singing competition when I was five.  There was a, a department store in Indianapolis, Blocks [The William H. Block Company], and Blocks had something called the Children's Hour at one of the local theaters.  And so they entered me in this competition, and I sang a piece with my dad playing the piano, called 'There's a Gold Mine in the Sky.'  It was an old Bing Crosby tune.  And I won second prize.  I--
Speaker 2: Can you, can you remember that?  Can you sing a, a little few bars for us?
Speaker 1: (Singing) "There's a gold mine in the sky far away.  We will find it, you and I some sweet day.  There'll be clover there for you down the line when we find that long lost gold mine in the sky"--something like that.  "So take your time old mule, I know you're growing lame.  But you'll pasture in the stars when we strike that claim, and we'll settle there and watch the world go by when we find that long lost gold mine in the sky."  And a couple of things, I have a very strong memory of my early childhood.  And I can remember standing in the wings of the theater watching this young girl, little girl, who won first prize sing and dance to One Two, Buckle My Shoe (laughter).  So second prize was the chance to make a recording.  And I can remember standing in the room watching the engineer--just I was fascinated--watching him record this thick wax thing, watching the wax curl off of the disc as I sang.  And up until the early 1970s, my parents still possessed that recording.  When they moved to a new location, somehow it was lost.  But I can remember this kind of scratching (singing) "There's a gold mine (laughter) in the sky far away."  And at the end of it, I said, "My name is George Irving Shirley, and I'm five years old." (Laughter)  And I wish I could, I wish I still had that recording.  But they, they, they kept that.  So, the music in me--
Speaker 2: Now, now that was in Indianapolis, right?
Speaker 1: That was in Indianapolis.
Speaker 2: In 1939--
Speaker 1: No, '38 [1938], so--
Speaker 2: '38 [1938].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The music came from both sides of my family.  My dad sang a little bit, but basically he played for us.  Interesting, to jump ahead just a wee bit, he died of the results of a stroke in, in 2000.  And the day maybe before he passed I, I visited him, and he was sort of semi-comatose, but he wasn't completely out.  So I sat next to the bed, and I started singing hymns that he knew, and like 'The Old Rugged Cross.'  And I saw his lips moving at one point, and I leaned closer, and I kept singing.  And he was singing the bass line.  He was singing the bass line to what I was, to the hymn that I was singing.
Story_ID: 155961
Speaker 1: So the music was, was from both ends of the family.  My father [Irving Shirley] tended to be a bit impatient.  I mean he was an insurer.  He spent the bulk of his life as an insurance agent in Detroit [Michigan], working for Mammoth [Life and Accident Insurance Company], which was a Kentucky company.
Speaker 2: So he came up here to--
Speaker 1: He--
Speaker 2: --because of the auto industry but in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he came up and he was initially employed as an ark welder.  He, one day, and I remember this very clearly, came home.  He had been to the dentist and had a tooth extracted.  And something was bothering him, and he reached into his--he was standing in the (unclear), the morning, he was standing in front of the mirror, the bathroom mirror, and I was in the bathroom with him.  And he reached into his mouth and pulled out of the gum a kind of oblong black object that the dentist had used to pack the gum.  The next thing I knew was he was in the hospital.  He was initially placed in a, sent to a place called Eloise [Sanitarium], which was a tuberculosis sanatorium on the outskirts of town, on wha--on the then outskirts of Detroit, 'cause they didn't know what was wrong with him but eventually diagnosed it as blood poisoning.  He was in the hospital for nine months.  That was when they kept you in the hospital rather than just getting rid of you.  He was in the hospital for nine months, and at one point, he was given up for dead.  My mother [Daisy Bell Shirley] was told.  She told me, 'cause I couldn't go out to see him because it was a TB [tuberculosis] sanitarium.  My mother said that the doc, the doctors told her, "Take his belongings home.  There's no way this man can last through the night.  Just make preparations."  And my father told me later, he said, "I, I died that night."  He'd one of those afterlife experiences that you read about.  He said, "They wheeled me out (laughter) in the hallway on a gurney."  He said, "I died.  I found myself in the presence of Jesus."  Now quite often if you've read anything about these experiences, people will say that they go through a tunnel, and they wind up in the presence of a being of light.  And depending on one's religious beliefs, the Christians tend to identify this phenomenon as Jesus and others, whomever, whatever, whomever.  But he said, "I was in the presence of Jesus.  And he took me through a graveyard, and he would stop and hold out his arm over the grave.  And the body would rise to the surface.  Some bodies, the faces were distorted with pain and anguish, and others were peaceful and calm."  He said, "He took me then to a doorway, and he opened it partially.  And I looked in, and people were singing and joyous."  And he said, "Jesus asked me, would you like to stay?"  I said--and he said, my dad said, "Oh yes."  He said, "Well, you can't now."  He said, "You have things still to accomplish, to do on earth."  And he said he reached under my left arm and pulled out three boxes, and he placed them behind the door.  And he said, "These are your treasures.  They will be here when you return." He said, "From that point, I started getting better."  He said, "There was an angel that I saw every night in the closet door in my room." Said, "The doctors had no answer for my beginning to recover after they'd given me up for dead."  He said, "I asked the doctor one day, 'What month is this,' and he says February.  'How long have I been here?'  And he said, 'You've been here about eight months, seven months.'"  He said, "I told him, 'Well, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm going home in April.'"  He said, "There's no way you're going home in April.  There's no way that someone in your physical condition will be ready to leave here by that time."  My father came home in April.  I remember the day he walked through the door.  My mother and I had, were staying in a, a boardinghouse on the corner of Josephine [Street] and think I John R [Street] in Detroit.  And I was on the bed.  I was standing on the bed getting ready to go to bed, my father walked in the room.  I'll never forget it.  So he had that experience.  And he told me later, he said, "I'll never be afraid of dying again."
Story_ID: 155962
Speaker 1: Possibly one of the things that he [Shirley's father, Irving Ewing Shirley] had to do, other than to take care of me and my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley], was to be one of the so-called pathfinders that established People's Community Church in Detroit [Michigan].  We had been members of Ebenezer A.M.E. Church since we came, and because of an incident involving what my parents considered to be the unfair treatment of a minister named [Reverend] Carlyle Fielding Stewart, who had been quite an outstanding pastor of Ebenezer A.M.E. Church.  When Reverend Stewart was considered for the Bishopric of the A.M.E. Church, he was denied, and from the point of view of my parents, demoted to a smaller church.  Ebenezer was one of the big churches, black churches in Detroit.  And my parents and many others in the church were really beside themselves at the treatment of this really wonderful man.  And so they bonded together and asked him if he would agree to join them and establish a new church.  And after some really painful soul searching on his part, he decided to do it.  And so he became the founding pastor of People's Community Church in Detroit, which became then one of the most important black churches in the city under his leadership.
Speaker 2: Now, that's, is, is it a nondenominational church?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's part--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of the community church organization.  So that may have been one of the important reasons why he was brought back amongst the living.  My dad was, in his insurance business--he didn't have his own business. He worked for Mammoth [Life and Accident Insurance Company]--he went all over the city of Detroit, writing insurance policies for members of the black community, went into rough neighborhoods. He went--he was all over the place.  And when he celebrated his ninety-ninth birthday, we took him to a restaurant out in Southfield, Michigan.  And as we came, we came out of the parking lot--we were, he was, he walked very slowly by that time--a car pulled up, and a young woman stepped out.  She said, "Is that Mr. Shirley?"  And I said, "Yes."  And she said, "Well, he, he was our insurance agent."  People recognized him. They knew him, and I'm convinced that many of them were able to bury their sons, their wayward sons because of policies that he wrote on their lives.  So he was very well known in Detroit.  One of the things that used to disturb him was the fact that, quite often when he walked up on the porch and knocked on doors in some of these rough neighborhoods, the children inside would call their parents by saying, "Mama, it's the policy man." (Laughter).  He said, "No, I'm not the policy man.  I'm the insurance agent."  'Cause for many blacks, naturally policy was the numbers racket.  That was their insurance (laughter).  So he didn't appreciate that, that confusion in their, in their minds.  But he was very well known, and very well respected.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I, as I said, I think that my personality is cut right down the middle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My dad was very organized in his business.  He used to, he had a great ability with numbers.  He would do all these with the fig, keep the figures in his head, and then he got himself a, an adding machine, so everything was exact.  I can't say that I took that from him 'cause I'm pretty lousy (laughter) at arithmetic and math.  But the sense of organization is something that I feel very strongly.
Story_ID: 155963
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you're actually coming up early years during the [Great] Depression--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --basically and in Detroit [Michigan].  Can you describe, now can you describe where you lived in Detroit here and, and describe some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay, can I go back to Indianapolis [Indiana] because I'd--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, sure you were there first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  We lived in Indianap- my, my recollection of our home in Indianapolis was a rental home on a major thoroughfare, along which the interurban cars ran.  Those were trains that ran between Indianapolis and surrounding towns.
Speaker 1: The electric train, trains--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --or, or--
Speaker 2: --yeah, I--they, they, they weren't electric--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to my knowledge.  I think that they were powered by some other--they, they may have been. They may have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know in Chicago [Illinois] the interurban trains--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --are elect, electric (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that they were, but I don't remember--we didn't have overhead lines.
Speaker 1: No, they've gotta--it works in another way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, we lived in this house.  This was my house (laughter).  Next door to it, on the left, was a woman named Woolridge [ph.], whose son [James Baskett] played the role of Uncle Remus in the Walt Disney production of the movie--
Speaker 1: 'Song of the South?'
Speaker 2: 'Song of the South.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was an ice parlor across the street, which was a great (laughter) a great boon.  And about a block or two away was Douglass Park, which was a large, beautiful park area, where the local residents would cook out and gather.  That was my neighborhood.  We went to St. John's A.M.E. Church, which was in another part of town.  And that experience I remember very strongly, the choir, growing up in that little church.  The main sanctuary was not in use because it needed repair, and so we held, the services were held in a small building that was attached to the church.  But that--I can remember one Sun, I think I can recall being either christened or baptized one Sunday.  I, I can see that.  I remember being held and looking out with the sunshine coming through the windows and this christening or being baptized.  But that was where the singing started.  I remember we had a babysitter that used to come and take care of me.  We had a piano, naturally.  We couldn't have--not, not have a piano.  My dad [Irving Shirley] would play, and I did my first plunking.  I had my first piano lessons when I was five.  Years later, when I went back to sing with the Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra and my parents came down from Detroit, and I said, "You know, I wanna go and visit to that house," and we did.  There was an older woman living there, and they let us come in and look around.  And I remember the house almost exactly as it was, except for one place where I had put a wall (laughter) that didn't exist, but everything else was as I remembered, had a nice long backyard where my parents would on occasion throw a party for the church members.  I remember listening to the radio, and I have that radio.  It was one, an old RCA in a tall case that had, it was sort of like a grandfather clock on it, but it wasn't really a grandfather clock, but there was a clock at the top on the radio.  And I remember that radio because, in part, because I would listen to spooky radio programs.  And my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley]--we would listen to Joe Louis fights.  And I could recall my mother, during one fight where Joe was having a bit of difficulty putting this, whoever it was, Billy Conn or someone like that, away--I think it was before Conn--my mother running out into the backyard because she couldn't stand (laughter) stand the suspense.  She didn't, didn't want to be around if Joe was gonna get knocked out.  But I have really very strong memories of that Indianapolis experience, and the music making, and just living in that house.  I swore when we moved to come to, to, to move to Detroit, I swore that I was gonna come back and buy that house.  I visited, as I said, the first time with my parents, and then on a subsequent visit I went back to visit it.  And the person who owned it at that time had turned it into a commercial business.  She, in the front yard--the front room had rearranged things.  And she was a hairdresser, so she had chairs there.  And that just sealed it for me. No, I won't come back and buy (laughter), I won't come back and buy this house.
Story_ID: 155964
Speaker 1: When we moved then to Detroit [Michigan], as I said, my parents worked initially for a man named Ernest Breech, who lived out in Birmingham [Michigan].  Breech was chairman of the board of Ford Motor Company.  And at that time, the school system in Birmingham was not that welcoming of black children.  So, I lived, as I said that summer, with my, with my grandmother [Candace Hubbard], my mother's mother, in Mount Clemens [Michigan].  And that fall, my parents decided that they had to move into Detroit.  They had to give up that job, and so they could be parents, and we could be together.  We lived in a number of different places, and it's sort of hard for me to put the sequence of residences in proper order.  I tried to do that repeatedly, and it doesn't quite always, it doesn't quite work out.  But at one point, to say, the first school that I attended was on the so-called North End.  We lived in a couple of places, one on Holbrook [Avenue] in a two-family residence, owned by a black judge whose name I can't recall.  At that time, I attended Alger, the Alger Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan].  We also at one point lived on, on Claremont [ph.], which was not too far from Holbrook.  As a matter of fact, I think that Holbrook existed on one side and Claremont maybe on the other side of where we were--I can't recall.  But we lived at one point in an apartment on Claremont, and I think it was a four-family building, which, where we met people who, who owned that building, whose son was a fabulous pianist.  And as it turned out, years later, when I got my first teaching job at Miller High School [Detroit, Michigan], he was my accompanist.  Billy Hynes [ph.] was his names, fabulous pianist.  So, on Claremont, as I said, we lived.  I, I was still going to Alger School.  At one point we lived in upstairs rooms in the home of a fellow who was a barber.  And it was when we were living there that my dad [Irving Ewing Shirley] became ill.  After that, as I said, during this time it was really rough on my mom [Daisy Bell Shirley].  Thank God she had her eldest sister, Aunt Addie [ph.] was--at one point we lived with Aunt--I think that was later.  She had a little help from her oldest sister, and we, she and I lived in this boarding house when I was still going to the Alger School then.  And my mom had to get up say about 4:30 in the morning to make sure that I had breakfast prepared for me, 'cause she had to leave before I ate breakfast to get on the bus, the streetcar or the bus--streetcar in those days--to get to work.  She was still working in private.  And then she would go out to visit my father at the hospital, which, again, was further out, on the outskirts of town.  But her strength, her spiritual strength, was what really got her through that.  And that's a, an image and a memory I'll always hold dear in regards to her example for me.  When my dad got out, I think we lived for a period of time with my aunt.  We lived right across the street from the Old Bethel A.M.E Church on St. Antoine and Frederick Streets.  And it was right--also, the other corner was the children's hospital, Detroit Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan].  Then we lived for a short period of time--at that time I went to the Balch Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: B-A-L-C-H.  And for a short period of time we lived in an apartment in that same area.  Then we moved, I believe, after that we moved to Hague Street, H-A-G-U-E, 618 Hague.  And that's where I spent the bulk of my, the rest of my childhood, and I went to the Moore Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan], which was about two blocks away.
Speaker 2: That's M-O-O-R-E?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  Interestingly enough, Hague Street, when you come to Woodward [Avenue]--Woodward is the dividing line between east and west--the next street--the extension of Hague on the other side is Pingree [Street] and the church that my dad founded [People's Community Church, Detroit, Michigan] and eventually bought, the big Baptist church right on the (laughter) corner of Pingree and Woodward [First Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].  So that, that, that's a very interesting tie in.  About four blocks, three or four blocks from where I grew up, the family church came into existence, and that church is still, is there now and very active.
Story_ID: 155965
Speaker 1: So, we're talking about sights and sounds and smells in, in Detroit [Michigan] I guess about that now, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, Detroit certainly for me was a new experience.  My early experiences in school were, were good, good.  I mean I had really good teachers, getting to make my way with the challenges of dealing with certain students, I mean certain personality types, and the bullies, and, and, and those who were more friendly.  And working into all of that was, was a challenge, was--but I had strong parental influence, and guidance, and support, and which is what I realized a lot of children didn't have and don't have.  So I was blessed in that regard.  The church experience at Ebenezer [A.M.E. Detroit, Michigan] was phenomenal.  Again, this is one of the major black churches in Detroit.  The building was the old Shaarey Zedek temple, Jewish temple, that sat on Willis [Street] and Brush [sic., John R. Street], across from I think, I think it was across from the old Grace Hospital [Detroit, Michigan].  And it was a tremendously impressive looking building, had a dome that could be seen for a good distance and a lot of rooms inside, a gymnasium.  Actually during the Second World War [World War Two, WWII], they housed soldiers there.  There were barracks for black soldiers who were home on leave.  And Joe Louis trained in that gymnasium on occasion.  We would have sports events.  We would have all sorts of community gatherings in that gymnasium.  There were, there was a large sanctuary, and then there was a smaller one across from it.  Across from the gymnasium there was a large kitchen and dining area.  It was just an incredible center of activity for the membership.  And it was church for the black community and possibly for the whites as well at that time.  I mean there wasn't that much to do on the outside other than go to the bars and nightclubs, if you were into that.  And church was the place that gave you a social kind of milieu in which you could function, and then be comfortable, and then find joy.  Church picnics, the church picnic every summer was, was a great experience out on Belle Isle [Park, Detroit, Michigan].  You know, we could get together and play sports and, and have great meals.  It was, it was a wonderful milieu in which to, to grow and be supported.  Life on Hague Street was good.  When I went to Moore Elementary [School, Detroit, Michigan], Moore Elementary was an interesting school because half of the building was devoted to educating kids who'd gotten into trouble, boys.  So it was called, the one half of the school was more for boys, and the other school, half of the school was more elementary, and tween didn't meet.  We would be out on the, on the playground.  For some, some reason the, I don't think there was ever any clash between the two populations.  We had really good teaching at Moore Elementary.  Some of the kids were really tough.  I can remember some incidences there where one teacher was struck by a girl, matter of fact, had her glasses broken on her face.  But those were incidences that were not sort of standard fare, like unfortunately seems to be the case more and more today.  It was a tough neighborhood.  It was a neighborhood that wasn't--it was middle class to poor.  There were businesspeople who lived in the neighborhood. There were poor people who lived in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood called in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It, it was called the North End basically--
Speaker 1: North End, okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  People from, the, the kids who commenced from Moore went to Sherrard Intermediate [School, Detroit, Michigan], which was a few blocks away, and was just closed, and just actually torn down.  And one of the schools at--and Moore Elementary no longer exists.  It was torn down a number of years ago, and condominiums built in its place.  On the corner of Oakland and Hague Streets was Barthwell's Drugstore [sic., Barthwell Drugs].  Barthwell, Sidney Barthwell was one of the premier entrepreneurs, black entrepreneurs, in Detroit at that time.  And I remember going to Barthwell's Drugstore and having sodas at the counter and buying merchandise there.  Oakland Avenue was quite a center, an economic center for the black community.  There were all sorts of shops that served the community.  There was the old Echo Movie Theater.  I used to go and spend a good deal, Satur, many a Saturday looking at doubleheaders, double, double features and enjoying that immensely, being caught up in the world of, of, of movies.  The, after Sherrard Junior High School [Sherrard Intermediate School], we commenced to, to Northern High School [Detroit, Michigan].  And the teaching here, again, was always very strong, excellent teaching.  And Northern produced some of a lot, many future judges, doctors, lawyers, excellent musicians.  The community was vital.
Story_ID: 155966
Speaker 1: Now did you, now you were part of the, a little group you said your parents formed with you with just the family to sing in church and--
Speaker 2: And just, just my mother [Daisy Bell Shirley], my dad [Irving Shirley], and myself.  That was in Indianapolis [Indiana].  And then, and then when we came to Detroit [Michigan], I, my mother sang in the senior choir.  My dad would play for me, for teens, and so we didn't perform as a unit anymore. But I would give recitals at Ebenezer [A.M.E. Church, Detroit, Michigan] and sing for social functions.  The music education curriculum in the public schools taught children to read music from the first grade.  So by the time you got to the sixth grade, if you had any musical chops at all, you were musically literate.  Then junior high school there were really good choral ensembles.  In high school choral and instrumental ensembles were quite outstanding.  When I began my teaching career at the old Miller High School [Detroit, Michigan] in 1956, my choir participated--I started in '55 [1955] and '56 [1956] my choir participated in the first annual choral, citywide choral festival.  And all the high schools choir, high school choirs participated in that--high level of repertoire performed, excellent ensemble, singing in tune, singing with precision.  It was quite spectacular.  And unfortunately that's been reduced to almost nothing now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But, but in the days that you were coming along, the music department, I mean the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Music curriculum was fabulous.
Speaker 1: --Music program were strong, that's right.
Speaker 2: The whole Motown industry grew because of that, all of those singers that Berry Gordy hired to begin his enterprise were musically literate. They could read music.  Two years ago I met [HM] Martha Reeves at an AGMA [American Guild of Musical Artists] meeting--after a meeting, sorry.  And I started to introduce myself.  She said, "Oh, I know who you are.  You were my high school music teacher." (Laughter).  She was in my, one of my girls' voice classes along with Kim Weston.  But these schools produced all that great talent that came out of Detroit, jazz musicians, classical musicians.  When I was at the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] there were five people on the roster from the Detroit area.  And that's pretty good for one of the major opera houses, international opera houses, to have five performers from Motown.  Joseph Silverstein was a longtime concert master of the Boston Symphony Orchestra [Boston, Massachusetts].  He came from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Isidor Saslav from the Baltimore Symphony [Maryland], concert master, Cass Tech.  This town produced great talents, [HM] Smokey Robinson, Aretha Franklin.  Smokey, Smokey formed his group when he was a student at Northern High School, people like Tommy Flanagan [Thomas Lee Flanagan], Yusef Lateef, no, Ahmad Jamal, [HM] Della Reese, Kenny Burrell, Milt Jackson, Kirk Lightsey.  The names go on and on and on and on and on.  The cultural curriculum of Detroit Public Schools was second to none in the nation and now it's destroyed. It's almost, almost destroyed by people who are looking to save money.
Speaker 1: Are you--we'll talk about that later in more detail, but when you were a kid, now were you aware that you had musical talent, or were you considered to be talented in music?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, as I said, I mean I started singing when I was about four.  So I knew that the singing was part of my life.  When I was getting ready to graduate from high school, I mean I had sung the solos.  In 'Messiah,' [George Frideric Handel] high school I sang the tenor solo in the first course of the [Giuseppe] Verdi '[Messa da] Requiem' in one of our concerts.  So I knew that my talent was considerable.  I decided not to, to go into professional music as a singer.  I mean I thought that was, that was a little far away, as, that's far, that was as far, that was as remote as New York City was from Detroit.  But, I decided to become a music teacher.  That was going to be my career, and I was indeed happy with that until Uncle Sam interrupted with the [U.S.] Military draft.  And it was after the draft that I decided to pursue professional singing as an opera singer.
Story_ID: 155967
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have a favorite teacher in the Detroit Public Schools or favorite teachers along--
Speaker 2: Favorite teachers, I remember fondly my elementary school teacher, a woman named Ostrowsky [ph.].  Although she didn't give me any solos to sing (laughter), she--I enjoyed her teaching and preparing me musically.  Ruth Pin [ph.] was my intermediate school music teacher, excellent.  She was African American.  My high school teacher was probably the biggest influence in school, Claire Weimer was her name and she--
Speaker 1: What's that, W-E-I--
Speaker 2: W-E-I-M-E-R, Claire, spelled with an 'e' at the end.  Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] was a basic, basically a black school.  There were two basically black schools in Detroit [Michigan] at that time, high schools, Miller [High School, Detroit, Michigan] and Northern.  That's not to say that there weren't black students at other schools, but these two schools were predominantly black.  Claire Weimer did not weaken the tea when it came to giving us repertoire to sing.  She challenged us with some of the toughest, most demanding literature, choral literature that's out there.  Anything that they could sing, sang at Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] we would sing, we could sing, and would sing at Northern High School.  Again, we performed 'Messiah,' [George Frideric] Handel's Messiah every Christmas.  I sang the tenor solos in Messiah and we had an alumni chorus that came back every Christmas to join us.  My first experience with the [Giuseppe] Verdi '[Messa da] Requiem' mass was when she programmed the first chorus of that mass on one of our spring concerts, and I sang the tenor solos in it.  So, the fact that we were black, did not in her view, and she was Caucasian, did not in her view mean that, well, you know, they can't do this, this repertoire, this is beyond them. Not at all.  So our choir was second to none in the city.  Morris Broadnax, who became one of Berry Gordy's chief arrangers and, and composers, sang base solos in 'Messiah.'  Billy Roquel Davis [Roquel "Billy" Davis], who wrote I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing in Perfect [In Perfect Harmony] he was in the choir as well.  So, we had the best training, the best training.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who is actually in school with you when you were--are there any--
Speaker 2: At the time, as I said, Broadnax, Billy Roquel Davis--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I'm just trying to make sure they weren't there.  You know, I mean, you were--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --You were just speaking in general about who became--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But they, they were actually there with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were there when I was there.
Speaker 1: Broadnax and Davis.
Speaker 2: Let's see, Charles Boles, who's a well-known jazz pianist around Detroit, was there.  He sang in the choir.  When I went back to do my, some of my student teaching at Northern, [Frank] "Sugar Chile" Robinson was there.  I don't know if you remember him.  He was a little guy who gained some fame 'cause he would sit at the piano and just bang it out.  He was in the choir at Northern. [HM] Smokey Robinson came after I did.  One of the people who was in the choir, and I think it was [Abdul] "Duke" Fakir--
Speaker 1: Of the Four Tops?
Speaker 2: Of the Four Tops.  I think it was Fakir who was in the choir, not one of the other fellows.  So, all this talent was there, and it was being fed. It was being developed.
Story_ID: 155968
Speaker 1: Now, now how did you--now, I take it you had decent grades in school and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I wasn't--I mean I, I couldn't say I was an all 'A' student, but I certainly was a 'B' student, a 'B+' student.
Speaker 1: Okay, what else did you like to do in school besides the music?
Speaker 2: Well, I was co-editor of the first page of our high school newspaper [at Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I drew cartoons (laughter).  I drew a cartoon strip for the high school paper.  And I did the same, I did cartoons for the, the, the newspaper at Wayne University, Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], as well, the Collegian.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, a writer and a cartoonist, alright.
Speaker 2: I've, through the years I've dabbled with drawing, and I drew some cartoons for a book that was published by my manager, my professional manager in the singing business.  She published the books about maybe ten, fifteen years ago and asked me to do some cartoons for it, and I, I did.
Speaker 1: What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: It's, I think she called it 'Getting It All Together.'  It's about taking care of all the things that one needs to take care of and be aware of if you're going to have a career as a professional singer in the classical music world.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And I also write.  I love to write.  And I said I've just had an online, an article, an opinion piece published online by the American Music Center in their Music Box, I think it's called, a blog kind of thing online.  It's more than a blog.  It's, it's, it's an opinion publication.  And I wrote an article on the music situation in the public schools in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Alright--
Speaker 2: So I, I, I do some writing also.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in those days though, we're talking about, you came out of high school in the--
Speaker 2: I, I graduated high school in 1951.
Speaker 1: 1951 [1951].  In those days, were you considered an oddball in school because you liked classical music and could, could sing and that sort of thing?  Is that, I mean, or, or did people feel, feel that way in those days?
Speaker 2: I, you know, amongst a certain portion of the school population, maybe.  But I don't really think so.  I mean, I don't, I don't recall anybody saying, you know, he's a sissy because he sings 'cause singing was going on all the time.  And here, again, we had guys who were tough guys who sang.  They'd get around, you know, if they weren't in the choir, they'd get together in the hallways and doo-wop.  And so singing--and then look, [HM] Smokey Robinson coming out of school a few years after I did, singing as high as he did (laughter), I don't think anybody called Smokey a sissy because he sang (in falsetto voice) way up there.  No, singing is a real part of the black community.  And there may have been some, some students who thought that what I say, sang, in terms of classical music, as well, elite, elitist or, but I never got that from anyone.
Speaker 1: Did you ever sing, sing any of the popular culture stuff of the time--
Speaker 2: Very little, but I mean I had my popular heroes.  You know, Nat [King] Cole for me was--people talk about Frank Sinatra.  Well, Sinatra yeah, but Nat Cole for me was about as high as you could get, and Billy Eckstine, Sarah Vaughan, people like that were, yeah, these, these are people that I admired greatly.  But I didn't see myself as a popular singer for the reason I didn't see myself as a gospel singer.  I sang spirituals, and I still am very much involved in trying to keep the spiritual alive in, in, in the minds and the view of present generations, because a lot of people don't know what spirituals are and what they're about.  They know gospel, and that's fine, but there is this other part of our heritage that got us through that people need to know about and it's great music.
Story_ID: 155969
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now how did you decide on which college to attend?
Speaker 2: Well, it was sort of (laughter), sort of decided for me because my parents [Daisy Bell Shirley and Irving Ewing Shirley] didn't have a whole lot of money. And Claire Weimer at Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] knew a woman named Marvel O'Hara [ph.], who was the supervisor of music education at Wayne University [later Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  And so she told Professor O'Hara about me.  And I met her at one point.  I think Marvel came out to Northern to hear me sing, and so it was decided that Wayne would be the place that I would go for my education, to get my music education degree.  I played euphonium in a little community band, and so it was arranged for me to, the summer of 1951, to play in a summer band that was fielded by Wayne University.  I say Wayne University.  It's now, it's now Wayne State, but then it was just plain old Wayne University.  That was a summer of the, I think, See the USA in your Chevrolet thing, you know--
Speaker 1: Dinah Shore--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (singing) See the USA in your Chevrolet.  It was I think an anniversary of the, the General Motors, and so there were a lot of celebrations arranged.  And I remember marching with this band in a big march and celebration in Detroit [Michigan].  This was my first chance to really march with a band to play with a, a big band other than our little maybe five or six-piece community band at, at Ebenezer [A.M.E.] Church [Detroit, Michigan], which was cond- which was formed and conducted by a member of the church who was a professional photographer actually and a man named Gaston Sanders [ph.].  And so that was my entry into Wayne University.  I, as a member of the Wayne band, received a scholarship every football season, which paid my tuition.  So my parents only had to come up with the ninety-five dollars or so for my tuition every other semester off, the off season.  So that was a big help 'cause they didn't have a lot of money, and ninety-five dollars was considerable amount of cash for them to, to fork up.  So, I was able to attend Wayne with that scholarship and achieve my degree.  Actually, I started teaching a semester before, the semester I, the semester I graduated.  There was a position that came open at Miller High School [Detroit, Michigan], and my supervisor arranged for me to take that position as an emergency substitute in regular position.
Story_ID: 155970
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, before, before we get you to Miller [High School, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I mean, what did you learn at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan], and who were some of your mentors at Wayne State?
Speaker 1: Okay, the, Marvel O'Hara [ph.] was, as I said, my supervisor, and she was a real, she became a real champion of my work there.  One of the most significant experiences I had at Wayne was my first taste of music drama.  My last school year the conductor of the men's glee club came to me, a man named [Dr.] Harry Langsford.  I had sung with the glee club a bit.  I sang more with the choir.  But Langsford came to me and said, "I want to do [Igor] Stravinsky's 'Oedipus Rex.'"  'Oedipus Rex' is a work that Stravinsky calls an opera/oratorio.  Based on the Oedipus story, it is written for men's glee club, orchestra, and soloists.  And the staging of the work is very stylized.  And Stravinsky wanted it staged so that the characters were more like statues that moved very slowly, and they're placed on different levels on the stage.  And that's how it was done at, at Wayne.  It was great because I didn't have a whole lot to do in terms of movement because I hadn't really been trained to do that, move and sing that much and, and act that way.  And it was for me a telling experience, a tremendous experience. I loved it. I enjoyed it.  But at that time it didn't speak to me as a way of life.  I was focused on becoming a music teacher.  And we did about three performances of that work at the Jessie Bonstelle Playhouse on Woodward Avenue, not too far from the Wayne Campus.  I have a recording that was made of that.  This was in 1955.  At the time, little did I know that seven years later I would be recording that work with the composer himself and performing it with him with the Washington National Opera [Washington, D.C.].  But that's, that's, that skips ahead a little bit.  But that experience was my first taste of singing an opera, and I owe that to Harry Langsford, who had enough faith in me to sing this work.  And it's, and it's a difficult piece.  It's--he gave me a recording of it that was recorded by the British tenor, Peter Pears, and the score.  I was a good enough musician to really master reading the score, but it was good to be able to hear what the piece was about with the orchestra and everybody else.  And so, that probably was the major experience for me at Wayne.  I had, again, great teaching.  I was fully prepared to begin my teaching career.  I had worked with some of the best high school teachers in the city in, in doing my practice teaching.  And with one, from the elementary part of it, a fellow named Walter West, an African American who was storied as a phenomenal elementary school music teacher, I spent a semester with him at his school.  So I was prepared to take the position.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's 1955, right?
Story_ID: 155971
Speaker 1: So it says here that you were the first African American music teacher in the City of Detroit [Michigan].  Is this--
Speaker 2: First African American vocal music teacher--
Speaker 1: Vocal music.
Speaker 2: --on the high school level.  Now I very well may have been the first high school music teacher of African American descent.  I'm not quite sure of that, but I think that that might be the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think that there, that there were any other high school music teachers at that time who were African American, either instrumental or vocal.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were there just a brief period--
Speaker 2: Year and a half.
Speaker 1: --Of time, year and a half.
Speaker 2: And Uncle Sam said I need you (laughter).
Speaker 1: You, you were already saying that some of your students here, you had Kim Weston--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Who had really a stellar rendition of the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'] back in the sixties [1960s].  And all the black radio stations would sign off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And it's on YouTube.  You can pick it up--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --And see her singing it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Great [HM] Martha Reeves was a student of yours.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it [Abdul] Duke Fakir, was he--
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --he was--
Speaker 2: --he was, he was at Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan].  He wasn't my student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was, Duke was there when I was a student there.  And I'm pretty sure it was Duke, I mean, the other guys, the, the, the other singers in that group [Four Tops].  I, I know, I knew Renaldo Benson because I had gone to school with his, with his sister.  I'd gone to junior high school with his sister, Chiquita [ph.].  And Renaldo went to Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] I believe, and he was there when my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] was there.  But I can't remember the names of the other Four Tops, but I do remember Duke Fakir, and I think that it was he who was at Northern when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, what are the, some of the, the highlights of that year and a half, I guess, at Miller?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I loved teaching.  I mean I really loved working with these young people.  I had to win them over because the former teacher of the choir, in particular, they really were very fond of him.  So I had some work to do to win them over.  And I enjoyed that challenge and making music with them.  It was--I went to a reunion about three years ago for the first time, to the Miller High School reunion, and there were some of those students there.  I just, I enjoyed being a teacher.  I enjoyed being in that atmosphere.  The colleagues there were really wonderful.  They were welcoming.  I was at home.  I mean I was doing what I felt I was born to do--decided we were gonna get married, the young lady [Gladys Lee Ishop] that I'd been courting during college.  And actually, since I was eleven years old, and she was ten we both went to the same church together.  I was an altar boy, and I should have been paying attention to the minister rather than looking at her through the palm fronds on the, the altar.  But we decided to get married and bought myself my first car.  It was a Mercury, and I understand Mercury is now (laughter) going to be discontinued, unfortunately.  I bought myself a two-door Mercury, great looking car.  And then Uncle Sam said mm, mm, nope, nope.  I was not happy about that.
Story_ID: 155972
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're drafted--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was drafted.
Speaker 1: --into the [U.S.] Army (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep. I had to--
Speaker 1: This is 1955--
Speaker 2: This was 1956.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: I had to rearrange my life, and having the kind of job that I really wanted disrupted this way. I was not a happy man.
Speaker 1: Now you, you got married though, right?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You got married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --well, we were supposed to get married in '56 [1956], in August [to Glady Lee Ishop].  Uncle Sam said he was gonna marry me in (laughter), in June or in July, the last part of June.  So we changed, we moved our wedding plans up, and we were married on June 24th.  The following weekend--we went for our honeymoon to Quebec City [Canada].  The following weekend I was married to Uncle Sam.  I was off for my first eight weeks of basic training.  I went in as a bandsman, but in the first eight weeks it's all just grunt work, you know, learning how to kill people and all that stuff.  The second eight weeks I went back to Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri] as a bandsman, and I played in the band that played for the graduation ceremonies, played the flag up in the morning, the graduation ceremonies, the cycles, the, the, the--Leonard Wood is basically an engineering camp. Then I'd play the flag down at night.  But in the interim, I wasn't playing music, which was--those intervals were quite too long.  I was playing eight ball (laughter), and I thought, man, if I have to go through two years of this kind of thing, I'm gonna go off my rocker.  Now before I was drafted I'd heard of the United States Army Chorus in Washington, D.C.  It was a new organization.  And indeed, three of my Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] colleagues had gone to Washington before they were drafted and auditioned for the chorus and were accepted.  They were all Caucasian.  And I had held off because, first of all, to join the chorus, to be accepted in the chorus, was a three-year commitment.  And I thought, well, I don't know, I don't wanna be in the Army three years.  And the other reason was that, well, this unit is all white.  The Army band, which was formed in 1925 or '26 [1926] by General [John] "Black Jack" Pershing, had never had a black member.  The Chorus, which was brand new, to my knowledge, didn't have any blacks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now this is odd.  Now, "Black Jack" Pershing actually got his name because he commanded black troops--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --Back in the, at the, at the (unclear) World War, in World War I [WWI].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but he's--this band named after him has no black members.
Speaker 2: Had no black members up to that point.  So, I thought, well, I, you know, my chances of getting in there are like, like an elephant getting into--crawling under a door, you know.  That's not gonna happen.  So I decided I was gonna be a soldier, and I was gonna go spend my two years doing what Uncle Sam wanted me to do, and that was play in the band.  But I thought, uh, this isn't gon' happen.  This is, this is too boring, you know.  So I decided I was gonna take some leave, and take that trip to Washington, D.C., and take my chances.  So, I along with two other fellows, one a, a white clarinetist and the other a white trumpeter, we took some leave.  We drove from Leonard Wood up to Cincinnati [Ohio] in his, in, in one fellow's little two-door Studebaker, and you know, we're trading and trying to get comfortable in that back seat, which would, wasn't much space.  And we were so exhausted by the time we got to Cincinnati, we thought, no, this ain't gonna work.  So we left the car there and took a flight to Washington, D.C., to do this audition.  We got to Fort Meyer [Virginia], which is the fort where The Old Guard [The United States Army Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps] is stationed and where the band is stationed, they're the ones that do all the Arlington Cemetery burials and the official parades in, in new, in, in, in Washington.  It's, Fort Meyer is sort of like a, a college campus in a sense, but it's where, you know, the, the barracks, where the commander of the Army was posted and so forth.  Then it was [General] Maxwell Taylor.  So, comes the day for the audition, the captain who was the conductor of the choir, of the chorus was a man named Samuel Loboda, a Russian American who eventually went on to become the commander of the Army band.  He was a very special kind of guy.  He was tremendous strength of character.  So, my colleagues auditioned, and they were told right away, Sam said, "No, we won't be able to use you," and then I sang.  And part of the audition was to also do some sight singing.  Well, I could, I could read anything you wanted.  I'd been trained in Detroit Public Schools [Michigan] to do that.  So I sang my solo, and then I sang with just a small quartet just to see I could read.  And so Sam said to me, "Would you wait a few minutes?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  The few minutes dragged into, dragged on to about a half hour.  And my cultural paranoia was jumping (laughing).  I figured what was going on.  Finally, Sam came out of the command room and said, "Well, we've decided that we would like to have you as a member of the Chorus, if it's what you really want."  And the only time I ever caught Sam Loboda with his pants down was this moment.  I said, "Sir, if this was a, if this wasn't what I really wanted, I wouldn't have driven and flown all night to get here."  And he sort of colored red.  He said, "You're right."  That was what led to my becoming the first black member of the United States Army Chorus and Band Unit.
Story_ID: 155973
Speaker 1: One of my friends, Chuck Gleason [ph.], who just passed away--he was one of my Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] buddies--said to me after I, my orders were cut and I got to Washington [D.C.], he told me there, there was a little shopping center across from the main entrance to Fort Meyer [Virginia].  And Chuck said, "You know, I was having my hair cut there the other day, and the barber said to me, 'I hear you're getting a nigger in the [United States Army] Chorus [and Band Unit].'"  And Chuck said, "I, I told him, said, 'Yeah, he's one of my best friends.'"  After I'd been there awhile, I did one day go over to that shopping center with a couple of my friends, another one from Wayne, I think maybe Chuck.  We went to a drugstore there to--they had a lunch counter.  And they went over to have dinner, and I thought I'd join 'em.  Well, the waitress, who was black, came and took their order, didn't say boo to me.  And it slowly began to dawn on me, un-huh.  There was a fellow who worked there who's black who came out and was ostensibly seeming to mop or sweep the floor, but he kept sweeping the same patch, to sort of looking to see what was going, what was gonna happen.  But it finally dawned on all of us what was coming down, said oh, okay, all right.  There was no way that I was gonna be served.  Now this is 1956.
Speaker 2: And the waitress is black?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she would have lost her job if she'd served me, just simply that.  She was preserving her job.  So, that was the atmosphere in Washington at that time and Virginia.  It was the beginning of an era, of a year of white flight, people, whites were moving out of Virgi--out of Washington to the suburbs, Maryland, and Virginia because blacks were, black numbers were increasing.  And that Christmas, with the Chorus broke into smaller groups, and we went around Christmas caroling at the quarters of officers in the area, Fort Meade [Maryland] and a couple of other places we would go.  And we went to one of these areas and sang for the commander of the military district of Washington, who was a general named [General John G.] Van Houten at that time.  And he invited us in to have a drink.  And as I started to come in, he stepped in front of me, and he extended his hand.  He said, "We heard you were coming."  (Laughter) I thought to myself, you heard that I was coming, you, the commander of the military district of Washington, heard that I was coming.  It was such a thing that there was finally a black member of the United States Army Chorus and Band.  I mean it, it was a huge thing.  And I'm thinking, you know, I, who needs that?  I mean I (laughter) just, I just want to come and serve out my time.  All the members of the band and chorus lived off post, so we were able to find an apartment in Southeast Washington not too far from the, the highway so I could get to the fort.  It was a, it was a good place to live.  I mean there were still whites living in that complex at the time.  It was, it was okay.  But that was quite an experience.  And most of, many of the guys in the chorus were from the South.  And I saw, over the period of time I was there I saw what, in the couple of cases had initially been a kind of frosty reception, melt away.  And I swear to you that today, I mean I've been to a number of reunions, and we stay in touch, I would trust my life with every one of those guys.  They became really good friends, like brothers really.  Matter of fact, when our daughter was born at, at Walter Reed [Army Medical Center, later, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland] in 1957, one of these fellows, a tenor, Rick Armstrong, was from Alabama.  (Laughter) Rick went over to the hospital, to Walter Reed. Took some flowers to my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop].  And when they asked, "Well, are you, do you, what is your relationship," (laughter) he said, "I'm a brother." (Laughter). They said, "Oh, okay," (laughter) so they let, they let him in.  But it was that kind of bonding with these men that continues today.  One, at one of our reunions, Bill Fox, who was our announcer, one of our announcers--one of our announcers was someone you probably are familiar with, Charles Osgood.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right--
Speaker 1: His name is--
Speaker 2: --'The Osgood File.'
Speaker 1: His, his name is really Charles Wood, Charlie Wood.  He was our announcer for many years.  That would be--I eventually signed up for an extra year because that was when I, I decided to go into professional music just before I was due to get out after my, the end of my second year.  So I decided to stay in and work with this teacher that I'd met in Washington [D.C.] to prepare for a singing career.  So I needed an income and the benefits, so I extended for an extra year.  So I wound up doing the full three years.  But Bill Fox (laughter) at one of our reunions said, was talking about the day when I got out.  And I'd forgotten this.  He said that I came and said goodbye to the unit.  They were rehearsing.  I walked in, and I said, you know, how much it had meant to me to be a member of the chorus, and I wished them continued success and all well.  And as I, I left, but then he said the door opened again, and George peeked back in and said, "Oh, by the way, you're segregated again," and closed the door (laughter) after.  Well, since that time, they've had a number of, of black and Native American, Hispanic members of the chorus and the band itself.
Story_ID: 155974
Speaker 1: --Now, now did you all [United States Army Chorus] perform for state functions at the White House (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  Yes, we sang at the White House.  We sang, we traveled to, with Wilbert Brucker to Chicago [Illinois] to perform. We, we sang for banquets, official banquets in and around Washington [D.C.].  We didn't spend a whole lot of time on the road.  That was the chorus from Fort Meade, Maryland, the Soldiers' Chorus, and they traveled all, almost all the time.  But this chorus was basically for the official functions in Washington, D.C.  And--
Speaker 1: You got a chance to be, you were in the presence for the first time of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ike Eisenhower [President Dwight Eisenhower] was the president at that time.
Speaker 1: --Eisenhower, yeah.
Speaker 2: And we sang for--he hosted a dinner for--who's that--some official, and we sang for him, he, he and Mamie [Eisenhower].  We used to sing every week at quarters one, which was the quarters for [General] Maxwell Taylor, the commanding officer--I mean the, the chief of staff of the [U.S.] Army.  On one occasion we went out to California to sing for an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] convention.  And on the way back, we stopped in Denver [Colorado] to sing with the Denver Symphony.  And we had about five days there, and a number of us took, hired a car and just drove up into the mountains and wound up in Central City [Colorado], and we went to the opera.  And that was the first time I had really heard an opera.  It was 'Rigoletto,' by [Giuseppe] Verdi, with Frank Guarrera, Metropolitan Opera Star, Joan Carroll, Maggie Roggero [Margaret Rogerro] , and a tenor named Jon Crain.  And I remember sitting in the Central City Opera House listening to Jon just peel the paint with all this big sound, boom, boom, boom, and this opera.  I remember there thinking, boy, it's a good thing that I never wanted to be an opera singer 'cause I couldn't do that all night long.  Well, again, little did I know at that time that four years later I would be making my Metropolitan Opera [the Met, New York, New York] debut with Frank Guarrera, who was singing Rigoletto that night.  I would make, make my debut with Frank at the Metropolitan Opera.  I tell my students, you know, don't sweat what's 'gonna happen to you because you don't know.  You can never tell what's in store for you.  Just try to be as well prepared as you possibly can, because God has things lined up for you that you haven't got a clue about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Central City, now that's a, it's kind of like, a, a touristy kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a re, it's a resort area.  It's a place where the, the, the, there was a huge gold mine there at one time.  That and, that built the city.  And it has become since a tourist area meant it's, that one point they tried to work gambling into it.  But I think that's sort of fallen by the way, and the gambling is done down the hill at another town.  But it's a fascinating place, a lot of history there, a lot of history.  And you can still go to this huge hole in the ground called the Glory Hole.  And you can look down (laughter), if you, if you wanna get close enough, down into it to see.  That's where they took most of the gold out, and it's a fascinating, fascinating area.  But the opera house has been there for, for, for a long, long, long time, long time.  There's a big opera season there every summer.  But that was the first time I'd seen an opera, not knowing that that was 'gonna become my life at that point.
Speaker 1: What did you think when you saw an opera on stage for the first time--
Speaker 2: Well, it was--
Speaker 1: And operas are pretty--
Speaker 2: I, I got, yeah, I, I enjoyed it, you know, but I thought, that's, that's not for me.  I mean I--my language experience was fairly limited, because at Wayne University [later Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] we didn't--in, in, in education, music education, we didn't study foreign languages.  The only foreign language experience I'd had up to that point was studying French in junior high school and high school [at Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan].  So I hadn't studied Italian, German and French, Italian, and German are the basic foreign languages for opera.  So, here I'm sitting there listening to this, to this cast singing Italian, and I'm thinking yeah, this is cool.  It's got nothing to do with me.  I'm a, I'm a choir director.  I'm going back to Detroit [Michigan] to resume my teaching career working with young people, working with choirs, and that's, that's, that's where I live.  I'll, I'll continue to sing a little bit.  As a matter of fact, I had said to my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] at one point, "Now when I go back to Detroit to resume teaching, I think I'm gonna look up maybe, maybe a little amateur theater group, 'cause I'd like to do some straight acting as well," little re, thinking about the fact that opera combined these two interests that I had, music, singing, and drama.  So, when I finally started singing professionally with a small company up in Woodstock, New York, in 1950, it was at, in '59 [1959].  When I walked out on the stage, I felt absolutely at home.
Story_ID: 155975
Speaker 1: Now tell us, before--I have a note in here to ask you about Themy Georgi.
Speaker 2: Themy Georgi.
Speaker 1: Themy Georgi, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, T-H-E-M-I or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --T-H-E-M-I, G-E-O-R-G-I--T-H-E-M-Y, G-E-O-R-G-I, fellow who is part Greek, part Turk.  He had had an operatic career in Europe and in the United States in the early part of last century, singing with the old Chicago [Illinois] company, a little Cincinnati [Ohio] opera company.  When I met Themy he was in his sixties I would say, maybe even a little older, living in Washington, D.C., and teaching voice at his home.  A number of the members of the [United States Army] Chorus were studying with him.  And one fellow in particular kept urging me to go and sing for Themy.  This fellow, John Gillis [ph.], or Jack Gillespie [ph.] is his real name, but he sang professionally under the name of John Gillis, Jack just kept pushing me.  He said, "Go, go sing for Themy."  I said, "Oh, I'm getting ready to get out of the [U.S.] Army, I, you know."  But one day I finally said okay, just to get Jack off my back.  And I went out and met this old fellow, very dramatic looking old guy with a shock of white hair and one of those 1920s movies profiles, you know.  And so I sang for him.  And he said, he inhaled (laughed), say, "You study with me, I can guarantee you'll have a career."  Well, nobody in all the years I'd been singing had ever said that to me.  Now he's looking at me. He's looking at my black face.  He's talking about me having a career in opera.  And I thought, mm.  So I went home, and I told my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] what he said.  And she made the second mistake that she'd ever made in her life (laughter), first marrying me.  The second mistake was that she said, "Well, whatever you do is all right with me."  I thought, alright, let me, let me think about this.  I don't want to go back home [Detroit, Michigan] and resume teaching, and then about twenty years down the road wind up saying to myself, you know, you should have tried it, you probably could have made it, you probably could have done it.  I didn't want that.  So I figured okay, I'll give myself two years.  I figured in two years pursuing a singing career I would get a pretty strong indication of whether that life would work for me or not.  So, I said, okay, I went to the captain and I said, "I'm gonna sign up for an extra year."  Now he was happy with that decision, 'cause I wanted to have, as I said, income and benefits to take care of my wife and, and now our infant daughter during that extra year of study with Georgi.
Story_ID: 155976
Speaker 1: God works in mysterious ways.  About two weeks after I signed up for an extra year [with the United States Army Chorus], I got a call from a woman named Sally Turnau, T-U-R-N-A-U, in New York City.  Well, I didn't know anybody in New York City.  But she said, "You know, I run a small opera company in Woodstock, New York.  We have just a very small cast of singers.  We have two tenors, one of whom has just canceled on us for this coming summer.  And our bass suggested that I call you."  The bass was a fellow named Ara Berberian , who was from Southfield, Michigan, but who had been a member of the Chorus.  I didn't know Ara before I met him in the Chorus.  He had graduated from the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] with a degree which he never used.  He played semipro ball in Canada and then became an opera singer, who spent about twenty-some years as a bass at the Metropolitan Opera [the Met, New York, New York].  Ara had suggested--he knew that I was, due to get out.  He didn't realize that I had signed up for an extra year.  So when the tenor that was supposed to fulfill that contract for this company canceled, he, he said, "Well, call George Shirley."  And I told the lady, I said, "Gee (laughter), I just signed up for an extra year in the Army, so I can't do this.  But please remember me because I'm gonna be getting out next May, and I'm gonna be looking for work."  She said, "Well, come up in January and audition for us, and we'll see where it goes."  I did.  They gave me a contract for that summer.  That was my entry into the singing profession.  After I hung up with her, I thought, you're trying to tell me something.  It seems as though I've done the right thing in making this decision.  Before I got out, I decided to enter the Metropolitan Opera auditions in that region, the Middle Atlantic Region, just to see if I could get some feedback because the judges were people from the Metropolitan Opera.  And I figured if they heard me sing then I, they could tell me what they thought about, of, of my chances.  So I entered the auditions, and I got into the finals in that district, that's the Middle Atlantic District, and I lost.  I went to the reception afterwards, and the two Metropolitan judges, John Gutman, who was assistant to Rudolf Bing, the general manager of the Met, and a man named Howard Hook, who was the chairman of the national audition, Met auditions, they came over to me and pulled me aside and said, "We want you to know that we liked what we heard you do.  You're on the right track.  We don't think that you're ready to go to New York yet for the finals of this competition, but keep doing what you're doing."  I left that reception feeling as though I had won.  In fact, I did win because I had heard from these people who knew what it was about.  I heard from them what I needed to hear, that I was embarking on the right track.  It wasn't gonna be a track that was necessarily easy, but it was the right thing for me to do.  That first summer of work in Woodstock, New York, was perfect for me, a small little company.  I think there were about seven singers.  There was no chorus.  There was judicious cutting of the work.  We sang some of the choral stuff that we needed to do, as well as the solo stuff, performed with two pianos.  The theater seated abut 200, 250 people.  Everything was in English, thank God, (laughter) because it would have been a disaster if I was trying to, to deal with Italian on such quick notice.  I made my debut in 'Die Fledermaus' of Johann Strauss as Eisenstein.  I sang Rodolfo in 'La Boheme,' [Giacomo Puccini] I sang Belmonte in [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart's 'Abduction from the Seraglio,' I sang Haroun in [Georges] Bizet's first opera, 'Djamileh,' and I sang Torquemada in [Maurice] Ravel's little opera, 'L'heure Espagnole,' had a great director, a woman named Barbara Owens, music director, Frederick Popper.  And that was a good connection for me because he was an assistant to Boris Goldovsky, one of the leading opera teachers in the country, in the world actually.  And that led eventually to my going to Tanglewood [Lenox, Massachusetts], to work with Boris the following summer.  But that summer got me started.
Speaker 2: So they had like a, a season?
Speaker 1: Yeah. We had a summer season--
Speaker 2: --Summer season.
Speaker 1: --On this little, on Byrdcliffe Mountain in Woodstock, New York.  And there, there was a big coach house across the road from a little theater where we lived, my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop], and our daughter, and me.  And that, that complex, that compound was an artists' compound that had been founded back in I think the twenties [1920s] by the man who owned the mountain.  It was a Dutch, sort of Dutch colony.  But that was my debut, and I remember that first night.  When I walked out and started to perform, I really felt at home, said this is what you're supposed to do.  And two years later, much too fast probably, I was making my debut at the Metropolitan Opera.
Story_ID: 155977
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: George Irving Shirley, last name is S-H-I-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 18th, 1934, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Presently, I'm the University of Michigan Distinguished Professor of Voice Emeritus.  I have been a professional singer of opera and concert since 1959.  And before that I was a high school teacher in music in Detroit, Michigan.  And actually between that position and starting my singing career in 1959, I served for three years in the United States Army as a member of the United States Army Chorus in Washington, D.C., actually Fort Meyer, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we--oh, I'm sorry, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 25th of October, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we, are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Ann Arbor, Michigan, in my home.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we are completing an interview we started in June of 2010, correct?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 155978
Speaker 1: Alright, and we, when we left off, you had, or you were auditioning or were about to audition with the Metropolitan Opera ["the Met," New York, New York] in 1961.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], I entered the Metropolitan Opera auditions, and fortunately I won a contract.  I won first prize, which was a contract with that company.  And I remained with the company as a leading tenor for eleven years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, from what I understand, you were the first African American tenor to win first prize at a Met tryout.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the first African American tenor to be given a contract with the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do they--okay, so you made your debut in 1961 in a Mozart opera.
Speaker 2: That's correct, 'Cosi fan tutte'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: It was at the last minute, because the tenor who was scheduled to sing canceled the day before the performance.  And I was asked by Rudolf Bing, who was the manager of the company, if I would do the performance the next night, and I told him yes.  I was young and foolish, (laughter) but it worked out alright.
Speaker 1: So how did it go?  Did you--
Speaker 2: It went very well.  Actually, I was rehearsing with one of the coaches in the company. I was rehearsing the last ensemble because I didn't know it yet.  I had been called in.  I was covering the role of Ferrando, which means that I would have to step in at the last minute in case the tenor who was to perform it canceled for any reason.  The opera was still be performed in English at the Metropolitan at that time instead of Italian.  And I'd had to do a couple of rehearsals on stage with Alfred Lunt, who was staging the opera, because the tenor, Charles Anthony, who was supposed to do the performance, was actually running back and forth between Washington, D.C. and New York City.  He was singing the role of Alfredo in 'La Traviata' [Giuseppe Verdi] in Washington, and that's really the reason why he came down with a cold I think the last minute.  So the day before the performance I was rehearsing with one of the coaches in the opera house when the door opened and Mr. Bing and two of his assistants walked in.  And he asked me if I would be able to do the performance the next night because Mr. Anthony had canceled, and I said yes.  But he didn't know that I didn't know the last ensemble completely from memory.  So when he left, the coach and I--I think it was Julius Berger--started in really pounding it.  And before I left the opera house that day, Francis Robinson, who was the press officer of the Met, loaned me a recording of 'Cosi fan tutte' with Richard Tucker and Eleanor Steber, both Metropolitan Opera artists who had recorded it before in the English translation that was being used.  So I took the recording home, and I played it all, the rest of the day, walked through the staging 'cause I'd been observing rehearsals that I had not been actually involved in, and I'd written down all the staging, so I walked through the staging all day long at my apartment, the same thing the next day with the recording running.  I went to the opera house that night and put on my costume and makeup and walked out on stage and walked through the opera.  I didn't make any mistakes, but I have very little memory of that night.  It was all on automatic pilot.
Speaker 1: That's quite a, that, this sounds no less than heroic (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, it's something that, that American singers who were members of the company, in particular, are required to be able to do. You perform your roles, and you also cover other roles in case of emergencies.  It just so happened that my very first performance at the Metropolitan Opera came as a last minute substitute for someone, and it was in an opera that I had really never sung before.  So it was, it was rather interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I have a note here that a recording of 'Cosi fan tutte' by Mozart won the Grammy Award in 1968--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --with you singing the--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was asked to record the role with Leontyne Price and fortunately it was a recording that was deemed worthy of a Grammy.
Story_ID: 155979
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, after signing the contract with the Metropolitan Opera ["the Met," New York, New York], now you--I have a note here that, that you studied with Cornelius Reid.
Speaker 2: He was one of, Cornelius Reid was one of the teachers with whom I studied in New York City.  I studied with about four or five actually over the period of time that I was living and performing in the New York City area.  But he was probably one of the most meaningful, most influential teachers that I worked with.  He was the one who really taught me how the physical instrument functions, and I owe him a great deal for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you joined the Met, were there other African Americans in other, under contract with the Met?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  The first was naturally Marian Anderson, made her historic debut.  And then immediately following her was the first African American male, Robert McFerrin, Sr., Bobby McFerrin's [Robert McFerrin, Jr.] father.  Robert was a baritone.  Then came [HM] Mattiwilda Dobbs, coloratura soprano, Gloria Davy, full dramatic soprano, Martina Arroyo, in 1959, Leontyne Price in 1960 I believe, and then I came along in 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were all, well, they weren't all members when--you, you're, you're giving me a history of--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --contracts.
Speaker 2: Marian Anderson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was no longer there, neither was Robert McFerrin or Gloria Davy.  Martina Arroyo had spent maybe about a year with the company, and then she went to Europe to continue building her career before she returned to the Metropolitan Opera as one of its, one of its most treasured artists.  I sang with her at the Met.  I had the great, good fortune of singing with Leontyne also at the Met.
Story_ID: 155980
Speaker 1: I didn't, I don't know if I asked you this before, but I'm gonna ask again just to make sure we, we do it.  Can you give us sort of like a brief history, a review of the African American in classical music in the United States?  I know I've, I've heard of the "Black Swan" [Elizabeth Taylor Greenfield] from the 19th century.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but, but tell us a little bit about the history.
Speaker 2: Well, blacks, who are by nature rather operatic people are very emotional and musical with wonderful voices, when opera was brought to this country by whites who really wanted to imitate the aristocracy and the traditions of Europe, opera was brought to this country and blacks almost immediately, when they had the opportunity to do so, fastened onto this music.  And there were singers like [Matilda] Sissieretta Jones, who was reportedly considered for a Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] contract, but it never came to pass.  She, there was a company formed around her called Black Patti's Troubadours.  And the concerts would be a mixture of more popular musics and then excerpts.  The second half was excerpts from operas, ensembles, and, and, and arias that she and her colleagues, tenors, baritones sang.  But the "Black Swan," Elizabeth Taylor Greenfield was considered the first African American to be recognized as one capable of singing European classical literature.  And she was I think born into slavery but was taken as a child to New England where she was raised I think by a Quaker family.  And she was rec, it was recognized that she had an exceptional voice.  It was contralto voice that could go from the lowest part of the range to up into the soprano range.  And she went to England I believe, and sang before Queen Victoria, and established herself as a singer to be reckoned with.
Speaker 1: She sang during the Victorian Period.  I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was 1870s, 18--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --eighteen nineties [1890s].
Speaker 2: She came back, and she did some concertizing here and then taught.  And one of her students was a tenor [Thomas Bowers] who gained the sobri-- sobriquet of the "Black Mario." He was called that because there was an Italian tenor named [Giovanni] Mario who was singing operatically in the United States, and his name was Thomas Bowers.  So the interest in this music goes way, well back into, into our history in this country.  The first black opera company was formed in a Catholic church I believe in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Washington, D.C.  I can't remember, but they performed an opera, 'The Doctor of Alcantara' [Julius Eichberg].  And I can't think of the name of the composer, but they did this, in part, to raise funds for the church.  I don't know what happened to that company.  I think that they did subsequent performances, but I'm not sure exactly when they faded out.
Speaker 1: About what year did they start?
Speaker 2: That was, again, I believe in the, possibly the, the mid to late 19th century.
Story_ID: 155981
Speaker 1: There were numerous singers, as I said, like Sissieretta Jones, Marie Selika [Williams], who had a very high coloratura voice, who gained some measure of fame singing operatic literature.  The company, the black opera company that put its stamp on the 20th century was formed by Mary Cardwell Dawson.  I think it was called the National Negro Opera Company, something like that, and they toured with 'La traviata' [Giuseppe Verdi] and 'Faust' [Charles Gounod].  And I believe that this company was founded basically to give a woman named Lillian Evans Tibbs an opportunity to sing.  She sang under the name of Lillian Evanti.  She was married to a professor at Howard University [Washington D.C.] named Tibbs.  And her name was Evans, so she Italianized, she brought both of those names together and Italianized it, so it was Evanti.  And she is on record as being the first African American to sing with an established opera company in Europe.  She made her debut in Nice, I believe, France, in the role of Lakme [in 'Lakme' by Leo Delibes] in about 1925 or '26 [1926].  And when she came back, it's rumored that she, again, was considered for, that she auditioned for the Metropolitan Opera ["the Met," New York, New York] but was not given a contract.  And so Mrs. Dawson took it upon herself, and again, I'm not exactly sure as to whether this is the proper genesis of that, of her, of Mrs. Dawson's company or not, but this is what I've heard.  She founded the company, and her leading soprano was Lillian Evanti in both 'La traviata' and in 'Faust.'  And they did performances in cities across the country.  And there were many singers, naturally, to make up this company, who went on to have careers not as opera singers necessarily, but to establish themselves as professional musicians.  Edward Boatner, who is best known as an arranger and composer, an arranger of, of spirituals, was a baritone who sang with that company.  So the history is, is rich and, and long--
Story_ID: 155982
Speaker 1: The first singer [Caterina Jarboro], if I can remember her name, to sing with a company here in the United States, a mixed company, was a company that was sort of put together to give her a vehicle, was, she made her debut with this company in Unite--in New York City at the old Hippodrome Theatre in 1933 as Aida.  And I always block her name because it was a name that, it was an English name, but that she sort of Europeanized.  But she sang in Latvia and had to escape when the Second World War [World War Two, WWII] came along.  And her name's on the tip of my tongue, and I can't pull it up right now, because she was quite a--she had made her debut as, as an ensemble member of one of the black Broadway shows back in the early part of last century and then went on to establish her, her career as an opera singer, again, in Europe but, and only that one performance here in the United States with a company formed for her by Guido Salmaggi, who had his own small opera company in New York City.  In that performance was a baritone named Jules Bledsoe from Texas, African American Bledsoe, African American baritone, who sang also successfully in Europe a bit.  And he and Paul Robeson were contemporaries, and Robeson had the bigger name and was the one who recorded more.  I found a recording of Bledsoe a number of years ago when I wrote an article for Opera News on black singers.  And I found this recording and placed it in the library, the Rodgers & Hammerstein [Theatre] Library [New York, New York] but it showed Bledsoe to have a rich, beautiful voice, certainly operatic in, in, in, in nature.
Speaker 2: Was it comparable to Robeson?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Robeson was more of a base baritone.  And, and Bledsoe was a baritone, but the record companies I guess at that point said only one (laughter), and so Robeson was the guy.  No one could argue with his being a, a, a major musical figure.  But it cut Bledsoe out of the picture unfortunately, because Bledsoe was a wonderful singer.
Speaker 2: Okay, was Roland Hayes in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Roland Hayes was not an opera singer.  Roland Hayes was arguably the first, really the first black international superstar, diminutive physically.  He was a, a tenor with a lovely delicate voice who proved that he was capable to, of, of matching the greatest singers of his time in the repertoire that he chose to do as a recitalist.  A wonderful story of Hayes, when he went to Germany to make his debut in the 1920s I think it was, late twenties [1920s], he walked out on stage, and he was met by a chorus of boos.  And he just stood there until they, the audience, got tired of booing him.  And he turned to his accompanist and changed the order of his program, starting with a piece by [Franz] Schubert, 'Du bist die Ruh,' which means you are repose, you are peace, you are rest.  And at the end of the recital, reportedly he got a standing ovation.  The Germans were initially a little uptight over a black man coming to sing their music to them.  But he won them over through the honesty and the, the purity of his singing.  So he was the guy who really started us off in a big way.  He gave Marian Anderson her first opportunity to have the spotlight shown on her when he went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to sing a recital at her church.  And he au, he asked her to do a group of songs on his recital.  And that, again, she was already doing some important, drawing, drawing interest in her local performances.  But when Hayes asked her to sing on his recital that sort of gave her a big boost.  He was quite, quite a, a, an idol.
Story_ID: 155983
Speaker 1: When I was growing up there were three people that I idolized, actually there were four.  Roland Hayes was one, Marian Anderson, Paul Robeson, and Joe Louis (laughter).  Louis, all of these people had a dignity about them that I wish young artists would study.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Joe Louis really made, made an impact on people in those days.
Speaker 1: He made an impact on people in a number of ways (laughter) with his, with his right fist and right arm.  But they all--Joe Louis had a dignity about him that you don't see in, in athletes for the most part today, and Hayes, Robeson, and, and Anderson, same thing.  They, they carried themselves with a sense of dignity that you don't see enough of, if at all, in young performers today.  These people were, from my point of view, worthy of being idolized. They were worthy of being looked up to and emulated, and I'm grateful that I had them as models.  I met Hayes when I was about eight years old.  He came to Detroit [Michigan] to give a recital at our church, Ebenezer A.M.E. [Church, Detroit, Michigan], and I was introduced, had the opportunity to meet him afterwards.  Years later, I was with the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], and I sang Rodolfo in 'La boheme' [Giacomo Puccini] on tour in Boston [Massachusetts] in maybe about 1963 or '64 [1964], '64 [1964] I think it was.  And at the end of the first act there was a knock at the door, and the usher was there with a card in his hand, a business card.  And I looked down, and it said bravo.  And I turned it over, and it said Roland Hayes.  (Laughter) He was in the audience.  I had met his daughter [Afrika Hayes], actually, before that.  She came to Detroit to sing for the wedding of one of my fraternity brothers, and I was asked to sing in that wedding.  This was about 1956.  And so I met Afrika at that time.  And later I had the opportunity when I was asked in 1974 to write and produce a program for WQXR-FM in New York City on African American singers, which program I called Classical Music and the African American.  I went to Brookline, Massachusetts to interview Hayes and spent an hour with him.  He didn't want to do a taped interview.  I think he had been burned too often.  But I had the great honor of sitting next to this man.  He had had a rough winter, and he came down, he looked a bit drawn, but he was immaculately dressed.  And we sat in his living room, and we talked for about an hour.  And it was amazing because whenever he smiled, he looked like he was about thirty-five years old.  It was just a wonderful experience I'll never forget.  I met Marian Anderson the first time when she came to Detroit to give a recital.  And while she was there, one of the sororities gave a tea in her honor at the branch, the, the library, branch of the public library that I worked at, the Utley Branch on Woodward Avenue.  And so I was working that day shelving books, and I caught her at one moment when she was sort of standing by herself.  And I pushed my truckload of books up and got her autograph.  And again, years later, in '74 [1974], I interviewed her for my program.  She came down from New England to New York City, and we had a wonderful interview.  The last time I saw her was for the hundredth anniversary at the Metropolitan Opera.  She came, she was in a wheelchair.  She came and I went over and, and greeted her.  Robeson, I missed the opportunity to meet him simply because I was too bashful to introduce myself.  My wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] and I went over to Brooklyn [New York] one Sunday to visit friends who lived in an apartment there.  And the wife told us, "You know, we have an art show downstairs.  Would you like to go and see it?"  My wife is a visual artist, so, I said, we said sure.  So we went downstairs, and while we were looking at the paintings, in walked Paul Robeson.  And I was so in awe of this man.  I mean I was singing professionally.  I was at the Metropolitan Opera and all that stuff.  I was too bashful to go over and introduce (laughter) myself to him.  I mean he was such a figure in my life.  And I, I kick myself--I got to know, I, I became acquainted with his son [Paul Robeson, Jr.].  And when I did my program, I wanted to interview Robeson, but his son said, "No, my dad is just too ill at this point. He, he can't, he, he can't be interviewed."  And so I lost my opportunity to be able to spend just a (laughter), a little time with this figure.
Speaker 2: Now what--when was it when you saw Robeson in--
Speaker 1: This would have been, this would have been in the, either the mid to late sixties [1960s], I would say, or maybe early seventies [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay 'cause he really was scarce in those days, hardly anyone--
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Saw him.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what about Marian Anderson?  I, I, I take it you were a fairly young man when you met her in the library (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I was a teenager.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And with Roland Hayes--
Speaker 1: I was, let's see--
Speaker 2: --at Ebenezer A.M.E., right--
Speaker 1: I was about eight years old.
Speaker 2: About eight years old, okay.
Speaker 1: I was about forty when I (laughter) met him, when I, when I, when I interviewed him.
Story_ID: 155984
Speaker 1: I was thinking as you were talking here about the, all the classically trained black people that, that we had at one time.  I, I, I guess we still have some, but--
Speaker 2: Just thought, I just thought, I just thought of the soprano's name.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --Katherine Yarbrough was her name, who sang the Aida [in 'Aida' by Giuseppe Verdi].  And she changed her name to Caterina Jarboro when she sang professionally.  This was a woman who was the first to sing with a, a mixed company in the United States when she did Aida at the Hippodrome Theatre [New York, New York] in 1933.
Speaker 1: Katherine Yarbrough.
Speaker 2: Right, Caterina Jarboro, spelled with a 'J,' J-A-R-B-O-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the black colleges, the music departments of black colleges basically taught classical music, didn't they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did, yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --They did and used to have what they called lyceum series for concerts.  Most of the singers who came were classically trained.  And when the revolution came in the sixties [1960s] and seventies [1970s], young blacks decided they wanted more of the music that they identified as theirs, the popular music.  And so the old format of the lyceum series went, underwent a complete change basically, and popular artists came in, very few recitalists singing class, European classical music.  There was a sea change in that.  I know that my, the recitals that I did at black colleges in the sixties [1960s], that was already beginning to be the case, and, and I can understand that.  It's, what happened, unfortunately, when there's change like that sort of threw out the baby with the bathwater (laughter).  You know, there's, this pendulum swing from one extreme to the other extreme.  One hopes that eventually it can begin to settle in the middle so that there is an appreciation for both forms of music on the part of young people.
Story_ID: 155985
Speaker 1: Yes, we were talking about the history of blacks in classical music, this, this rich, a rich tradition, you know, up until the, up to the point where you joined the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York].  I just wanna know what the lay of the land was, it was--you mentioned [HM] Mattiwilda Dobbs--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Was, was she still singing in the U.S. when you started--
Speaker 2: She wasn't at the Met, but she was still singing, to my knowledge, yeah.  She, she married I think a, she was married to a Swede [Bengt Janzon] I believe.  And so she was still singing abroad, and she was still singing some in the United States.  But I don't think that Mattiwilda was singing at the Met when I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she, her, her career was continuing, to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: She was from the famous Dobbs family out of Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --John Wesley Dobbs--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so at the--in those days I think, in popular culture, black people were exposed to Marian Anderson.  Most all black people knew who Marian Anderson was.  And in '62 [1962], being a kid coming up in '62 [1962], we, some of us knew who Paul Robeson was, but so many--he was kind of wiped out of the media in, in those days.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: His movies weren't shown on television, and he, because of the--
Speaker 2: Right, because of the this witch hunt--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Communist thing.
Speaker 1: Right, the, yeah, Cold War.  They just kept him out of, out of sight.  He didn't really reemerge for us until the late sixties [1960s] when, when, as you said, the black rev, revolution on college campuses--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Kind of turned around, and he came, turned up again.  But, so, so what, now what about black composers, operatic composers?  I think, can you--'cause I know some, I mean people like William Grant Still, Scott Joplin--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And others wrote operas.
Speaker 2: Right, right, again, the, the sense, the desire to write music drama was always there.  That's what musicals are, Will Marion Cook and people like that who wrote the early mu, black musicals on Broadway.  It's just to, a step to another side to, to write an opera.  So there were people who were interested in that and did it, still wrote a number of operas and some chamber works, the larger ones.  There was an opera written by an African American that was 'Ouanga,' [Clarence Cameron White and John Frederick Matheus] the, was the name of the opera.  And it was performed at the Met, not by the Metropolitan Opera Company, but by a black company that was, Clarence Cameron White was his name.  And that opera was performed at the Metropolitan Opera.
Speaker 1: About when, when was this done?
Speaker 2: I think, it might have been in the forties [1940s].  I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this, the name seems implied African--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Themed--
Speaker 2: O-U-A-N-G-A, Ouanga it's called.  And I kept--
Speaker 1: O-U-N-G-A, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't remember the, the, the plot.  But in more recent times, Anthony Davis, who wrote the opera on Malcolm X life, 'X [The Life and Times of Malcolm X],' which was performed in the New York City Opera, and also 'Amistad.' He wrote that as well.  Writing an opera is a huge undertaking, especially if it's gonna be a big four-acter (laughter).  I've, whenever I speak to composers, I urge them, if they're interested in writing an opera, I urge them to write a chamber work, which can be a one-act opera.  First of all, it's easier to produce, costs less money.  Benjamin Britten, the, the British composer, was a master at writing one-act operas that people love and, and, and that have a life.  The small company that he wrote them for, they could tour them. They could put 'em on wherever.  And with the costs of production these days, I think it's really wise for composers to think in the small framework, to write a chamber work.  And if it's such a really great success, then it can always be expanded.  But it's a big undertaking, so it takes a lot of time out of a composer's life and takes a lot of money to put on if it's a big work.  So, not, I think it's true of white composers as well as blacks, not a lot of folks (laughter) think in terms of writing a big four-acter, unless they know that there's somebody who's going to be interested in putting it on, and unless someone commissions them to do it, and commissions are not handed out willy-nilly or with great largesse.  So, there may be some really good composers out there who would love to do it, but to have the time and to take the time out of their money-earning capacity to do that is, is a decision that is not easy to come by.  But, yes, the, the desire and the interest in writing operas in a composer who loves the voice and has an ability to understand the voice and to write for it so that what is written can be sung without undue stress or that it really fits the singing voice as an instrument, they're there.  But to get them to, to commit to a, an opera is a big deal.
Story_ID: 155986
Speaker 1: I think that when, you go back on the history of black people in classical music, there's something about classical music that's, it's, it's, it's almost like a, it's been used as a proof that blacks are civilized or advanced or, you know, you know what I'm talk, talkin' about?  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean [Joseph Boulogne] Chevalier de Saint-Georges, he wrote operas in, he, he, he tried, he seemed to be trying to prove that he was I guess a renaissance man. He could do everything.  You know, he--
Speaker 2: Well, that was true in everything in his life.  I mean he was an excellent swordsman, he was a soldier, he was a composer.  Well, I don't know if it's so much a desire to prove one's self as to be gifted in such a way that you have things that you can do.  And if those things are outside of the expectation of society, but you have the gift to do it, and you wanna do it, then it's, it makes sense to try to do it, not to necessarily prove that I can, unless you wanna prove it to yourself that you can.  But it's what, it's what you're made of.  I've, I've, I've often said I'm really--I, I didn't choose to become an opera singer.  My focus when I was in school was to get a, a degree in music.  When I was a child I knew that my life would be in music in some way.  And at the end of high school [at Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan] I knew that it was, I wanted to teach.  And that was what I pursued when I was a student at Wayne [State] University in Detroit [Michigan].  I graduated with a bachelor of science in education, majoring in music.  And I had, I got the job that I wanted.  I was the first African American to teach on the high school, music on the high school level.  Uncle Sam messed that up (laughter).  He drafted me a year and a half after I started teaching.  So, when I was in the [U.S.] Army, my plan was to go back into teaching.  But someone [Themy Georgi] said to me no, you have the possibility of becoming an opera singer.  And nobody had ever said that before.  I'd been singing in Detroit all these years, but no one had said that to me.  And the person that said this to me was a man who was teaching privately in Washington, D.C. Some of my colleagues in the [United States] Army Chorus were working with him, and this man had had a career.  He was part Greek, part Turk.  And I sang for him at the urging of one of my colleagues [John Gillis ph.] in the Army Chorus, and the old guy said to me, "You study with me one year, and I guarantee you'll have a career."  Well, if somebody had ever said to me in Detroit, you know, you're gonna be an opera singer, I'd, I would have said to them you're out of your mind because I don't even, I don't know opera.  I don't even like it.  My interest is in recital literature and choral literature and, and symphonic literature.  But when he told me that, it made me think.  Okay, I mean I, I don't know.  Yeah, I, I love teaching, but I don't know what other things I'm capable of.  So with my wife's [Gladys Lee Ishop] agreement, I decided, okay, I'm gonna sign up for an extra year in the Army.  I was originally taken in of course as a draftee, two years.  But I wanted--I said that I'm gonna sign up for an extra year to have benefits and an income so I can take care of my wife and our little infant daughter [Olwyn Elizabeth].  And I'm gonna see where this goes.  I'm gonna give it two years. Two years I'll know whether this is a life for me or not.  And when I got out of the, the service things went much more quickly and into places that I would have never dreamed of.  And I've often said I'm really--I thank God that I was able to have a career doing something that folks didn't expect me to do, I didn't expect me to do it, but that people--you know, people say, "Oh, you sing.  Yeah, well, what group do you sing with?"  "Well, Metropolitan Opera, Covent Garden." "Oh, oh, ooh, you're, you're, you're." "Yeah, I sing opera."  "Oh?"  So it sort of gives me pleasure when that happens because the expectation is that oh, I gotta sing blues or jazz. I gotta, you know, sing pop music.  Well, I got nothing against those forms, but that's not, those are forms that I never really was that interested in performing, for whatever reason.  I don't turn my nose down on them by any stretch of the imagination.  I can't turn my nose down on people.  My other, my other idols when I was growing up were people like Sarah Vaughan and Billy Eckstine and Nat [King] Cole.  You know, that's, these are great musicians. These are great performers.  But that wasn't where I found myself focused.  It wasn't on opera either.  The so-called classical literature, the, the art songs for recital that was where I found myself feeling much more comfortable.  And it led eventually to the operatic stage, I mean holy smoke.  When I was in the Army we took a--we were on--we, we went to California, the Chorus did.  We didn't do that much traveling.  We went to California to sing for an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] convention in the Hills on, in California.  And the captain tied on a performance with the Denver Symphony Orchestra for our return trip, and we had about three or four days in the Denver [Colorado] area.  And one day we had a completely free day.
Story_ID: 155987
Speaker 1: We [United States Army Chorus] had an extra concert tacked on to our trip to sing with the Denver Symphony at Red Rocks Amphitheater [Morrison, Colorado], so we were in the Denver [Colorado] area for about four days.  And one day we had a free day, so I and about three of my friends, we rented a car and drove up into the mountains and went to the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado] and saw the campus.  And we wound up about four o'clock in the afternoon in Central City [Colorado].  Central City is a resort town.  I mean it's a fascinating old mining town, and they have an opera company there.  And we were walking down the main street, and one of our members, Ara Berberian, who is from Southfield [Michigan] but was also a member of the Chorus--I didn't meet him until the [U.S.] Army--he graduated from the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] but never used his degree.  He wound up singing at the Metropolitan Opera ["the Met," New York, New York] for, for twenty-some years after the Army.  But Ara was one of these people who knows people wherever you go.  And we were walking down the main drag, and he stopped as he said I know this guy coming toward us.  Turned out to be a former high school--college friend of his in law school at University of Michigan.  And this fellow happened to be the chief tour guide, and he was also the head usher for the opera.  So we wound up with five tickets, five comps to the opera that night.  The opera was [Giuseppe] Verdi's 'Rigoletto,' with a number of Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] artists, one of whom, Frank Guarrera, who was singing the leading role, Rigoletto.  Margaret Roggero was singing the role of Maddalena.  O.C. Hawkins was singing the role I think of Sparafucile, and a soprano named Joan Carroll was singing Gilda, the soprano lead.  And the tenor was a fellow who sang New York City Opera and had a very fine career, named, a fellow named John Crain.  And I sat there listening to Crain sing that night, just his voice just peeling the paint off of the inside of this theater.  And I thought to myself, it's a good thing that I never considered becoming an opera singer 'cause I could never do that all night long.  This was in 1957.  Little did I know that four scant years later I would be making my debut at the Metropolitan Opera with Frank Guarrera singing, he was singing Don Alfonso in 'Cosi fan tutte,' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] that I would eventually sing with Joan Carroll, the soprano lead of that night '57 [1957], sing with her in Santa Fe [New Mexico] when we did the American premier of Alban Berg's 'Lulu.'  That just, I tell my students you don't know what's going (laughter) to happen.  You don't know.  You've got dreams here.  It's difficult.  You pursue them until life tells you that maybe there's another path.  But if anybody had told me in 1957 that four years later, years later I'd be singing with some of these same people at the Metropolitan Opera, I'd have said you're out of your mind.  So, the ability to have a life, a professional life, doing what other people didn't expect me to do and what I didn't expect to do, I mean that, that's just a blessing from above that I'm grateful for.  I'm grateful that God considered me worthy of it.  And I've just tried to continue to do as, the best I could under the circumstances as they have unfolded themselves.  But opera was not something that I aspired to when I was in college [at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 155988
Speaker 1: You know, my mind is going back to a couple of examples of what you're saying.  One is Scott Joplin who, you know, inventor of ragtime basically, who, you know, wrote 'Treemonisha' and I think--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --another opera that I don't know, know the name of.  But I think 'Treemonisha' was never performed during his lifetime.  But--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a friend of mine remarked once, he said, "Well, why would he want to write opera, you know, 'cause he's"--I said well, he, he died of--
Speaker 2: Why not?
Speaker 1: --ge died of syphilis, did--I mean, no, he--the other places he worked weren't necessarily--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: Right, why not?
Speaker 1: --so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Here, again, I mean African history is operatic.  Tribal history is operatic.  In an African tribe nothing can be accomplished without music, dance and drama.  Rituals can't happen unless they're accompanied by music, dance and drama, the masks, the, the dance, the drums, the, the chants, that's opera. That is absolutely operatic.  So it's no stretch, really, to see blacks performing opera.  Yeah, the language is different, but that's about all.  The musical form is different, but for a musician, like Duke Ellington said it's all music.  I remember when I lived in New Jersey, in Montclair, New Jersey, I went to the home of a composer, African American.  For some reason I was with someone else, and I can't remember why we went.  And on the walls of his home were platinum discs, gold from recordings of his arrangements and of his compositions performed by Motown artists.  I can't remember his name, but he was a Motown arranger and so forth, and he had all these--on his piano sat a manuscript that he was working on, a string quartet.  Now one might ask, "Hey, well, this guy is making scads of money doing arrangements for Motown people and on R&B and what have you.  What's he writing a string for?"  Why?  Because he's a musician, because he wants to express himself not just in one mode, but he has capability of expressing himself in other modes.  One of my best friends that I met when I went to New York City was the late Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson ["Perky"], phenomenal musician who, whose last post with the Center for Black [Music] Research [Columbia College, Chicago] as the conductor of the orchestra there.  Perky was a conductor.  He studied conducting with Dean, the late Dean Dixon.  He studied classical music.  He was the arranger and pianist for Barbara McNair when she had her television show.  He strode, he, he, his grasp included classical, popular, gospel, everything.  He, he, he did the whole thing.  Why?  Because that was his gift.  He could do it.  He was a musician.  He was a literate musician.  He was creative.  And there would be no reason in the world for him not to write what came to him to write.  He had written a prize-winning string quartet when he was younger.  I commissioned a work from him through the Ford Foundation in 1964, a piece called Ati--that he entitled, 'Attitudes for tenor voice, violin, cello, and piano.'  And we premiered it in New York City at the Grace Rainey Rogers Auditorium [Metropolitan Museum of Art].  We also did it, I performed it at one of the, the historical black colleges, and I can't remember which one it was.  I mean it's, it's, it's a fabulous piece, phenomenal piece about black historical life in this country using poetry of, of great poets.  And why should, why should any artist be limited?
Speaker 1: Now his name even is, he's named after Samuel Coleridge Taylor, right, the, the--
Speaker 2: Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
Speaker 1: Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the white--
Speaker 2: --The, the British, British writer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His mother was, Perky's mother was a musician, and so she named (laughter) him after him, but the, the, the names are reversed.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Right.  But there's no reason for anybody to limit themselves.  Yes, you don't wanna stretch out into territory that you know you don't (laughter) have the ability to encompass. I mean to, to gain ownership of.  But, even there you have, you have the right to explore it before you say, "Yeah, I own this, and I can perform it.  It doesn't matter what I look like."  One of the things that amazes me today is to see the number of Asian classical, Asian musicians who have mastered European classical music.  Some of the greatest artists before the public today are from Japan and from Korea and from the Asian countries where the musical construct is completely different.  We don't see people from the West mastering those musics the way they master Bach, Beethoven, Brahms.  It's, it's, it's amazing.  But that again shows that a musician has that possibility.  There, no doubt there are Americans who, if they decide to, okay, undergo the discipline of learning how to sing Japanese music, it could be done.  But it requires a lot of discipline because it changes how you conceive of music and perceive it in between your ears.
Story_ID: 155989
Speaker 1: Now, what you were saying about the African music being dramatic in the, the, with the presentations, with, with pageantry and that sort of thing, I, I thought about what [HM] Paul Carter Harrison says about Africa, you know, black theater.  He says they should be included in the music and the dance and everything in the--in the--all of it altogether.
Speaker 2: So, being--
Speaker 1: He said that's the most natural way.
Speaker 2: Becoming an opera singer was the most natural thing for me once I realized that, oh yeah.  When I walked out on stage in this little company [Turnau Opera Company] up in Woodstock, New York, to make my debut in 1959, I knew I was at home.  I knew I was doing what I was born to do.  It felt perfectly natural.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know [HM] Charles Burrell, the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Bass player.  He's from Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: When I, when we sang with the Denver Symphony [Orchestra, Denver, Colorado] back in 1957, Charles Burrell was the bass player then.  That's when I first met him.  Two years ago at the National Association of Negro Musicians Convention in Colorado, both he and I received awards.  And that's--I hadn't seen Charles since 1957, and we reminisced about that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he's also a jazz musician.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Early on, I think he told me on a crystal set [radio] he heard the San Francisco Symphony in Detroit and one or two--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --Playing the symphony.
Speaker 2: Sure. There's no reason, again, if you have the ability to do it, there's no reason not to do it.  You shouldn't let anybody for any reason if you've got the ability tell you, you can't do that, (laughter), that no one has that right.
Speaker 1: Now do you, like Burrell, do you dabble in jazz?  'Cause he plays in the jazz--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Band.  Do you--
Speaker 2: I've, I've, I'm not, you know, I have sung jazz songs, you know.  I, I don't consider myself an, an expert at scatting, you know, but I've sung popular songs.  One of my favorite is (singing) "It's not the pale moon that excites me, that thrills and delights me.  Oh no, it's just the nearness of you."  [song, 'The Nearness of You'] Yeah, I like that, but I'm not gonna say that somebody's going to pay to hear me do it, you know.  But, yeah, I've, I've, I've taken those possibilities, but I never attempted to get somebody to pay me to do it (simultaneous) because I don't think that that's my strength.
Speaker 1: I think you could get someone to pay you to do it.  But that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: But I don't think that, I don't think of that as being my strength, but I love to sing it.  I love to sing those songs that I feel are singable. The songs that Nat [King] Cole sang, that, that Sarah Vaughan sang, that Billy Eckstine sang.  This was, this was like--the first date I took my future wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] on was to hear Nat King Cole when he came to the Michigan Fairgrounds to, to perform.  I mean I thought that guy was one of the, one of the greatest.  You know, people talk about [Frank] Sinatra.  Yeah, Sinatra was okay, but for me, Cole had the whole package.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The voice wasn't a great voice, but what he did with what he had just put him way above everybody else.
Speaker 1: I think Charles Burrell taught us that the difference between jazz and classical music, and he enjoyed them both, one was highly disciplined, the other one had a lot of freedom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you had to manage that freedom.
Speaker 2: That's absolutely right.  You have to be, to be a great jazz performer, you have to have a sense of, of improvisation that just comes, you know, I mean, and you've got to manage it.  You know, you work on these, everybody else in the ensemble.  It's amazing when you listen to a jazz group, you know, how they, they, they, they respond to each other, how they--there's a little bit of that, but very little in baroque music, you know, the ability to, to improvise.  That was expected in, in baroque music.  But it was all actually not as free because there were, there were, there were tropes, and there, there, there were patterns that people studied.  And, and so they would put those in, and, but in jazz, if you would get a, a bunch of players together and they jammed, it is all happening at, on the moment.  At the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], the jazz program--the fellow who founded the jazz program there, fought like crazy to get a class that is open to all musicians for improvisation purposes.  And he has a jazz--he has an improv orchestra that gets together, and then kids just jam they do things, you know, and, but it's open to singers as well.  So, but then that's completely out of the canon (laughter), and so he had to really fight the status quo to be able to do that.  Because, yes, classically trained musicians don't generally have that instinctive ability to just let it go, to let it rip, to take the chance, so that's, that value is, is tremendous.  I am not, not skilled at piano.  Yeah, I can get up and go, ske-bop and blip, blip, beep, beep, jiggity, digga wep, de-doo, gatiga, tink, tip, bop, beep, bop--but here, again, I mean (laughter), standing next to somebody who does that, I'm not gonna (laughter), I don't find myself that qualified, but it's fun.  I mean I, I do it. It's fun.
Story_ID: 155990
Speaker 1: Okay, let's kind of pi- pick up the chronology again.  Nineteen sixty-two [1962] with the Metropolitan Opera ["the Met," New York, New York], and now did the, did you, do, in '62 [1962] did you--how long did you do, do the one [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart show, opera--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the 'Cosi fan tutte' ran for that season, and then we took it on tour.  So I got a number of performances in that first year.  I never did 'Cosi' again at the Met, did other things, but a lot of other things.  But that was my debut.  Also--actually my official debut was to have been as Pinkerton in [Giacomo] Puccini's 'Madama Butterfly,' and that was to come later in the season.  But since this emergency arose, and [Rudolf] Bing said, "Okay, can you do this?"  I said, "Yeah."  So the 'Cosi' became my actual debut.  My official debut, as I said, came later.  I did the Pinkerton maybe about a month after that.  I also did some smaller roles.  I did the--And I can't remember whether this was all in my first season.  I think I did the Steersman in 'The Flying Dutchman,' [Richard Wagner] and I might also that first season have sung [Count] Almaviva in [Gioachino] Rossini's 'Barber of Seville.'  I might have.  I did, again, those roles quite often over ensuing years.
Speaker 1: Now at some point I know you got a chance to sing, perform with Shirley Verrett, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And this was in, early on, too in '62 [1962]--
Speaker 2: Shirley and I met first in the Metropolitan Opera auditions in 1961.  And we were all, we were in the finals together.  I won first prize, and another soprano won a contract as well.  Shirley didn't win a prize that time, and that's the only time I've ever bested Shirley in anything (laughter).  She eventually came to the Met on her own terms, not as a contract winner.  She came in as a star, as was it, it should have, as was befitting her, her talent and her personality.  We sang for the first time together at the Spoleto Festival in 1962.  Let, let me think, let me think that, because there are two, there were two things that happened, both, either both in 1962 or one in '62 [1962] and one in '63 [1963].  We sang together in the Spoleto Festival in Spoleto, Italy.  We sang 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet] together.  She sang her first Carmen, and I sang Don Jose.  I'd already sung Don Jose with Boris Goldovsky Company, Boris Goldovsky's company in Boston [Massachusetts] in 1961, but that was in English.  In, in Spoleto we sang in French.  And at about that same time, she and I sang in a production of [Igor] Stravinsky's 'Oedipus Rex' with the Washington National Symphony in [Washington] D.C.  It was Stravinsky conducting, and we recorded it for Columbia Records.  So those were the two times that Shirley and I performed together.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so we, we had the note about 'Oedipus Rex.'  So, now, Shirley Verrett was married to [HM] William Warfield and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: No, not to William--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --No, Leontyne Price was married to William Warfield (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright, I've got 'em mixed up, okay.
Speaker 2: Shirley Verrett was married--
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: She first was married to a man named [James] Carter, and that marriage did not last.  Her second husband until her death was Louis LoMonaco, Italian-American artist.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, well, this is a good time to ask you about Leontyne Price.  Was she at the Met when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was there before, she was, she made her debut the year before I made mine.  And I had the great privilege, honor of singing with Leontyne on a couple of occasions.  I believe the first time we sang together was in a '[The] Magic Flute' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart].  I hope my memory is not (laughter) playing me wrong here.  We did 'Magic Flute,' she, Pamina, and I, Tamino.  And then we did 'Don Giovanni' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] together.  She did Donna Anna, and I did Don Ottavio.  We didn't sing the 'Cosi' together, but we sang, we did the recording of 'Cosi' together.
Story_ID: 155991
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, within a year's time it seems that you had developed quite a repertoire of, of roles in, in, in, in one year [at the Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: The interesting thing is my career got started, again, on this emergency jumping in.  And that proved to the management that they had someone who could do that and not fall flat on his face.  The result was that I was asked to do that probably more often than I should have.  And young, initially there'd be nerves or less--the more I was asked to do that, the more of a problem it became.  The roles that I did at the Met [Metropolitan Opera], I think I did twenty-seven roles altogether there.  Of those roles, the ones that I had sung prior to performing them at the Met were very few.  One that I had sung prior to that was Rodolfo [in 'La boheme' by Giacomo Puccini], 'cause I made my debut in Italy in, in that in 1960 before I went to the Met.  Don Jose was another one that I had, had already sung.  I think that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think all the rest of them were for the first time anywhere.  And that can really sort of begin--and some of those were with, at the last minute.  The 'Cosi [fan tutte' by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart]--the Ferrando in 'Cosi' was the last minute.  The des Grieux in [Jules] Massenet's 'Manon' was last minute because Nicolai Gedda's father died.  He sang the first performance of a new production, and I was covering him, so I sang the next two and Nick went off to his father's funeral. des Grieux in [Giacomo] Puccini's 'Manon Lescaut' was at the last minute because a tenor canceled.  Nemorino in 'L'elisir d'amore' [Gaetano Donizetti] was last minute, (laughter) actually.  I had come to the end of my season this particular year, and I was getting ready to go off and do recitals in the South.  And Rudolf Bing asked me, he said, "George," he said, "We have a performance, a performance of 'L'elisir d'amore' coming up."  And he said, "We don't have a tenor.  Would you, can you do this?"  Well, that "L'elisir" wasn't on my list.  And I said, "Mr. Bing, I don't know the opera."  He said, "But you, you, you've got to help us," in his English accent, "You, you've got to help us. Good God, you've got to help us."  I said, "Well, I'm, I'm going off to sing recitals in Tuscaloosa [Alabama] and Talladega, Alabama, next week," said, "Well, all right."  So, he called me (laughter) on the telephone when I was either in Tuscaloosa or Talladega.  He said, "George, you've got to do this."  And I said, "Gee."  I said, "Okay, I'll, I'll, I have to take a look at the score when I get back 'cause I don't know it."  It wasn't on my list of covers.  I got back and the opera, the score is about this thick.  And I'm thinking heaven's sake.  It's got recitative, and it's got arias and so forth.  So I learned it.  I had about two weeks to learn it.  And I did the performance, and it was a success.  A number of years later they offered me another performance (laughter), one.  And that was in 1967 I think.  It was the year that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated, and--
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: --in '68 [1968].  And the performance was scheduled for the week in which he was assassinated, and I canceled it.  I said I, I can't do this performance now.  And so they had to get somebody to (laughter) replace me.  And they eventually offered me another performance, and that was with Reri Grist.  I took that one.  But that was sort of the pattern that so much of what I did at the Met, except for I think those two roles that I mentioned, and maybe I've forgotten one.  It was all for the first time, and on most of those roles for the last, at the last minute, because somebody canceled.  The first, Gabriele Adorno in 'Simon Boccanegra' of [Giuseppe] Verdi was last minute because somebody had canceled.  After a while, you know, that kind of thing really started getting to be a bit much for me to handle.  And, but that's the way it went.
Speaker 1: Now is, the implication here, now if we were looking at sports, then we would know how to look at this.  You, you always sit on the bench until the starter gets hurt, and then they put you in--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --At the last minute, and you succeed, and then, you know.  But they only put you in when somebody else is--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I did have also chances to do my first performances of things.  The, the, the, the, the, it wasn't always just jumping at the last minute.  My, my point is that jumping in at the last minute was, happened a lot during my eleven years there.  And it began to sort of be something that I really didn't look forward to doing.  But, again, American singers who have contracts there are expected because the Met is not like an opera house in Europe.  When somebody cancels in Paris [France], they can call Germany, or they can call the UK [United Kingdom], or they can call Italy and say, "Can you, you have somebody you can send over to do the performance tomorrow night because so and so is ill?"  And that happens.  Well, that doesn't happen in the United States because the Met is a year-round, I mean it's the one opera house that has really a full season.  The other opera houses have people come in to do specific shows.  And once they have done their show they're gone.  They're doing something else.  They don't have a roster of artists that's available for the Met to call on if they need some assistance.  So they have to have all of their singers in-house.  Today there are singers who are under contracts I understand and make very good money, but they're, they're just basically as covers.  So that, you know, they may go through a whole season without ever getting on stage to perform.  And that's not something that I would really like to, I wouldn't want to deal with that, but I understand that that is the case with a number of artists.  But that's the way the Met protects, protects itself, so that what I did was what other singers do.  But I, I got the feeling that I did it (laughter) maybe a little bit more often for big roles than some of the other singers did, but that was the way it worked out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So for eleven years, what percentage do you think of, of your roles were, were where you were pushed into service and had to, you know, perform this great feat again?
Speaker 2: I'm terrible at trying to figure percentages, (laughter) but I would say less than, I'd say maybe forty percent.
Speaker 1: That's almost half the time, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 155992
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a fave, did you have a favorite role?
Speaker 2: No.  People ask me that all the time.  The great roles repay you twice over for the hard work you put into it.  So I can't say that Don Jose ['Carmen' by Georges Bizet] was more of a favorite role than Rodolfo ['La boheme' by Giacomo Puccini], than Pelleas ['Pelleas et Melisande' by Claude Debussy], which I never did at the Met [The Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York]--I did it in the UK--or Don Ottavio ['Don Giovanni' by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart], or Tamino, or, it's impossible to say.  I think at present I hold the record for the number of performances as Tamino in [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart's '[The] Magic Flute.'  I, I loved really all the roles that I, that I did, even the short ones like Narraboth in 'Salome' [Richard Strauss].  I mean the opportunity to sing that even though I get killed early on (laughter), but to sing on stage with Birgit Nilsson, I mean, holy smoke (laughter), that's, you can't beat that.  I did two roles actually in 'Macbeth' my first season there.  I did Malcolm, the shorter tenor role, and then I eventually did MacDuff, and that last time was with Nilsson again.  It's, it's, it's, I can't say one.  There, there are some roles that I wouldn't want to do again and some of the contemporary operas (laughter) that I've done, but, and I did those basically in other, other theaters.  And then I did a lot of contemporary works out in Santa Fe [New Mexico], a couple of which I would love to do again.  I did--in the, as I mentioned, the American premier of Alban Berg's 'Lulu,' I did the role of Alwa, which I think is a fabulous role, love it.  And there were a couple of others that I did that I thought okay, it's over, I'm done (laughter) I'm happy that it's over. But the great roles I can't chose one above the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I guess, likewise, you don't have a favorite opera, I guess.
Speaker 2: No, I mean the operas that I really enjoyed doing, I, I loved doing 'Pelleas.'  'Pelleas et Melisande' is one of those operas that is, it's a very special taste, and not a lot of people necessarily care for it.  I love Debussy, and I think that 'Pelleas' is a masterpiece.  I have a recording of it that I did with Pierre Boulez and Elisabeth Soderstrom.  And many people think that it's one of the best recordings of the opera that exists.  And I'm grateful for that opportunity to have been able to do 'Pelleas.'  I love 'boheme.'  (Laughter) It's sort of hard not to love 'boheme.'  And, and Mozart, I, I really enjoyed making, I enjoyed trying to make Mozart tenor heroes menschlichkeit.  Quite often the tenor is happy just to try to deal with the music as best one can and not really make the character strong.  And I loved making, trying to make Don Ottavio and characters like that to perform with strength.  And one of the reviews that I, I made my debut at Covent Garden [London, England] as Don Ottavio, opposite the Donno, Don Giovanni, of a man that won, a singer that one, wouldn't, didn't ordinarily associate with that role, and that was Tito Gobbi.  Gobbi was known as a Scar--as Scarpia in 'Tosca' [Giacomo Puccini].  And Iago in 'Otello' [Giuseppe Verdi].  These are really strong, nasty characters.  He was, he was masterful at that.  Now, Don Giovanni is also not a very nice guy, but he's a different kind of--and so I got a review in that, from that debut that pleased me greatly that said basically that my Don Ottavio was every bit as, as frightening as, as Don Giovanni, or as, as strong as Don Giovanni.  I thought, thank you (laughter).
Story_ID: 155993
Speaker 1: Now, now, if opera, the costuming and the makeup is, is, is very, you know, it's, it's strong, you know, I mean strong costume, strong makeup. The visual thing is so strong.  Would, would--if I went to the opera, to the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] in 1960, in, in the sixties [1960s], and saw you in an opera, would I know you were black?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  I--there was a controversy about this that got blown all out of proportion.  But I did, I did a role in Santa Fe [New Mexico], 'The Stag King' of a German composer, 'Konig Hirsch' [Hans Werner Henze].  And there were was a writer who lived in Santa Fe who was asked to write a review and an article about this opera for Time magazine.  And so she did.  And in the art--she, she, she interviewed me a little bit, but in the article she said that I was forced to use a kind of pink cream to make up my, make myself up, and made it appear as though I was trying to hide the fact that I'm black.  And that, that article reverberated all over the world, really.  When I went to England shortly after that to sing something at Covent Garden [London, England], one of the writers for the, one of the papers there jumped all over that.  And I said, "No."  I said, "That's not the reason I use makeup."  First of all, everybody on stage uses makeup, and costume, and wigs and so forth.  I have a right to look as stupid as everybody else.  It's part of the theater, the convention of theater.  Why should I go out as me when there's nobody else standing up there as them, as, as, as themselves?  You make up in order to look the role of the character as the character has traditionally been played.  I would not be happy with a, a Caucasian artist who came out to sing Otello in white face.  That's not about that.  I'm not on that stage to make a political statement.  I'm on that stage to perform a role as best I can in the manner that it is expected to be performed.  And as long as wearing costume, and makeup, and wigs is a part of the, of, of the convention that is respected, long respected and is in place in theater, I have a right to do that.  Why should the expectation be different for me because I'm an African American?  Doesn't make sense.  So, what (laughter), you know, what do you want?  I'm not hiding, I'm not doing it to try to make people not know that I'm black.  Someone was telling me that in the old house we used to have our photographs on the wall when you--in, in, in the, the entrance when people look up.  And someone said (laughter) that he walked out after a performance, I was above, and they looked up and they saw my picture and they said, "He's black?"  Yeah, right.  There's no makeup on my picture there.  Now interestingly enough, in the present Metropolitan Opera they have photographs downstairs of people in costume.  And they took the photograph from 'Cosi fan tutte' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] and put it there.  Now, the, the photographer that was at the Met for many years, named Louis Melancon.  Louis was a Cajun from Louisiana, and he would, he would retouch photos of everybody that he, he took.  And if I were, if I--I used grease paint on, on stage, and so he would retouch all this.  And for that particular photograph, he narrowed my nostrils (laughter) so that it looks like I've got almost no nostrils whatsoever.  And it makes me look like I don't look, even in (laughter), in, in makeup, you know.  So I'm thinking, okay.  And I have on a, a periwig and so forth.  But again, I have the right as an artist to present myself as my colleagues do, plus the fact that makeup serves a purpose under theatrical lights.  If a Caucasian goes out on stage without makeup what happens?  The features wash out.  If I go out on stage without makeup, they go the opposite direction (laughter).  You'll see, kind of blur, maybe some eyes and teeth.  So you don't see the features of the face unless you use makeup to bring those features out.  So makeup has that very practical usage that has nothing to do with trying to hide--I mean, when Mario Del Monaco or [James] Jimmy McCracken were singing Otello or, or, or anyone who sings that role, they're not trying to hide the fact that they're white.  They're representing the character as a black man.  So if they can do that, I have the right to represent a character who is Caucasian.  And that's the way it works.
Story_ID: 155994
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did the fact that you and I guess any of the other black opera stars when they were performing in the United States or in Europe, I mean was, was that like, do you think--oh, my initial question was, it, was there a difference in how your covered in the United State and in Europe?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: It, it was--
Speaker 2: I've, interestingly enough, the only times, there, there been two times that somebody has referred to my race. Once in the Amer, in the United States and once in the UK [United Kingdom].  But normally, I can't look in trying to--in remembering reviews, that hasn't been an issue.  If it was in the reviewer's mind, they didn't really put it out there in those terms.  The first time I sang abroad was in Italy.  And one of the reviews I got in the paper was, in translation, "The black Rodolfo has passed his exam."  So, it wasn't a negative.  It mean it was okay.  They--it was, it was something that they were curious as to whether this black guy could sing Rodolfo.  And they liked what they heard, so "Rodolfo nero ha superato l'esame" has passed his exam.  So, fine.  When I made my debut in Scotland as Rodolfo in 1967, none of the reviews targeted race.  They were very positive reviews and they were wonderful.  I sang it in the eighties [1980s] with the same company, but I didn't wear a wig.  I wore my own hair.  I, I wasn't trying to make a statement, I just did.  And one of the (laughter), one of the reviewers made note of that, so.  In the United States there was nothing ever really said until one critic, who was a critic that I respected for his knowledge, and he wrote for a magazine in the New York area.  I jumped in at the last minute.  I was--simply because I was asked to.  Again, I mentioned when I jumped in to 'Manon,' [Jules] Massenet's 'Manon,' it was a new production.  And Nicolai Gedda, who was singing des Grieux, suffered the demise of his father.  And so he sang the first performance and then left for Sweden, and I sang the next two.  And this respected critic didn't care for my performance, which is his right.  I mean, he mentioned that he felt he didn't--that I didn't have the, the kind of voice for the role and without, without saying what kind of voice he felt was right for it.  But then he made reference to the fact that I didn't look like a French noblemen but not so much saying that, that, that was his drift.  And I thought, okay, I don't think I'm gonna let that go without a response.  So I wrote him a letter, not for anyone else's eyes but his.  And I said you know, I really would like to know because, you know, what voice type, I mean what, what, what--whether you felt my voice is too small for the role or too large or what?  Because that would be helpful to me coming from you.  And then I said, I wrote, well, does it bother you that when Zinka Milanov sings Aida, [in 'Aida' by Giuseppe Verdi] that she's not really Ethiopian?  Or that when Mario Del Monaco sings Otello [in 'Otello' by Giuseppe Verdi] that he's not black?  I said if that, if that doesn't bother you, then why are you bothered by the fact that I'm not a French nobleman?  I didn't add in at that time, you know, that [Joseph Boulogne] Chevalier de Saint-Georges and the fact that writers like [Alexandre] Dumas, fils and [Alexandre Dumas] pere were half black.  But I just said why does it bother you?  I used to, I, I would see him quite often at the old Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], and he would always smile.  Net, next time I saw him after I wrote him the letter was in the hallway.  Our eyes met, his jaw dropped, and he turned away as he passed.  There was no greeting.  I saw him again (laughter), as fate would have it.  God works in mysterious ways.  I went to a performance of [Ruggero] Leoncavallo's 'La boheme' given by a small company in New York at an auditorium on Broadway.  And as I walked in, my seat was right next to him.  And (laughter), and I came in and I saw him and I said, "Hello."  He said mm, hm, hmm.  And at intermission he disappeared.  I don't know whether he disappeared because he didn't want to see the rest of the opera or that he moved his seat or what happened, but for the second half of the show he was not there.  For the next three years after that 'Manon' performance, every review he wrote of anything that I did was negative, which proved to me that critics don't like being criticized.  He finally gave me a decent review for the performance of '[The] Magic Flute' [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] that I did.  So, those were the only incidences where in print at least there was reference to my race.
Story_ID: 155995
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, now a typical season with the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], you, you do a season of shows in New York [City].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do, do you tour, too, during--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the Met tour, which I think no longer exists, always came at the end of the season.  And there were certain cities that they always went to, Boston [Massachusetts], Atlanta [Georgia], Birmingham [Alabama] until Birmingham, people in Birmingham told Rudolf Bing that we don't want to invite I think it was Leontyne Price.  We don't want her to come, so, so Bing said okay, we won't come.  And so he, he just lock--locked Birmingham out.  But they'll go to Dallas [Texas], they go to St. Louis [Missouri] I believe, they would go to Cleveland [Ohio] and Detroit [Michigan].  So, in the old days I was traveled by train, and eventually they changed to flying, and then eventually, no tour.  What they do now is are the films, videos of the, the performances.  But the tour is a lot of fun.  It was, it was interesting because (laughter) my first tour was at the end of the '61 [1961], '62 [1962] season.  And I was told--and also the, the, one of the cities was Memphis [Tennessee] as well.  And I was told by people, blacks in particular, said "Oh, he said Atlanta's gonna be all right, but oh, watch out for Memphis.  It's bad news."  I said, "Okay."  So, we got to Atlanta first, and there was only one hotel that the black members of the company could stay in.  There were, there were three black members of the company, the, the chorus I believe, two women who were very active activists and one male in the chorus.  And, but there was only one hotel we could stay at, and that was the Peachtree Manor.  The rest of the company for the most part stayed down the hill from Peachtree Manor at the, the Biltmore [Hotel].  Some people stayed I think at, at a, a motel.  And it was, it was a very interesting experience for me.  At one point, the chorus members said, "You know, let's go across the street from the Biltmore to Davis Brothers Cafeteria.  They got great food, and it's inexpensive."  So I said, "Okay," so we went across (laughter), went across for lunch.  We walked in, and the young manager, young white fellow came running toward the door, "No, no, no, no, no, y'all, y'all can't come in, y'all, y'all, y'all, y'all can't come in."  And some of our, the company members, some chorus members, maybe orchestra were sitting there having lunch already.  Some of whom got up and left. Others sort of sat there (laughter) and finished eating, so okay.  I went downtown.  This was in 1962.  I went downtown one day just to walk around.  I hadn't been in Atlanta before.  And this was at the height of the movement [Civil Rights Movement] and desegregation of facilities.  And I passed on the, I was on the bus, and I passed by a White Tower [hamburger chain] I think it was.  And there was a line of young blacks, maybe college, high school-age kids, nicely dressed, standing outside the closed door.  They wouldn't let 'em in.  And so as I went further downtown I saw shop people, shopkeepers looking out the door 'cause they heard these kids were coming.  So I got off at one point, and I was walking along, and I passed a barbershop.  I looked in, and I noted that there was a black barber, fine.  So I went back to the hotel, and somebody said, "Just ask about that barbershop."  And I asked one of the, the African Americans who worked there.  He said, "Oh," he said, "that's Herndon's."  He said, "You know, that's a black family.  It's been in Atlanta for years.  But that's Herndon's barbershop, and you can't get your hair cut there."  I said, "What?"  He said, "No," he said, "they won't cut your hair."  So I may--I remembered those young people standing there.  I'd made up my mind, I'm gon' get my hair cut (laughter) at Herndon's.  So the next day, I had time.  I went down to Herndon's, and I walked in.  There were two chairs next to the door.  And I had a book with me, and I walked in and I sat down.  The first chair was occupied, and the barber there was a light-skinned black, and he sort of looked at me.  And the next chair in back of his was empty, and then the third chair there was a black barber cutting someone's hair.  And in a, a chair, a barber chair sitting right in front of me was this big Caucasian fellow in overalls, and he sort of looked at me.  So I opened my book.  It was a book on [Enrico] Caruso, Caruso's history, and I opened the book and I started to read.  And after about five minutes, the barber in the front chair came over.  He said, "Can I help you?"  I said, "Yeah, I'd like to get my hair cut."  He said, "Are you from around here?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Are you Indian?"  I said, "No, no, I'm American."  They looked at me, and, and so he walked over to the guy seated in the chair with the overalls on and said something to him.  And I think, and I couldn't be sure, I think he probably told him that I was Indian.  The guy said (mumbling).  So he came back to me and he said, "Okay, in a few minutes the fellow back there will cut your hair."  I said, "Fine."  So when the fellow in the back finished cutting this patron's hair I went back, and this guy was grinning from ear to ear (laughter) because he knew.  He was, his, his, his hands were like this.  It wasn't the best haircut I've ever gotten because I think he (laughter) he was so nervous.  But I thought to myself, I am not leaving this city until they cut this black man's hair.  So that was my initial visit to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting on a number of levels 'cause this is Herndon's, you know, [Alonzo Franklin] Herndon is the founder of Atlanta Life Insurance [Company].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A very rich man.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: One of the benefactors of Atlanta U [Atlanta University, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and all that.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: But yet in his barbershop you couldn't--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --A black person couldn't get his hair cut.
Speaker 2: That's right.  When we left Atlanta and we went to Memphis, something happened that did, had not happened in Atlanta.  As soon as my foot hit the ground, someone from the local opera organization came up to me, "Mr. Shirley, welcome to Memphis."  I felt my mouth drop open, after having been told that Memphis was worse than Atlanta.  It was quite the opposite.  Now, there were places I think where a couple of our members went to try and eat and there was some stuff, but there were other places they could go and--and in Atlanta, also, the only place you could eat downtown was the, one of the big department stores.  So--
Speaker 1: Rich's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Rich's, right.
Story_ID: 155996
Speaker 1: In 1966, I went back to Atlanta [Georgia], this time--see, I, I wasn't scheduled to sing anything in Atlanta.  Leontyne [Price] sang '[La] fanciulla del West' [Giacomo Puccini] there, but I wasn't scheduled to sing anything in '62 [1962].  In '66 [1966] I went back to sing Almaviva in the 'Barber of Seville' [Gioachino Rossini].  I booked into the Biltmore Hotel, no problem.  I immediately after booking in went across the street to Davis Brothers Cafeteria to have lunch, no problem.  So just in four short years all the stuff that we'd had to deal with before had been swept aside.  Now, I'm sure there were some patrons in there who were not that comfortable with my (laughter) being there or with blacks coming in, but there was no big deal about it.
Speaker 2: That's interesting too 'cause a lot of cities in the North you couldn't stay at a hotel.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: My hometown in Dayton [Ohio] was like that and other places.
Speaker 1: Well, in Detroit [Michigan], I grew up in Detroit, remember walking down Woodward Avenue, and there were restaurants we couldn't go into. There were places we couldn't go.  So, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you got a chance to see change on a national basis--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 155997
Speaker 1: So you were, you sang with the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], the Met for eleven, you were contracted for eleven years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I signed with them for eleven years.
Speaker 1: Eleven years, and now, now, I have a, a note here that you, there was some sort of a bad review you got for 'Romeo and Juliet' [Charles Gounod].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did that have anything to do with you leaving the Met or--
Speaker 2: Yes, it, well, it--what happened was (laughter) in 1969 there was what the union, we termed a lockout.  There was a contractual dispute, and I was one of the officers of the union.  I was a recording secretary.  And there was a radio interview in which I made a plea, a comment to Mr. [Rudolf] Bing to, you know, let us work.  We wanted to work.  He had, he had placed an ad in a magazine saying that he was interested, he, he wanted the company back at work.  And I said something on the radio about, "Well, it didn't seem that way."  Well, he heard that.  And I saw him right after this interview, and the way he, way he greeted me I knew oh, boy.  The, the handwriting is on the wall as far as I'm concerned, you know, but so be it.  In 1971, he, he had, he left Met. He retired, and Schuyler Chapin's first season came.  I had sung Romeo in 'Romeo and Juliet' 'cause I'd cover Franco Corelli when we first did it in 1967 and I sang some performances of it.  And, but it was not a role that was that easy for me.  There were places in it that were very difficult, but I managed to get beyond them.  When I came in for what turned out to be my last season, two things, Mr. Bing had signed, before he left he signed a number of artists to extended contracts, but he didn't do that in my case.  So I figured okay, it's gonna be up.  I came into that last season prepared to sing Mozart because those were the roles that I was scheduled to do.  I was covering Romeo.  I arrived the first day and Schuyler Chep--Chapin met me at the door.  He said, "You know, we have a rehearsal of 'Romeo and Juliet' today, and Fran, we can't find, find Franco Corelli.  Will you do the rehearsal?"  Well, I thought well, okay, here we go again.  But I really was not psychologically prepared to do, to do that.  I was looking at roles that I was comfortable with, and I was looking forward to it.  But I knew the music.  I'd sung the role, so I said okay, so I did the rehearsal.  It was, it went okay.  And he came to me after rehearsal.  He said, "Well, can you do the dress rehearsal tomorrow because I want you to do the performance?"  And I thought, ah, so I said okay.  So the conductor, after the dress rehearsal--it went okay--wanted to work on it, Alain Lombard, wanted to work on certain things.  I'm getting tired and--'cause the performance is the next day.  So I went home, and I told my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] I said you know, I really don't want to do this role right now 'cause I just, I'm not together with it.  And I didn't want to do what Corelli--'cause they, they couldn't find Franco.  Franco had had what for him in his mind I think was a, a disaster with the role.  He cracked on one of the high notes one night, and then I had to go in at the last minute to finish the opera for him.  And he just never was that comfortable with it anymore, even though he could sing the pants off, I mean this great voice. He could the pants off.  But he was like this, a bundle of nerves.  So he just didn't show up.  And so Schuyler came to me.  He said, "Okay, you got the opening performance."  And I thought to myself, well, I can do like Franco, and I can cancel it.  But I, I, I didn't want to do that.  And I really (laughter) didn't wanna go ahead and do the performance, but I made the decision, okay, I'm gonna go ahead and do it.  It wasn't the most comfortable night before the performance that I'd ever spent, but I thought okay.  And those difficult places in it, I decided okay, I'm gonna go out and I'm just gonna drive my way through it.  And I got through the performance.
Story_ID: 155998
Speaker 1: I noted that applause was decidedly on the cooler side [after a performance of 'Romeo and Juliet' by Charles Gounod at the Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York].  I thought well, at least I got through it.  My, my press person called me the next day and said, "Have you seen the New York Times?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Oh," so I got a copy of the review.  And it was saying oh, Shirley's career is on shaky ground, that it wasn't a good performance and so forth and so on.  So, I said okay.  I called the management and spoke to one of [Rudolf] Bing's assistants.  I said I want to come and talk to you about this.  And Charlie Wright, [Charles] Charlie Riecker was the person I spoke with.  I said, "Charlie," I said, "Take me out of the performances that are coming up."  I said, "I don't wanna work out my problems with this opera in front of the Met [Metropolitan Opera] public.  I don't wanna do that."  And I said, "While we're at it," I said, "Let's look at my list of responsibilities, the roles that I cover as well as perform.  I'm gonna prune that list."  It was the first time I'd ever done that in my career at the Met.  I said, "I've got this, this season I'm responsible for fourteen operas."  He said, "You're kidding."  I said, "No, I'm not.  Pull the list."  I was responsible for fourteen operas, either to perform or to cover, which means that I had to be ready with all of them.  He said I--I said, "Let's take, start taking this, this, this, this, this, this, this, this," took off a number of things.  Now, arguably yes, it's something that I should have done years before that.  But in my mind, I was there, yes, to prove that a black person could do this thing, which was, again, the wrong thing to have in mind, but it was there, it was what it was.  I was the only tenor, the only black, you know, all that stuff.  And I said take those things off my list.  And when I did my last--so I got back to doing the [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart, the, the 'Don Giovanni' and the, the, 'The Magic Flute.'  That was what I was geared to do.  My last broadcast was of Don Ottavio in 'Don Giovanni.'  And I think it was my last performance also there.  And I knew at that last performance it'd be the last time I'd ever sing at the Met.  It was a bittersweet feeling, but that's what it was.  So, the fact that the Romeo did not go that well, I mean I, I think that was the worse review I'd ever gotten from performances I'd done at the Met, didn't--if it had gone well, I don't know if my contract would have been renewed there or not, because Bing didn't renew it.  And he, he was really (laughter) he was really upset with me because I had said what I said.  I saw him a couple of years after that when I'd, when I did my radio program for WQXR.  It was a very successful program.  It ran for two seasons, and it was syndicated.  But it was interesting because, after that first season, he contacted WQXR and said that he wanted to do a program of interviews, some, something called Singers Can Also Speak. (Laughter) And so I happened to see him at WQXR one day.  There was a kind of reception.  And he said to me, "Oh George," he said, "let's by, let, let's bygones be bygones, all right?"  I said, "Mr. Bing, I have no problem with it."  So, he had a lot of power at the Met even after he was gone, so I don't know if, even if [Schuyler] Chapin had wanted to renew my contract, I don't know if he would have been able to or not.  So it was the end of, for me, what was an era.  It was fascinating, but it didn't end my career.  I mean I continued to sing at Covent Garden and other theaters around, around the world.  But it was, it was a fascinating time.  I'm glad that I had it.  And it, it has good memories as well as memories that make me think, whew.  If it had worked a little differently, who knows?  All the last minute performances, things like that take their toll, but it is what it is.
Story_ID: 155999
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you continued to perform.  And so, so, I, I know you worked in, in Europe at some point, I mean in London [England] you say Covent Garden--
Speaker 2: I went to, well, I made my debut in Covent Garden, at Covent Garden in 1967 at Glyndebourne [Festival Opera, United Kingdom] in '66 [1966], the Scottish Opera in '67 [1967], in Berlin [Germany] in 1983, so the exposure continued.  It was good. I enjoyed it. I had wonderful experiences there.  I think that if I had stayed at the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] there were some things vocally that I needed to work out that I probably wouldn't have had an opportunity to do, that my leaving the Met enabled me to get some things together that needed to be gotten together.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know I don't think we pointed out before that when you were covering all those roles, I mean you had to not only learn the music and the, and, and the--
Speaker 2: Staging--
Speaker 1: --the staging and the acting--
Speaker 2: Everything that goes with it.
Speaker 1: --in another language.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean you had to sing another language--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that they were--how many different languages did you have to sing in?
Speaker 2: Well, the standard languages are French, German, Italian for opera, and English.  I have sung, not at the Met, I have sung in Polish (laughter).  Maybe the Poles don't think so (laughter).  But in Detroit [Michigan] we did an opera by a Polish composer, [Karol] Szymanowski a few years ago, and that was in Polish.  I've sung in Russian, never have sung any opera in Spanish.  I've sung songs in Spanish.  So it's fairly wide enough range.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask about that 'cause I don't know if that's clear to anyone who watches this, what all you were doing, you know.  You just weren't rehearsing a role, but you had to get the music, and then you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, you have to have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the languague--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to have to those in your, in your mind and in your throat.  And the thing is if you with an opera or anything else, when you learn it, your muscles then remember what it's like to sing it that way.  And if you don't, if, if you come back to it after a few years and you've gone through some changes of technique or just getting older and so forth, maybe your voice doesn't sing it as easily as it used to five, six, seven, ten years ago.  So you have to have a time, a period of time to rework a role so that you can sing it with the voice you now have.  This is something that people don't, aren't, aren't cognizant of necessarily, that as the body matures, so does your throat.  Your throat goes through changes as well.  It can also go through changes, medical changes that, like reflux and what have you, that can affect how you sing.
Story_ID: 156000
Speaker 1: So your professional performing career basically, until you returned to education, I guess this is your peak years, from '62 [1962] to, to '80 [1980], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd say to '80--well, actually through '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What would be, do you have a favorite--well, I asked you before if you, you know, you enjoyed every minute of this, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, except those times when I jumped into something the last minute and realized that oh, boy, maybe this is something I shouldn't be singing, and that happened on some, a couple of occasions.  And once I sang those roles I just took 'em out of my repertoire.
Speaker 1: And what would be the biggest challenge in a role like, I mean that, that, that you would have in a particular role?
Speaker 2: Stamina.  Roles are written so that they lie, most of the role will lie in a particular area of the voice, and some roles lie higher than others.  And this depends, if you've made the right choice, then that role will fit your voice well where it, where your voice lies, where it's most comfortable.  And in some of the things that I did at the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] at the last minute, when I really didn't have time to work them adequately into my voice, and that can take maybe years at times for you to become comfortable with a particular role. I would get on stage and find out, mm, this is not that comfortable.  And when that happens, then the sound is more stressed. It's been more worked.  It doesn't sound easy 'cause it isn't.  So that was, again, the kind of pressure I had to deal with increasingly at the Met.  Not being an opera fan when I was younger, when I got into the business I didn't really know that much about opera roles.  I didn't know whether a role was right for me or not.  And some of the teachers that I had really were not that informative, couldn't really guide me in that.  There have been--in hindsight, yeah, there should have been times when I told the Met no, that's, I know I can't sing that role.  But the fact is that I didn't know (laughter) because until I found myself really working on it and thinking, this isn't gonna be the easiest performance that I have ever given.  What should have happened and what I do in counseling my students is to take time to learn a role, to find out what it's all about, to find out, to get, to ascertain your comfort level in every page of that opera, which means that if somebody comes to you before you have studied it or before you have completed your study of it and says to you, "I want you to do this opera opening night, you know, fifteen thousand dollars per performance," if you don't have ownership of that role already, then you have to say no.  You have to take a chance that they're going to be upset and say well, if you don't accept this, then we aren't going to ask again, that's okay, because they'll be even more upset if you sign on the dotted line and then find as you continue to work on this that oh, I'm struggling.  And you try to go out and do that performance and it fails, they're gonna be really upset.  And the next time your manager goes to them and say, what about so and so for this role, they're gonna say, "Well, we gave him an opportunity to do it.  He failed us, so we're not interested."  If you say no up front, and they say well, okay, forget it, and you continue to have success, they're gonna come back to you.  Why?  Because they know that you're gonna make 'em look good.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you have a performance that you can say is your greatest performance during this period of time?
Speaker 2: There were a number of highlights.  I wouldn't say--it's like trying to choose the (laughter), the, my favorite opera.  I mean there were moments when I felt that it didn't really firmly come together.  And again, that was with different, different roles at different times.  There were times when I felt yeah, and then other people felt well, not that great (laughter).  So, I have to leave that up to history, to people to say.  But, yeah, there were times when I felt that--I mean, the, one of the recordings that I have that was illegally taken (laughter) off of the radio that people now can buy is a performance of 'Simon Boccanegra,' [Giuseppe Verdi] again, a role that I stepped into at the last minute at the Met because a tenor had canceled.  And this was with Renata Tebaldi, and it was a role that really felt right, and the recording of it sounds right.  And people point to it and say yeah, that, that was really a good, a really topnotch performance.  There were some performances of Madame, of, of Pinkerton, 'Madama Butterfly,' [Giacomo Puccini] that I did that I'm, I'm happy with.  And there are a number of performances, but I can't say that there was one that says that that was the be all end all.
Story_ID: 156001
Speaker 1: So you returned to education in 1980.  Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Well, I was still performing.  I got a call from University of Maryland, College Park [Maryland].  They were looking for a professor.  And I thought I real, I want to get back to teaching, I love teaching, and maybe this is the time to do it.  I mean, it's coming to me out of the clear blue, from above, as did the opportunity to become a professional singer, so I thought well, let me, let me, let me pursue this.  And so I took the professorship at Maryland, and it turned out to be right on.  And then the opportunity came to come to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], which was a school that I was always interested in.  I had friends on the faculty here, and I didn't even think twice about that. I said yeah.
Story_ID: 156002
Speaker 1: Alright, so, University of Maryland, now, now this is University of Maryland in College Park [Maryland]? Okay.  And so you joined the music department at University of Maryland.  And what did you teach?
Speaker 2: Singing.  I mean I, there I taught singing one-on-one, applied music.  I taught on one occasion I think a diction course, and on one occasion a music history course, vocal literature course.  At the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] we have people who teach those aspects of it, so basically at Michigan I've just taught singing lessons.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so were you like full-time faculty at University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was full time.
Speaker 1: You were in charge of the vocal program--
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: You were in charge of the vocal program--
Speaker 2: I wasn't in charge of it.  No, I was--
Speaker 1: Alright--
Speaker 2: --Just a faculty member.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I was full time.  We still lived in New Jersey at that time, so I would commute down on, say, Sunday nights and teach maybe three, four days and then come back to New Jersey on the weekend.  And when we were getting ready to move to Maryland is when I got the offer from University of Michigan, so we came here instead.
Speaker 1: This is, this is '87 [1987]. Yes, okay.  So, did you enjoy--well, I guess you enjoyed teaching at Maryland--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --But why did you come back to Michigan?  Was it because of the family--
Speaker 2: Well, again, as I said, this is a school, the School of Music [Theatre and Dance] here was always one that I was interested in.  Growing up in Detroit [Michigan], I couldn't afford to go to [University of] Michigan, but Michigan has always been one of the premier music schools in the country.  And I had friends on faculty here, like Willis Patterson and others, and so, plus the fact that both of my parents [Daisy Bell Shirley and Irving Ewing Shirley] were still alive and living in Detroit at the time and as was my mother-in-law.  So it was a chance to come back home.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And here, you also got a chance to perform some of the, you, in '96 [1996] you sang Herod Antipas in [Richard] Strauss's 'Salome'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at--
Speaker 1: --And--
Speaker 2: --At the Michigan Opera Theater [Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 156003
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and you also were in a production of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was that was in Europe at the Bregenz Festival in [Bregenz] Austria--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --In 1998.  My history with 'Porgy' is very short.  I was asked by Nathaniel Merrill ["Nat"], who was the house director at the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York], if I would consider doing Sporting Life [character in 'Porgy and Bess'] in 1965.  And I refused because knowing the history of black males who have sung in that opera and then who've not been hired by other opera companies to do other roles, I didn't want, even though I was at the Met, I didn't wanna take a chance on being typecast.
Speaker 1: Now what is that story?  Now this is a--
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: --Story, an opera story that we haven't heard before--
Speaker 2: Well, 'Porgy,' when 'Porgy' came to life, it was because of its music and its storyline.  It was considered by those opera lovers--it wasn't considered to be an opera.  It was considered to be a folk opera.  So it, it was looked down upon as not being the real deal.  And the singers who performed the roles, and Porgy, the role of Porgy itself is one of the hardest roles in operatic literature, especially if you do it the way it has traditionally been done.  The singer has to spin the whole night on his knees, which can just ruin one's physical health, I mean.  The late [HM] William Warfield walked with a limp. One foot was turned out.  And I think that was probably because of all the Porgys that he did.  That's a difficult role.  There's a lot of hard singing in the role.  And the other roles are not that easy.  The singers who have come out of 'Porgy' performances and have done well in opera have usually been women, the Besses and the Serenas.  But Porgys and Sporting Lives and others have not really been accepted with that same kind of open-arm policy.  That's not to say that for all Besses it's been easy.  It's not.  But men have been the ones who have found themselves locked out generally of the possibility of doing other operatic roles that they're capable of doing.  So, I didn't wanna take that chance.  I mean I have a former student, Alvy Powell, who is the principal base soloist with the United States Army Chorus.  Alvy spent a number of years in the Chorus, and then he started getting work singing Porgy.  And so he was discharged from the [U.S.] Army, has sung Porgy all over the world with companies.  He sang at La Scala [Milan, Italy]. He sang at I think in Paris [France].  He sung all over the world.  But he had a manager, and was one, one of my, my former manager, and she couldn't get him hired to do other operatic roles that he was capable of doing.  So what did Alvy do?  He went back into the Army, 'cause he had family to take care of.  Now he would still get out and do some performances on the outside, but there was--you gotta ask yourself, why, why, a man who has success doing one of the hardest roles in a repertoire, why couldn't he be hired to do other roles?  He's got the voice for it, the presence.  So I didn't wanna take that chance, and so I told Nat no, I won't do it.
Story_ID: 156004
Speaker 1: Let's see, '65 [1965], I was thirty-one years old. Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], considerably older, in my sixties, about sixty-three years or so, sixty-four.  When the offer came [to perform in 'Porgy and Bess' by George Gershwin], it came from a man named Gotz Friedrich, who was the intendant of the artistic director [Walter Felsenstein] of the Deutsche Oper Berlin [sic., Komische Oper Berlin, Berlin, Germany], with whom I had sung before a number of times.  He initially offered me the role of Daddy Peter, and I said no, that doesn't interest me.  But I'd be interested in doing Sportin' Life.  So he said, "Good."  The officials of the festival, the Bregenz Festival [Bregenz, Austria], one of the officials said, "But this man is too old (laughter) to do Sportin' Life. He's too alt"--but Gotz insisted.  So I had my chance to do Sportin' Life, and I had one of the best times of my whole career.  It was--I knew I could do that role as an old pimp (laughter)--
Speaker 2: How old were you at that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, then I was about sixty-four I think.  And I had a ball.  I--the, the, the company had had some difficulties.  This was the second year of the performances.  The company had some difficulties the first year with housing in, in the town of Bregenz.  And the town fathers were, just been embarrassed by it, so they made some arrangements.  When we opened rehearsals this second year, the cast still wasn't quite sure how things were gonna go evidently, so they opened it with a company prayer.  I've never experienced that in my career as an opera singer.  But it got things off to a wonderful start.  There was such a family feeling in this huge cast of people.  It was, it was wonderful.  On, as a matter of fact, on YouTube there are excerpts from two of the arias that I sing.  The, the production was quite different. It doesn't take place in Catfish Row.  It takes place under a ruined bridge in San Francisco [California] (laughter).  Gotz Friedrich was nothing if not political, and this was--he always found a way of making some kind of political statement of course.  But it was a wonderful experience.  I had a ball.  Drawing on all my memories of growing up in Detroit [Michigan] and seeing the sporting lives walking up and down Oakland Avenue and coming out of the Picket Fence Bar, it was, it was a great chance to use that information, and it turned, turned it into a Sportin' Life character.
Speaker 2: As for the role, I've never seen it on stage.  I've just seen it--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --In movies.
Speaker 1: It's a great opera.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of people say, people still feel like it's embarrassing.  Well, look, it is the equivalent, it's a verismo opera.  It's equivalent of 'Cavalleria rusticana' [Pietro Mascagni] and 'E'Pagliacci' [Ruggero Leoncavallo], about the seamy side of life, those about the seamy side of life in Italy.  This is about the seamy side of life in America.  I've seen things on Black Entertainment Television [BET] that are more embarrassing to me than 'Porgy and Bess' will ever be.
Speaker 2: And just my own opinion, I never thought of it as being embarrassing, but I did feel profoundly sad by 'Porgy' and--you know, it made me feel profoundly sad.
Speaker 1: It is, I mean it's a side of life that if anybody has any sensitivity at all, it is sad.  And it, it, it goes on today.  It's not just fantasy.  It goes on big time today, drugs, the whole thing that poor people are caught up in.  Detroit is suffering it.  Chicago [Illinois] is suffering it.  I just read something the other day about the murder rate in Chicago, which surprised me, it's, it's more than the murder rate in Detroit.  These things have always gone on in an atmosphere of poverty.  You go back into early United States in New York City, those rough areas for the Irish and the, the German immigrants coming in and, and the, the, the Italians.  It's, it's an old, old story.  But because it is based on factual incidents, it's something that we have to recognize as being valid and certainly try to do something about to correct.  But given human nature, it's hard.  Bess's story is, is, is said, that she is victimized by her addiction to drugs.  And Sporting Life says, "Yeah, come on, let's go to New York.  I got plans for you.  Here, sniff a little bit of this happy dust."  I mean, that's going on today. It's going on, come on, folks.  But this particular work, it's a work of art.  The music is great.  The story is powerful.  It's still, it's the the only American opera that Europeans want to hear.  Now we've had some really fine opera written by great composers here.  My former manager in the 1960s told me, she, she married an Italian, her second marriage, who was a television producer for Rai.  And she went to La Scala [Milan, Italy] to speak with the artistic director there, Gideon Galli [ph.].  She wanted to bring the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] to La Scala to perform.  And she said, "George, she told--he told me, he said, 'Senora, what will the Metropolitan Opera perform for us?  If I want to do 'Tosca,' [Giacomo Puccini] we do 'Tosca' here.  If I want to do 'Manon,' [Jules Massenet] then I invite Paris [France] opera.  If I want to do 'Der fliegende Hollander,' 'The Flying Dutchman,' [Richard Wagner] I invite Berlin.  The only opera that the Metropolitan can present here for us is 'Porgy and Bess.'"  He wasn't joking.  So, we have to wake up to the fact that this is a great--and this was before the Met production of 'Porgy and Bess.'  The Met didn't recognize 'Porgy and Bess' until what, the 1980s as an opera?  They didn't produce it until 1980s, with [HM] Simon Estes and Grace Bumbry.  But the Europeans are saying come on.  This is great verismo opera.
Story_ID: 156005
Speaker 1: In terms of the, some of the new operas by black composers, do you have any thoughts about them?  I know there was a production in Detroit [Michigan] a few years ago of the, 'Margaret Garner' [Richard Danielpour].
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --that, that is by a Caucasian composer on a black theme.  Good piece. I have always encouraged composers to write on themes that come from American history, 'cause American history certainly is operatic, and there is so much material to choose from.  And just it's something that needs to be done more of.  We don't need composers writing about something that happened back in Shakespearean times or biblical times necessarily or, we need, if we want opera to be of interest to American audiences, black, white, whatever, that audience has got to go to the theater and see something there that they can relate to.  They gotta see themselves on stage, not the Duke of Mantua.  They gotta see Duke from Hasting Street (laughter), or--
Speaker 1: Duke of Earl.
Speaker 2: They've gotta see themselves represented with great music and a great storyline.  That will bring them into the theater, and that will make opera the art form that can do battle with, say, rock concerts and what have you that fill the stadium.  We've got a rich history from which to draw in drama, plays as well as opera, and composers have got to focus in on that.
Story_ID: 156006
Speaker 1: You retired I think in 2007, was it?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Officially retired. I still do some teaching for the, the school [University of Michigan, School of Music, Theatre, and Dance, Ann Arbor, Michigan], a limited number of students, but officially, I don't, I don't go to meetings anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: I won't ask you who your favorite students are, but can you talk about your students a [University of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland], and here at the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Well, the ones at Michigan have been the ones that have gone on to establish careers of significance.  Anita Johnson, soprano, African American soprano, made her debut at the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York] a number of years ago.  Michael Fabiano, Italian American tenor, made his debut at the Met two years ago. He's having a wonderful career.  The, David Daniels, who is the premier countertenor today in the concert and operatic world, was one of my students.  Scott Piper, wonderful tenor, who's having a really fine career, just joined our faculty as a matter of fact.  He's still having a career, international career, but Scott took an interest in teaching and is going to be a wonderful teacher.  So, the, the level of student here is, is, is very high, and it's been a great privilege to work with these young people.  I had a chance to work with music theatre students here that have gone on to do some really good things on Broadway.  I think it's Thomas Hartwell [sic, Robert Hartwell], I believe, Hartwell--don't want to get his first name wrong--wonderful singer and dancer.  This young man is just eating Broadway up right now, tremendously talented.  So it's, it's, it's been a wider range of students that I've been able to work with here.  I've had students from the straight theater program.  One of the most beautiful baritone voices that I've worked with was an, was an acting student who graduated a couple of years ago, so music theatre, music education, voice, straight voice performance, just been able to have a wonderful studio of diverse talents.
Story_ID: 156007
Speaker 1: Now do you only teach the talented, or could you take someone who did, does not ordinarily sing and bring them up to a level where they could actually--
Speaker 2: I've worked with singers, people who've wanted to sing, whose gifts have been less noted, say, or notable.  It comes down to whether--it comes down to the quality of the voice, and the singer's musical ear, and the sense of what it is to sing and be expressive.  Now some people have great voices, but they don't have that singing sense.  Some people have great voices, and they sing out of tune because the ear is not accurate. Then some people with voices that are less notable, but they have all the ingredients.  One of the people I learned a great deal from was the late Boris Goldovsky, who would speak of the multi, multiplication by zero.  If you have, say, five test tubes, and all of them except one have something in them--they don't have to be full, but they have something in them--and one of them is empty, then chances of that producing a career are nil.  If they have something in them, if each one has something in them, that it's not filled to the brim but varying levels, there's a chance for success.  If they're all filled to the top, then yeah, I mean it's (laughter) but if one of those is empty, then chances are that nothing will happen.  I remember hearing a young lady sing once I went to the library in Montclair, New Jersey, where we used to live and they used to have little concerts, recitals in a rear room.  And I heard this singer, and I went over and stood and listened for a while, young lady, personable appearance, lovely voice, musical in terms of singing with expressiveness and what have you.  But almost everything she sang was a little bit under the pitch, which is tragic.  Now, if I worked with her, I would have to determine whether the pitch problem was a matter of her ear or whether it was something that could be corrected by changing her technical approach to singing.  But from what I heard in those few minutes, I couldn't discern any technical problem, which for me would say--if she were to ask me, "What are my chances?"  I would have, would've had to say, "I don't think they're very good.  As a matter of fact, I don't think you have any chance to perform because you're singing is out of tune."  Again, if the voice had been less appealing, but the musicality was as strong, and the expressiveness was as strong, and the tuning was accurate, that person is liable to have a career.  So, it's an individual thing. It just depends.  Sometimes, one of the things that's difficult in teaching at the university level is that you hear a young high school student who may have some of those problems, but what we listen for is, okay, is it basically in tune as, as what we hear, something that if you can be corrected, if the expressiveness is something that makes us interested, if there is some charisma in the performance.  So you take a chance on if, depending on the range of talent, and take a chance on bringing this young person in.  And sometimes they can just completely surprise you within maybe a semester or a year of study there's a complete change.  And this person is yeah, this is someone who shows tremendous career potential.  So it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's something of a crapshoot at times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the ear thing is, is really crucial.
Story_ID: 156008
Speaker 1: Do, do you give advice about how to take care of your voice?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we have to.  There are things that we've learned fairly recently that were not, that people weren't aware of, we weren't aware of just 'til a few years ago.  For instance, in choirs, if somebody comes to choir rehearsal and is wearing perfume, strong perfume, that's a no, no because it can create problems, respiratory problems in the singers around you as well you yourself.  And that's not something that people paid much attention to. Diet, acid reflux is something that has ruined any number of careers over the years.  It wasn't really recognized in this country until I'd say the nine, mid 1980s apparently because it's something that I'd never heard of before the 1980s.  When I was teaching at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], I would, as I said, go down, spend about three or four days on campus.  And I'd work late, and then I'd eat late.  One of my favorite foods at that time was General Tso's chicken, which is pretty spicy stuff.  One night I woke up and I felt, I felt as though I had a blowtorch on my throat, really uncomfortable.  And at some point after that, I noticed that I was having difficulty swallowing.  And after that my voice started having problems.  In the middle of the range it would sort of kick out.  I could sing above or below, but in the very middle it was difficult to phonate.  So I went to my laryngologist in New Jersey, and he checked me out 'cause I also had, seemed to have phlegm I couldn't get rid of.  He said, "Well, you have something that we call near phlegm."  I said, "What's that?"  Well, he didn't really give me an adequate explanation of it.  We moved shortly after that to Michigan so I could start my career here [University of Michigan, School of Music, Theatre, and Dance, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And I had a performance coming up in New York City, a concert performance, and I was having this problem with my voice not speaking in the middle.  So the new doctor that we had gave me something called Theo-Dur, which seemed to help.  And I got through the performance, but it really wasn't healing the situation.  I also had performances with the Deutsche Oper from West Berlin [Germany] in Japan, in Tokyo, 'The Ring Cycle' [Richard Wagner].  And I went to do those, and it got me through, and came back.  And because this Theo-Dur wasn't really getting rid of the problem, helping me, just helping me to sort of deal with it, I stopped taking it.  And I had a, had a headache for three days coming off this stuff.  I asked one of my colleagues, I said, "Do you have an old-fashioned laryngologist that I can go to," 'cause I thought I still had the remnants of a virus or something.  So she sent me to her laryngologist, who gave me a very interesting exam, unlike any I'd ever had before.  At one point he took a sharp instrument and he said, "I'm gon' touch the back of your pharyngeal wall.  Tell me what you feel."  On one side I felt nothing.  On the other side I felt it.  And he said, "Okay."  He said, "Your larynx is slightly tilted."  I said, "What?  Is that because maybe I've been singing the wrong stuff?"  He said, "No, no."  He said that'll correct itself.  I'd done a lot of coughing 'cause I did have at one point a, a virus.  And he said, "You have a lot of pachydermia."  I said, "What's that?"  He said, "It's kind of thick, gray mucous that's sort of gathered around your, your, your, your laryngeal, your mechanism in your throat, which is the reason why you feel that you have all this phlegm you can't get rid of."  He said, "Your vocal folds are red and swollen around the retinoids."  The retinoids are at the back.  They're two little mechanisms that open and close the vocal folds when you breathe.  And he said, "You have acid reflux."  I said, "What's that?"  So he gave me a four page printout of foods and stuff that I had to avoid.  And I looked at that and I thought, what am I gonna eat?  Everything that I eat and drink is on this, but no more fried foods, and no more alcohol, no more caffeine, no more fried breads like pancakes, no more chewing gum, nothing with peppermint in it, no more mouthwash.  I'm thinking for heaven's sake, what am I gonna do?  But what I was experiencing, experiencing in the difficulty of swallowing was dangerous because that could lead to a precancerous, a, a cancerous condition of the esophagus and a collapse of the esophagus.  So I had to go, undergo a tremendous change in my diet, and I also had to put the head of my bed up on blocks of wood, the legs under the head of my bed on blocks of wood so the entire bed was elevated so that at night if I regurgitated stomach acid, then it wouldn't come up and burn my vocal folds.  And that's the problem.  Performers always eat late then go to bed, the worst thing you can possibly do, anybody can do, because that weakens the stomach valve so that it no longer closes off at night and prevents the acid from coming from the stomach up the esophagus.  So my bed is up on an angle.  My wife [Gladys Lee Ishop] says it's like sleeping on the side of Mount Everest 'cause she keeps (laughter) sliding down.  But it's the only way I can avoid that, plus the fact no, nothing to eat or drink about three hours before I go to bed not even water because the problem is that whatever is in your system that is liquefied, that's what you regurgitate.  So, that's important for people to know, even if you're not a professional singer, 'cause reflux can give you life threatening problems.  That's one of the reasons why Nexium and, and, and the other ma, medicines have become so popular in the last couple of decades because here in this country it was not something that was recognized.  I was singing in, at Covent Garden in London [England], and the baritone was leading, doing the leading roles is German.  And he said that, as we were approaching opening night, he said, "You know, I always have this coughing, this, this thing that going on," so he had to cancel opening night.  He sang later performances.  But what the poor guy didn't realize, and I know that now, is that he had reflux.  Everything in his diet, beer, wurst, cheese. All that stuff was feeding his problem and causing him vocal problems.  So, in teaching, that's one of the things we focus on, what it, what's necessary for vocal health, plenty of rest, good hydration, at least eight glasses of water a day so that the mucous membrane around the vocal folds is, is filled, and you're not singing on a dry throat, proper diet, sleeping so that you don't have air blowing on you and drying you out at night, having a humidifier running when the heating system, system comes on so that, that the air is well moistened, all of those things, and again, no strong perfume when you have to sing 'cause that gives problems in the, in the respiratory tract.  So all of these things are addressed with students in their training.
Story_ID: 156009
Speaker 1: Okay, so diet's important to a singer is what you're telling us.  And, but everybody has the image of, even in sports they talk, they talk about like don't count your win until the fat lady sings, you know, meaning Wagnerian opera star with the horns in her--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Hat and all that, but, you know, some of our, you know, [Luciano] Pavarotti's a big guy.  And back in the days when they had the castrati in Italy, the big guys, you know.  And the--
Speaker 2: Painfully big.
Speaker 1: Yeah and the, you know, even Aretha Franklin in the soul, you know, was supposed to have the best voice in the soul singers is a big woman.  But--
Speaker 2: She had, she had that voice before she became big.  If you see Aretha as a young woman, there wasn't all that avoirdupois hanging off of her.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Fat is not required for singing operatically. It's not required.  When I first met Luciano Pavarotti in London [England], 1967, he wasn't fat.  He was a big guy, big head, big neck, big chest, but he was not fat.  As I understand it, he had gained the weight because there was this thing in, amongst some Italians that you have to have the nerve endings well covered (laughter) as singers.  So he began to balloon, but he was not fat.  And he was singing beautifully when I first heard him.  So, I think that, think there could be a, a number of reasons why opera singers have been traditionally sort of large.  First of all, many of them are large people.  Big voices come out of large frames and large necks.  And the sounds that we make are expansive sounds, large, and there might be a psychological connection to that, that when you're singing this way--it's interesting that when I'm working with a student whose, maybe sings with a little teeny, tiny voice, and I know that there's more in there, I might give that student a suggestion.  Imagine as though you are a three hundred pound gorilla in the middle of the jungle, and now make the sound that you think that gorilla would make.  And quite often, I get a sound out of that body that's like this, without them forcing it.  So how you see yourself plays a role in how you express yourself with your voice.  And if that sense of expansion is like this, then it could be that over time, you know, when you begin to eat every day rather than every other day, when you start your career--eating is a good thing--and you, again, start eating after performances and then going to bed, and that adds to your girth.  At one point, early in my career, about 1962, it was, my, my, my, my weight history is interesting.  When I was in college I weighed about 155.  I have small bones.  When I went to the [U.S.] Army, when I was drafted into service--oh, when I started teaching, I went to about 170, and I thought, mm, hey.  I was drafted and I thought there goes my weight.  In basic training I went up to about 190.  And that was because I was eating a lot of, you know, rich food, but I was also exercising.  I was probably in the best shape that I've ever been in in my life, and that surprised me.  When I left the military and started show business, I went back down to about 165, 160 'cause, that wasn't out of choice.  When I went to the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], my career took off, started eating every day, I went up to about 205.  And my colleagues made such fun of me that I thought okay I got, I (laughter) gotta come off of this.  And so I identified what was putting the weight on me, bread and sweets.  Those are my weaknesses.  I asked my wife [Gladys Lee Ishop], I said, "Look, I'm eliminating bread, and I'm eliminating sweets."  And if she puts something on the table that I just couldn't resist, I would have maybe this much of it, just for the taste.  And I went down to about 185 and 180.  My singing weight remained about 180.  In recent years, now that I'm a senior citizen, to get my cholesterol down a few years ago my doctor recti, recommended a statin.  And so I've dropped back down to between 150, 145, 150, 155, in, in that area, which is right for my age and right for my bone structure.  So I've sort of been all over the map.  But I know that the best way, unless you have some internal problem, the best way to get rid of weight is to identify what's putting it on you, and then discipline yourself enough to cut back on it or to cut it out.  You don't have to go on a crash diet.
Story_ID: 156010
Speaker 1: When I was singing in Scotland, the wife of one of my colleagues was dieting.  She would eat whatever she wanted one day, and then she wouldn't eat anything the next day.  And the soprano that I was singing with was doing the same thing.  I said, "No, no, no, no, don't do that.  Just eliminate those things in your diet that you know are putting the weight on you."  So she did, and she came to me about two weeks later, and she said, "Look, look, look."  Her skirt, she was losing weight.  I said, "Yeah, don't, there's no need to starve yourself."  So, this whole thing with weight, no one wants to see someone who is unhealthy.  And there are some singers, yes, who go the unhealthy way.  But then there are other singers who are meant to be large, and they--the, the, the thrust in the business now is for everybody to look like a sylph, you know and that ruins the voice of someone who is a large person and who loses weight the wrong way or too grad, too rapidly.  You also lose fat off of the laryngeal area, and that affects the vibrate, vibratory action of your vocal folds.  So people like [Maria] Callas, who evidently lu-- used leeches, and her voice was negatively affected.  [Renata] Tebaldi, slimmed down, and her voice was negatively affected.  You have to be very careful in losing weight.  The, the soprano held, the Wagnerian soprano who underwent the stomach procedure to lose weight recently simply because the fact that some idiot at Covent Garden [London, England] who designed the costume said, "Well, you don't fit my costume."  Come on.  Now I don't know this woman saying that intimately, but people who do know her say that she doesn't sing as well now as she used to.  And that's a shame because opera is about the voice.  It's not about looks.  The, the looks are all, you know, they, they, fake in a sense.  You know that you're not in Paris [France] (laughter) when you're there. That, that's scenery.  It's about the voice, the beauty and the power of the voice to carry through an orchestra without being amplified by a microphone.  And when you mess with that, if you mess with a singer's construct to the point where the voice begins to suffer, then you, you're ruining the whole, the whole idea.  More and more performances now evidently in places are being mic'd, and that's, that's, that's, that's not what opera is about.  It's not what it should be about.  It should be about hearing that voice have the power to slice through a ninety-piece orchestra without amplification other than what is natural.  I can see in the future as, if this trend continues that a youngster with a really fine voice will say, "Why should I study voice?  I mean why should I build the instrument?  They're gonna mic me anyway?"  And that's what's happening on Broadway. Everything is mic'd.  Everything makes it, makes all the voices sound basically the same, and you don't know where they're standing when they're singing.  I mean I, I, we just did a re, a performance recently at the beginning of the semester calls the Grand Night of Singing where all of the, the singing ensembles got together on stage at Hill Auditorium [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and performed.  It was wonderful.  It was very interesting that when the musical theatre kids come out, and these are kids are all really talented--they're very good--two of the soloists sang, and they were not mic'd, and they couldn't be heard.  Does a move on in some of the quarters to--and not amongst the voice teachers 'cause we're trying to get them to build instruments that will, can cut.  But there's a move on, well, you know, the, the--and it's, these youngsters couldn't be heard.  If they had been mic'd, then it would have been fine.  But they could not be heard.  The ensemble you could hear, but the two soloists--and that hall is really good for hearing people.  So, changes from my point of view are not always desirable.  And a change that does anything that robs the voice of its authority is for me a negative.
Story_ID: 156011
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask this question.  I'm gonna change gears a little bit.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy (laughter), that's a biggie.  I want to see a return to the kind of dignity of character and of carriage that I spoke of and speaking of, of people like Marian Anderson, Paul Robeson, Roland Hayes, and Joe Louis.  There seems to be more of a trend toward a kind of behavior that is, and this is true not only in the African American community but in America in general, crass, roughshod, wanting finesse, not respecting what finesse is about, wanting a kind of spiritual quality, that no matter how much, how loud one sings about spirituality, seeing it more in action.  I wanna see a return of respect, individual to individual.  I mean, you look at what happens in the black neighborhood today, young people victimizing older people, not having any respect for people who have gone before.  It's all about what they want, when they want it, and they don't care how they get it.  I've seen neighborhoods in Detroit [Michigan], my, my mother-in-law's whole neighborhood, just go down the tubes, old folks having to give their houses away because they're being victimized by young thugs who don't care anything about them.  And quite often, these homes were the only thing that they had that they could call their own.  That's, that kind of behavior, that kind of thinking, if you can call it that, has got to change if the black community has any future whatsoever--too much noise, not enough time to think, to hear the still, small voice of God, if you will, too much racket--a real respect in the black community for education rather than seeing that as a white man's thing, you know, trying to find--you know, in our desperate desire to, to define who we are as a people, we've thrown out too much good stuff.  And we seem to be more focused on getting it yesterday than putting the time in that it takes to get it over the long haul, to get, to really get it properly.  That, that's not true of all youngsters.  I mean the, the, the black youngsters that come to school here, I know that they, they've got the right idea.  But many of them had to fight their way out of situations that don't respect what they're after, and that's got to change.  There are too many of our young people who are just going down the tubes. And in a sense, you can't put all the blame on them.  The people who brought them into this world, where are they in the picture?  Quite often they're not there. That's the reason why they're going down tubes.  So, for adults to take charge and to provide the models that young people need to counteract the Sporting Life [character in 'Porgy and Bess' by George Gershwin] models, that say yeah, I got mine. There was a wonderful photographer in Detroit who used to--Jayward Bailey [ph.] was his name.  He used to take guys who were in trouble at my high school [Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan]--he lived down the street from my high school--and take them into his photography studio and teach them photography.  And Ed told me that he eventually moved out of the neighborhood into another section of town.  He said one night there was a ring, his doorbell rang, and he opened the door and there was this young fellow standing there dressed in his mink coat and his hat, say, say, "Hey, Mr. Bailey, man, you remember me?"  Said well, said, "Yeah, I think I do."  He said, "Yeah."  He said, "You, I went to Northern [High School], and you took me in and you taught me how to, you know, develop pictures and so forth.  And I just wanted to thank you, man, for what you did."  And the guy reaches in his pocket and pulls out a wad of bills and thrusts it at Ed.  And Ed says, "Whoa, whoa, wait, just a minute," said (laughter), "you misunderstand.  I, I didn't do what I did for this."  Said, "No, man, now take it, take it, take it."  He said, "I got more where that came from--just a minute."  So he goes out to the curb where his Cadillac's parked, opens the trunk, comes back with a briefcase, pops it open.  It's full of money.  Ed said, "Look, take your briefcase, go back to your car, and forget where I live" (laughter), said because I knew that that kid was gon' be dead in a few months.  And that, unfortunately, is where the head of, the heads of too many of our young people are.  Get it now, get it fast.  That's an old, an old philosophy.  What was the old thing that I heard when I was growing up about the, the caucasian gangster, live fast, die young, have a good looking corpse.  Again, it comes from the poverty-stricken areas where crime seems to be the, the only way out and the fast way out to get what you want in this life, and you're desperado enough to do it.  And that kind of thing that is fed by drugs is a huge thing to battle, to get our young people's minds turned away from that, to settling into the hard slog of getting it the right way.
Story_ID: 156012
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I mean, I went after my teaching certificate.  That's what I wanted to do.  I wouldn't change that.  When the opportunity came from above to pursue the singing career, the decision was given to me, two years, give it two years, then you'll know.  And it went faster and further than I could have ever expected it to, so I wouldn't change that.  Maybe I would have used a little different (laughter) made a little different statement on the radio, placed, expressed myself a little differently when I was a union officer.  I don't know.  But, here again, I don't really regret that because it was what I felt I needed to say.  So, everything that's happened in my life up to this point has taught me something I needed to know.  I don't know if I could have learned those things if I'd made other decisions.  I might have learned cert--I certainly would have learned other things.  But, as I look at it, it's, I've, I've been able to make my life doing what I love to do, and that's, that's gold.  That's something that a lot of people can't say.  I have a beautiful family.  I mean I've, I've been blessed beyond anything that I could have expected out of life.
Speaker 1: Now in regards to your family, can you tell us something about your children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a daughter that is a mother of two daughters.  She lives in New Jersey.  She's, she works for Blue Cross Blue Shield in human resources, her daughters. One is twenty-nine I think. The other is twenty-six.  The younger daughter is a mother of two little ones, so we have great-grandchildren.  Our son lives in Chicago [Illinois].  He, he coaches lacrosse in schools there.  He played professional lacrosse for four years for the Detroit Turbos, and when Chicago got its franchise [Chicago Machine] about three years ago he played one year with them.  He and his wife have, they waited until they were past forty to have a child, so we have a little three year old granddaughter by them.  And it's, it's wonderful. It's, it's filled our lives with such joy and challenge (laughter), but I wouldn't have it any other way.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think we asked you probably earlier in the interview about how you met your wife [Gladys Lee Ishop].  But just in case we didn't, I mean--
Speaker 2: I was an altar boy, at Ebenezer A.M.E. Church [Detroit, Michigan].  And there was this pretty girl that I used to peer at through the palm fronds on the altar during the sermon when I should have been listening to what the minister was saying.  And there was this pretty girl that had silver spoons in her hair.  And we met when I was eleven and she was ten at church.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and been together, I mean or been associated--
Speaker 2: Well, we've been married now what, fifty-six years, yeah.  We married in 1956, fifty-six years.
Story_ID: 156013
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question too.  You know, when you look back on your life again today, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the, the historic fact that I've been blessed to have three firsts in my life, again, first high school music teacher in Detroit Public Schools, black, in, in the high school level, public schools, the first African American member of the United States Army Chorus, and the first black tenor at the Metropolitan Opera [New York, New York] that I assume would be part of it. Students that I've taught who have gone on to do whatever they've done, hopefully well, either as teachers, as performers, or in any other profession they've entered to fulfill their lives.  I think that a living legacy in people is more important than a plaque on a wall, something like that.  I've established recently two--there's a scholarship established in my name at the University of Michigan School of Music, Theater, and Dance [Ann Arbor, Michigan] by friends.  And I've established a scholarship for high school students in Detroit [Michigan], focused on the compositions of African American composers.  I wanted to make that literature, which is considerable, more apparent and available to young singers, both African American, or Caucasian, or Asian, whomever.  They need to know that this music is there, and is worthy of their attention.  So that was established two years ago.  And we've had two competitions giving prizes to young folks who are getting ready, who are in college now, getting ready to go.  That, those things I think, I would hope mark whatever legacy I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I wanna ask you about another person's legacy now before we, before I ask my last question.  And when we were here in 2010, we interviewed you in the office of, at the University of Michigan of Miss Shirley Verrett.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And she passed since that time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, just kind of tell us what you think how she should be remembered.
Speaker 2: As one of the great, greatest singers of our time, of any time, and also as a teacher of great significance.  She has students out there now who are performing professionally.  She had a great impact on our students at [University of] Michigan, as well she should have.  She was a great colleague, and all of us miss her presence greatly.
Story_ID: 156014
Speaker 1: Okay, now, our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said when, when responding to legacy, I'd like to be, like to be remembered as a teacher who tried to share with students those things that they need to know in order to strengthen their possibilities for achieving a successful career.  I'd like to be remembered as a singer who used what he had the best he could to, to bring pleasure to people who listened to performances that he was involved with.  I would probably most love to be remembered as a good husband and good father.
Story_ID: 156015
Speaker 1: Alright, there's one more thing I, I wanna ask you to do, if you could do it at the--I know at the end of our interview with [HM] William Warfield he sang for us in German.  So I'll, I'll--if, if you can sing a little bit for us some, some op, a little opera for us in whatever language you choose to sing in, we would appreciate it.
Speaker 2: Let me preface that with the old 'Steve Allen Show.'  I don't know if you ever remember 'The Steve Allen Show.'  It was a great comedy show.  And they did a segment with Louie, with, with Tom Poston once called Where Are They Now?  They did it with all three of the guys that, but the one I'm going to refer to is the one in which they visited an old operatic tenor at a place like the Ansonia Hotel in New York City where a lot of old singers and teachers live and, and teach and what have you.  It's a hotel where [Enrico] Caruso used to live in Grand--on the corner of 73rd and Broadway.  So (laughter), they visit Poston, and he's dressed in his evening gown with his ascot on and so forth in this apartment full of photographs of his career.  And at one point in the interview Allen asks Poston, the tenor, he says, "Maestro," he says, "You are well known for singing that, that, that phrase from the opera 'E'Pagliacci' [Ruggero Leoncavallo]."  He says, "And our, our, our, our, our listeners would just love to hear you sing that phrase."  And Poston says, "Well, I'm [Italian accent], I'mma no sing a long time.  The voice is, is not, not, not, not too good."  But he say, "I, I have here a recording that I, that I can play that place for you."  And Allen says, "Well, alright, okay."  So he blows the dust off of this old thick recording, puts it on the thing, winds it up, puts the needle down--[static sound effect]--then you hear this voice, (unclear), payak [ph.], payak, payak.  And he's got, "Oh, this is, this is, this is--there's a crack in the, in the, the, the record. It's too bad, it's no, no good."  So, Allen says, "Oh, that's too bad," so they talk a little bit more.  And so the end of the interview comes, and he said, "Maestro, could, could you not, just, just try to sing that phrase for us once?"  He says, "Well," he says, "It's been a long time, you understand?  I try."  So he takes his thing, you know, [singing] "Payak, payak, payak, payak."  So, I don't know what you're gonna get (laughter), but, gee whiz.  There's a, and this is, I, I don't, I don't have a piano here, so I'm, where I start, this is an aria from 'Girl of the Golden West,' [sic., 'The Girl of the West'] [Giacomo] Puccini.  It's a role I never sang, but this is a short aria, [singing opera in Italian]. Few little clicks here and there, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You are the real deal (laughter).  Thank you so much.
