Story_ID: 26330
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Mark J.T. Smith, Mark, M-A-R-K, J.T. Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, and J.T. stands for?
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Troy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: No, not really (laughter).  I think when you have a name like Smith, it's good to have multiple initials.  There are lots of Smiths.  In the institutions that I've been at, there've always been more than one Mark Smith, and every once in a while we get each other's mail.  So having the two middle initials is really helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you named after relatives?
Speaker 2: I was named because my mother liked the name Mark, and she was trying to think of a name that kids couldn't make fun of too much.  So that's where it came from.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 17, 1956.  I was born in New York City, in Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Right now, I am a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana], and I serve as the dean of the Purdue University Graduate School.
Speaker 1: The graduate school of electrical engineering--of engineering or--
Speaker 2: No, so Purdue University has five campuses.  And there's one graduate school that covers all five campuses.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, just wanted to clear it up and make sure.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: You got me on that.  No, what is it?  April the 8th, I think it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, and two thousand and--
Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013].  That one I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: So we're in the Krannert Building on Purdue University's campus on Grant Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26331
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I would say so.  I think my favorite food--sometimes it varies.  It depends on what mood I'm in, but lobster usually comes out on top.  I have a fondness for lobster, and the other one is Chilean sea bass.  If Chilean sea bass is on the menu, I usually go for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: That changes too much.  I--sometimes blues, sometimes browns.  It depends.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Ooh, probably Springtime when the weather is starting to get nice and warm, and flowers are coming out.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Umm, Kauai [Hawaii] and Fiji.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26332
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about both your mother's side of the family and your father's side, separately, at first, and then we'll put 'em together.  So can you tell us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, Joan Smith, J-O-A-N, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: So, she was born in New York City.  She was born April the 20th, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about their activities?
Speaker 2: So I don't really--I haven't done much research on my family history.  So I really don't know.  My mother's, well, my mother's family was in New York.  They have roots in Alabama.  My mother was raised by my grandmother, single parent. Her first name was Esther. They lived in Long Island City, so she grew up in Long Island City, and then moved to Manhattan, and then to Queens, all in New York. Her first name was Esther.  They lived in Long Island City, so she grew up in Long Island City, and then moved to Manhattan and then to Queens, all in New York.
Speaker 1: Long Island City.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--how far is that outside of the city of New York?
Speaker 2: Well, Long Island City is in New York City.
Speaker 1: Is it in, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It's next to Astoria in Queens [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, in Queens, okay.  All right, so, now, what happened to your grandfather?  Is there a story about what happened?
Speaker 2: I don't know too much--and she didn't know too much about her grandfather.  So she didn't know him as a child.  So I don't have much information about him at all?
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother grew up in Alabama then, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there a--do you know where in Alabama, she's from?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a town in Alabama that was not well known.  And my mother may have told me that town a long time ago, but I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the family never went back to visit or anything?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there--do you get the sense that whatever brought them to New York was a distasteful experience in Alabama that they didn't wanna return to?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe it was.  I think that my grandmother was trying to find a location where she could have a better life, and she came to New York City to do that.  I know that she valued education very highly, so that was a principle that she passed on to my mother and it's kind of been in the family forever.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your grandmother have a chance to get an education?
Speaker 2: She--you know, that's a good question.  She may have graduated high school.  She did not have a college education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26333
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Joan Smith] have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother has a master's degree.  She was a social worker.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she went to school in New York City?
Speaker 2: She went to Hunter College for undergraduate and Fordham University for her graduate work [both in New York City].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, did your mother have any stories about growing up in Queens [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, let's see.  All right, so one that she would tell would be, she was a free spirit.  And she liked adventure, and so she wanted to go off and take this trip.  And I remember her saying my grandmother didn't want her to do this, didn't think it was a good idea, didn't think it was safe.  Well, being the free spirit that my mother was, she decided she was going to do this, and she went off with her friends and took this trip.  This was kind of being a little bit defiant and so forth.  But I remember her telling me that her grandmother didn't have the negative reaction that she was expecting and just understood that it was in my mother's genetics and kind of accepted it, and, but she had a good time on that, on that experience.  And ever since then, you know, she's had fondness for traveling and did a lot of traveling in her adult life.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did she go on this trip?  Did she talk about it?
Speaker 2: So, that, I don't know.  But it was some kind of a camping trip.  So, you know, backpacks were involved, and there were a group of, of her friends who went on this trip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might have been New Jersey or Pennsylvania, but I really don't know.  It wasn't a long distance away.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and she likes to travel and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she loved to travel.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's full name, Esther--
Speaker 2: Yes, so I get teased about this a little bit.  And so, this is on my father's side or mother's [Joan Smith] side?
Speaker 1: On your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Oh, on my mother's side, Esther--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Esther.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was her last name?
Speaker 2: Young.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay, so your mother's maiden name was Young?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, any stories about why your mother decided to become a social worker?
Speaker 2: She has always been a people person.  So she likes interacting with people and she wouldn't be comfortable in kind of a technical environment.  I remember her telling me once, she had a supervisor.  She worked in a hospital.  And she, I was asking her, well, are you interested in becoming a supervisor, and this would be a promotion.  And she didn't find that attractive.  What she really wanted to do was to be working with the individuals.  She liked the cases.  So I've learned something about what her likes and dislikes were, wasn't interested in supervision.
Speaker 1: Okay, I would think she probably had a lot of good stories about--I think New York kind of pioneered a lot of social work--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --approaches and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Most of the interesting stories that we heard at the dinner table were about the supervisor, perhaps not making reasonable decisions or at least in not the eyes of mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there're even a couple of, you know, literary stories about, you know, social work in that era--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the disconnect between those in the office and the people who were actually in the neighborhoods and how they--I can't--, I know I've read a couple of 'em, but can't remember 'em.  But that's, so, okay, so your mother went to Hunter College [New York].
Story_ID: 26334
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Windsor, W-I-N-D-S-O-R, Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and is there a story behind his name, Windsor?
Speaker 2: No, I think that was a name that was in the family.  My grandfather's middle name, I believe, was Windsor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth, your father?
Speaker 2: My father.  He was born May the 12th, in New York City in 1924.
Speaker 1: Now, how far back can you trace his side of the family and where to, and what are the stories associated with them?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately, I can't go back very far.  I know the roots are in North Carolina.  But I believe that most of my grandmother's life was spent in New York.  All of his life, of course, was in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my grandmother was Mary, Mary Smith--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my grandfather's name was John Smith.  So John and Mary Smith were my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Now, this has got to--now, that--they probably got a lot of people's mail?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, particularly when they checked into hotel rooms.  They always got some stares, John and Mary Smith.
Speaker 1: People would say, sure (laughter), right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, John Smith and Mary Smith.  That's interesting.  So, any stories about North Carolina that's, that are shared in the family?
Speaker 2: No, I just know the roots.  I mean all the things that I know are about their times here in New York.
Speaker 1: So they didn't, they never went back home to, to North Carolina or never considered that a place to go back to, to visit or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so once again, do you think that there're, maybe some aspects of North Carolina life they really didn't wanna return to?
Speaker 2: That could be, but I hadn't--no one has made any comment that I can recall that would indicate that.  So my family's very small, unlike my wife's family, which is huge.  But my family is pretty small, and now, you know my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have an aunt, my father has a sister, Dorothy Smith who just passed away.
Speaker 1: Just the one sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were very close.  We were all very close, which is what happens when your family is small.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your--what did your grandparents do for a living on your father's side?
Speaker 2: So my grandfather was a minister.  He was in the Methodist church, and my grandmother was a mom.  She also worked at "The Guild" which was a Catholic organization.
Speaker 1: Is that a charitable organization or a--
Speaker 2: I assume so.  You know, I, I never learned too much about what she did.  When I knew my grandmother, she was just finishing that, and she retired pretty much as I started to get to know my grandmother.  So I don't know the details about her work experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like some sort of charitable organization--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I would guess.  That's what I would assume.
Speaker 1: All right, and your grandfather was a reverend.  Did he pastor a church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: And he died before I was born.  He died in 1954.  So I never had a chance to know him.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of his church?
Speaker 2: I have to look that up.  I do not know offhand.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it your family didn't continue to go there after something happened to him (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Correct, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26335
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did your father [Windsor Smith], did he have any stories about growing up?  Now, he grew up in New York City, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he was at that age where World War II was in process when he turned eighteen.  So he was drafted and went into the war.  He fought in the South Pacific, and he drove one of these amphibians [amphibious warfare vessels].  He used to tell some fascinating stories about that.
Speaker 1: Well, for instance?
Speaker 2: Well, so he, there was--he told one story where he was in this Amphibian.  They used to call them "ducks."  And they would hold a small number of people, maybe ten people or so.  And the duck is going along in the water, and this great big fish, it was kind of a 'Jaws' [1975 film] kind of story, came up.  And then they saw the silver belly of this fish, just turn over.  And he was saying the size of this fish was just humun--was just immense.  And if that fish had wanted to, it could have knocked the entire duck over.  And so they were quite unnerved by this experience and quite happy to get to land.
Speaker 1: So, he said a "fish," not a whale or anything, just a, I mean a--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I think maybe when you're in that position, (unclear) need to distinguish a whale or a fish is, you know, a little bit difficult.  But, no, he said, fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did he talk about how the soldiers were treated there.  I know that was the last war where we had a segregated army.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  In his particular unit, he had friends, and he thought--because he was young, relative to the others.  So, he had his group of friends, and I think he was treated pretty well.  He didn't have any stories to tell.  I know that there was a lot of concern about malaria, and so people would smoke in order to keep the mosquitoes away, at least that was the prevailing wisdom at the time.  I don't know if that worked or not, but I remember that.  He was stationed in New Guinea.  And this wasn't the most pleasant place to be, but he never really complained.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, New Guinea can--you know, that's an interesting place, and a lot of--there were tales of headhunters and that sort of thing in New Guinea.
Speaker 2: We never heard any headhunter stories (laughter).
Speaker 1: Never heard it, okay, all right.  I think one of the Rockefellers disappeared there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the '30s [1930s], never, they never found him.
Story_ID: 26336
Speaker 1: At any rate, well, now, did your father [Windsor Smith] get a chance to go to school too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he went to Jamaica High School.  So he had a high school diploma and then went to the war [World War II], was drafted in the war after graduation.
Speaker 1: Now, Jamaica, that's in Queens [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting.  So I was from Jamaica, New York.  I--it wasn't until I was in high school that I knew that there was another place called Jamaica that was an island, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he came out of Jamaica High School.  He went through the war.  So did he go to college on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], when he came out--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, he never went to college.  He joined the Transit Authority and drove a bus in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that was considered a decent job in New York City.
Speaker 2: It was.  The unions were very strong.  And so, yeah, he provided very well for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26337
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Joan Smith and Windsor Smith] met?
Speaker 2: Wow, not a good one.  I, I mean--let me see, I'm trying to remember.  So they, they met over a friend's house.  They were, they were introduced, and I remember that my father fell in love with my mother at first sight.  And it took a little time for my mother to come over, and then they fell in love, and they were married, married their entire lives, fifty years of marriage before my father died.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26338
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Joan Smith and Windsor Smith] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they look, how they walk, talk, their attitudes, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm a mix, in between.  So my father, all right, was the world's nicest person.  He had just the most calm disposition, never got upset, was always caring and considerate of others, just amazing in that regard.  My mother was, she was energetic, she was feisty.  She had opinions, she had opinions about a lot of things.  My father was very much a peacemaker.  So, you know, you could have those kind of two extremes there and, because of the personalities, they got along very well.  I am in the middle.  I wish I had my father's patience and all of those wonderful qualities.  I have a little bit of it, but not as much as I would like to, my goodness.  And then I have a little bit of my mother's feistiness, and that little nonlinear behavior that kicks in every once in a while, sometimes strong opinions.  So I'm right in between.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26339
Speaker 1: Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: No, I was an only child.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you were growing up, did your household just consist of your mother [Joan Smith] and father [Windsor Smith] and you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: So my family was spread.  My mother and father, me, we lived in the house.  And then my grandmother and my aunt, and so the five of us were very, very close.  That was the nucleus of our family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: Had a cousin, Barbara, and Cousin Ray, they lived in Long Island [New York].  I didn't see them very much.  And then I had another cousin, Roy, who I saw a little more often, but not that much.  But he was a big influence in my life.
Speaker 1: All right, well, we'll get to him in a minute.  I know, I read about him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, so, you had a lot of supervision growing up, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and a lot of times, only children spend a lot of time with themselves usually, you know, reading and doing other things, you know.  I mean that's been what we've found.  But, I mean did you do that?  Did you spend a lot of time by yourself?
Speaker 2: My mother kept me--
Speaker 1: I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --very busy, and we did a lot of things together.  We took trips together.  I was always involved in YMCA [The Young Men's Christian Association] activities.  She didn't believe in idle hands.  So there was always some activity that I was involved in.  So I never felt alone, but, you know, one of the things, I guess, that I've learned in comparing notes, I am comfortable with free time to myself.  I don't need to have lots of people around me all the time.  So I can be content that way.  I don't know if that was because I grew up as an only child or whether or not I was genetically disposed to that, but it's just the way I am.
Story_ID: 26340
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think my earliest childhood memory is being on the second floor in the master bedroom, which my parents [Joan Smith and Windsor Smith]--they put me in the master bedroom.  All right, in my house, there wasn't much difference between the master bedroom and the other bedroom.  There were only two.  But that one, I think they felt was a little safer for some reason.  But I remember being in a playpen and there was a friend of the family.  Her name was Jo, and she was coming up the stairs, and she was saying "Boo," and I would laugh.  And I remember, I remember her saying--and it must have been, I don't know, between one and two years old.  But that's the earliest memory I have.
Speaker 1: Well, that's great, that's great.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember the "boo," and I remember thinking this was so funny.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26341
Speaker 1: All right, now, did you grow up in the same place the whole time or did your family move a lot or--
Speaker 2: No, so we lived in that same house until I left for college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is in Queens [New York], right.
Speaker 2: Right, Jamaica, Queens.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the--did the neighborhood have a name that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, it was Jamaica, Queens.  Sometimes it was called South Ozone Park.  We used those interchangeably.  When I was very little, I think that we were, the [U.S.] Post Office tended to classify that area as South Ozone Park, and then later, Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't far away, we weren't too far away from [John F.] Kennedy Airport.
Speaker 1: I think they made a movie called 'Ozone Park', I think about, you know, a Jewish community, I believe in New York.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, this wasn't a Jewish community.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know that South Ozone is different from Ozone 'cause the movie is just 'Ozone Park'.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, so I don't--
Speaker 2: You know, neighborhoods change.  And when I was there, it wasn't--well, it was sort of mixed I think when I was very, very little.  But really, my memories, it was pretty, predominantly a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, and had your parents been married long before you were born?
Speaker 2: Well, they were married in 1950, and I was born in 1956.  So they had six years under their belts.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, okay, so they had already established their home and everything--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --when you came along.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 26342
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, the sights, sounds and smells of?
Speaker 1: Growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up.  So when you say "sights," are these kinds of memorable, childhood events that--
Speaker 1: Well, things that you remember seeing that, you know--
Speaker 2: If I said the '64 [1964] [New York] World's Fair, would that be--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, the sights of the World's Fair would be, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's one that stands out.  I remember that.  That was one of the most exciting things to come around in my little life, right, going to the World's Fair because, you know, you got into this thing.  First of all, it was huge, at least for the kid that--I mean I was a little kid then.  But--
Speaker 1: You were about eight, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right, eight-year old kid.  And all the buildings were futuristic.  And there were rides and attractions that I had never had an experience like that before.  I mean it was the equivalent of a Disney World nowadays for a kid.  I remember that the tickets were very expensive.  I believe they were twelve dollars which in that day was very expensive.  Even getting to the World's Fair was sort of an experience because they had put all of these new overpasses and at that time, overpasses were a little bit new.  I mean they looked kind of even futurist, just getting there, right, so it's a tremendous amount of excitement--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--the inter-state highway system was brand, was sort--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of new, springing up around the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so we would go there and spend--not that many times, but we went a number of times and would spend the whole day.  I remember the lines were long, but as a little kid, I was not bored at all.  It was just the excitement of waiting to go in the line was something that I had never experienced before.  So that certainly stood out in my mind.
Speaker 1: I know it got a lot of television coverage and Ed Sullivan did his show from the World's Fair and other entertainers, 'The Today Show'.  Everybody was, you know, talking about it.  And so, is there any one memorable thing that--
Speaker 2: So you asked about smells--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --so I was thinking about that.  So I'll give you a smell.  Coney Island [New York], all right, the smell of Coney Island French fries.  That I remember.  These fries, they were absolutely delicious.  I don't know what it was.  It was something about the way the potatoes were cut.  They were julienne fries and they were a little thick, but they were just salted in this way that was just so delicious.  And I remember the smell of those on the boardwalk.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Sights--sounds.
Speaker 2: Sounds, well, maybe [John F.] Kennedy Airport, the airport sounds.  I don't remember the year, but I remember when Kennedy Airport, it was called Idlewild Airport opened up.  And this was a big thing.  This was a new airport and the architecture was absolutely magnificent.  All of the--this was a different time for airport architecture now.  All of the airlines had individual buildings with unique, artistic features.  So one of the signature buildings there was the TWA [Trans World Airlines] Building.  It looked like a butterfly, very modern, futuristic.  It still looks pretty modern and futuristic.  The other one was the Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] Building, National Airlines had--there's no National Airlines anymore, but there was one.  And all of the--and they were kind of in this ring.  And so, and there was a chapel, I remember there.  And so going to the airport was a big thing to do for the tourists.  And the sounds of the flights of airplanes taking off and landing was something that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26343
Speaker 1: All right, so you were saying that in the neighborhood [Jamaica/South Ozone Park, Queens, New York] you went to the 'Y' [YMCA, The Young Men's Christian Association] and--
Speaker 2: That's right.  So the YMCA had a great program, an after-school program, and they also had a summer program.  And they had a gymnasium and a swimming pool.  I used to love to swim when I was a kid.  And we would go to the park that was there and play softball, had lots of friends there at the 'Y'.
Story_ID: 26344
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you like to do as a little, tiny kid?
Speaker 2: Play.  So, going outside, playing, just in the street.  Don't ask me what we did when we played.  We, we wouldn't get into too much trouble, but we would do tag, hide-and-go-seek, adventure things.  For us, adventure was going down the road to a lot which had a lot of trees, and for that, that was like our trip to the jungle.  We'd climb trees, do things like that.  That was fun.
Speaker 1: Now, Queens is a borough in New York that actually has grass and tree--more grass and trees--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) A little bit, yeah.
Speaker 1: --than the other five boroughs, except for, I guess for Central Park or something.  But, you know, so that's a little, you have a little bit more space to--
Speaker 2: More suburban than Manhattan, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, now, okay.  And you went to the 'Y' [YMCA, The Young Men's Christian Association], I guess, when you got a little older?
Speaker 2: About eight years old, nine years old.  That's when I started, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you ever in the Boy Scouts or Cub Scouts?
Speaker 2: No, I was in the Central Queens YMCA. And so, that was kind of a parallel program because they had programs that looked a lot like the Boy Scouts, similar kinds of activities in arts and craft, outings, where we would take trips.  In the summer program, for example, I don't know how many people were in the group.  There were several different age groups.  And there were probably about five or six buses of kids that would go.  So one time, one day of the week we would go to Long Beach.  Another day we would go to Rockaway Beach.  Sometimes we would go to Cunningham Park.  But each day in the five-day period, five-day week, there was a different trip that was a day trip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so a lot of the things that you might do in the Boy Scouts related to, you know, outdoor-type activities, you know, we did those kinds of things too.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you go to the museums and that sort of thing too on these field trips?
Speaker 2: Not with the YMCA, but I did that with my parents [Joan Smith and Windsor Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was very big on museums, and--I guess one of the things that was a little peculiar.  So this was a time when it was safe to travel, I mean a kid could travel by himself.  So, you know, as a young kid, I would take the subway and go into Manhattan.  I mean we started out, we were--I went with my mother for a long time until I knew my way on the subways.  And we would go to the museums, do different things.  And then, maybe about a year later or so, I was able to do that by myself.
Speaker 1: So about how old were you when you started doing that?
Speaker 2: Oh, brother, I wanna say maybe ten or something, ten, eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what would you do by yourself when you'd go up there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd go to Central Park, Central Park Zoo.  I'd go to the Museum of Natural History, sometimes the Metropolitan Museum of Art.  Sometimes I'd go to movies that were there.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: That was as a little kid.  And then when I got older, you know, there were other things, shopping for clothes and so.
Story_ID: 26345
Speaker 1: So, now, what about school?  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: So the closest school to me was PS-123.  That's where I was supposed to go to kindergarten.  And I did.  And my mother [Joan Smith] wasn't happy with the quality of the education in the local school.  So she arranged for a transfer.  I went to PS-90 which was in Richmond Hill [Queens, New York].  So I was bused to school.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the difference in the two schools, I mean when you look back on it?
Speaker 2: Well, the quality of education, at least in her mind, was higher at PS-90 than it was 123.  I didn't have a point of comparison, obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I don't know.  But, I mean my recollection was that, I certainly learned a lot and the quality was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, going to being bused to school.  So this was the foundation for many of the stories that I tell my kids, and I enjoy having that experience because I can tell them about how I had to walk to the bus stop in order to go to school.  And there would be some days when it was freezing, two degrees below zero, with the snow and the winds.  Then, of course, in the stories that I tell my kids, there're hills that are involved and things like this, which didn't actually exist.  And I did have shoes, although sometimes in my stories, I don't.  But we get the message.
Speaker 1: I see, I see (laughter).
Speaker 2: Every parent ought to have some story like that to build on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father actually had those stories (laughter), and I believed--I don't know how much was exaggerated, but I think he did.  But--
Speaker 2: The reality was that the bus stop was only two blocks away, right, but, okay.
Speaker 1: So, where was PS-90?
Speaker 2: So, yeah, it was in Richmond Hill--
Speaker 1: Richmond Hill, okay.
Speaker 2: It took about a half hour.  It was about a half hour drive on the bus.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Richmond Hill like a integrated kind of a school or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there were kids from my neighborhood that were bused to Richmond Hill, which was predominantly white and there was also a Jewish community in Kew Gardens [Queens, New York], and they were bused in too.
Story_ID: 26346
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, science.
Speaker 1: Okay, even from a little kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, liked science.  Now, where do you, where did your interest in science begin?  Do you know or is it, you think it's genetic?  You have a disposition towards science?
Speaker 2: So I always liked to play with things, tinker things, build, build things, take things apart.  I loved electronic gadgets.  I loved mechanical gadgets.  So this was just part of play and part of fun.  As a little kid, you don't really understand the inner workings of these kinds of things.  But I think one of the big influences that I had was going over to visit my cousin, Roy.  And he had, he was also a tinkerer by nature.  But he had a workshop in his basement, an electronics workshop.  And he had lots of Heathkits [electronic kits] and oscilloscopes and was really into radios and electronics.  And I went down there and, you know, he showed me some of the kits that he had built and some of the electronic gadgets and the radios that he had built.  And this was fascinating.  I didn't know what it was, but I wanted to.  And so I think that was kind of the spark that sparked my interest in electronics.
Speaker 1: So, was he into shortwave radio?  Did he have a--
Speaker 2: Yes, so he was into shortwave.  He would talk about ham radio [amateur radio], but he wasn't there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, but that was kind of his next thing.  Now, I think--so that was kind of a snapshot where, that piqued my interests.  And that was my exposure to Heathkits.  And I think after that, he then got into other things.  I know he got into leatherwork, and he would make lots of these beautifully handcrafted pocketbooks and leather goods and things like that.  So he really did enjoy working with his hands.
Speaker 1: Now, how much older was your cousin, Roy, than you.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was my father's [Windsor Smith] age.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was a--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, a little older than my father.
Speaker 1: So did you ever make a Heathkit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: I made a couple.
Speaker 1: --what did you make?
Speaker 2: A multimeter, what else?  Trying to remember now.  I made two or three or those Heathkits.  And I remember having some of the worst, ugliest solder joints that you would ever have seen.  But they did get better with time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I also discovered that a hot soldering iron can burn things, like furniture.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--now, you're about ten, wait, nine or ten when you're doing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably nine, ten or eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26347
Speaker 1: Now, at school, do you have good grades?
Speaker 2: So, when I was in elementary school, I did not have good grades--well, I didn't even know what grades were.  I was just there, right.  And school was a little boring for me.  I was not your ideal student at all.  I got into trouble from time to time.  But I remember a turning point in my life.  And it was about in sixth grade when I discovered that there was a little competition there that you could have for grades.  And I kind of liked having the highest grades in the class.  And I figured that out really at the end of sixth grade and seventh grade.  So I started to get competitive, and when that happened, I started to get good grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any special teachers at PS-90 [Richmond Hill, Queens, New York] that stand out, that you remember now?
Speaker 2: Special teachers?  They were all nice.  They were friendly and calm, lots of patience, which you needed dealing with a kid like me.
Speaker 1: Now, give us an example of this.  Now, you're painting yourself now as a kind of a--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, a kind of problematic kid.  What, give us a story about yourself in those days?  What would you do?
Speaker 2: Pass notes in class.  Talk in the back of the classroom, not pay as much attention as I should because I wasn't really that interested.  I just wasn't into what was being discussed; had no consciousness about grades or anything like that.  You know, you went to school.  I was looking forward to the time when school was over so I could go play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so just kind of unfocused on school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 26348
Speaker 1: Now, did you do a lot of reading at home?  Did you, was that part of--
Speaker 2: No, I was not, I didn't do a lot of reading.  I did more television than reading.  And I guess, again, I didn't mature academically, if you will, at least I wasn't focused on academics until junior high school.  Now, I transferred.  So I was in the public school system.  And then when I went into seventh grade, my mother [Joan Smith] and father [Windsor Smith] put me in a private school.  It was a small, private school.  It was called Henley [The Henley School], and it was in Holliswood [New York].
Speaker 1: Now, is this a place where you'd have to stay on campus or--
Speaker 2: I would commute.  So it wasn't like a boarding school or anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Henley--what's the full name of it?
Speaker 2: It's called The Henley School.
Speaker 1: The Henley School, okay, like The Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Henley School.
Speaker 2: Very small.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, was this an opportunity?  I mean how did your mother find out--
Speaker 2: So, she didn't like the quality of education at the school that I would have been going to, whatever the junior high school was, right?  And so she pulled me out.  And that's really when I got into sort of that academic, competitive mindset.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were the other students competitive around grades?  Is that how you really--
Speaker 2: Not everybody, but--and maybe I was--you don't know what's inside of the mind of everyone else.  And I didn't advertise my competitiveness at all.  I, it was very much internal.  But I didn't like other people scoring higher than I did, which was a constructive way of pushing myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a motivation for studying hard, and it was a sense of achievement, you know, when you did well on exams and so forth.  I had my favorite subjects, of course.  I really liked the math and science courses.  But I paid attention in English and in history.  They were all interesting.  Teachers were very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the racial population of Henley?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly white.  I would say 90-10, 90 percent [white], maybe 10 percent black.
Speaker 1: So there were other black, some other black students there?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Any in your class, in your classes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were always a few.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were clearly minorities.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about the teaching staff?  Was it integrated at all?
Speaker 2: Not much.  There were no black teachers.  There was one Chinese teacher, name was Mr. Lam, taught science.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in this time, a lot of students in middle school go to science fairs, create science projects and that's when that concept is usually introduced.  But did you prepare a project for the science fair?
Speaker 2: Not in junior high school.  So there--let me see, in--well, you wanna stay in junior high school or go to high school 'cause I didn't do any science projects--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In junior [high] right now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  I didn't do any--there may have been some, you know, just in-class kinds of things that we did.  But I didn't do anything in the National Science Fairs or anything?
Speaker 1: So, did the school even participate in some kind of a science fair or citywide--I know the public schools have like citywide science fairs and that sort of thing or sectional science fairs?
Speaker 2: It could have been that some of the high school students participated in that, but in junior high school, I did not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Henley had a high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was junior high and high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you go on to the high school?
Speaker 2: So I did for two years, and then the school closed.
Story_ID: 26349
Speaker 1: Now, during this middle school period, you said you watched a lot of television.  Did you watch, you know, scientific programs?
Speaker 2: No, no, I watched dumb, goofy stuff.  I watched more than my fair share of cartoons and shoot-'em ups [action] and things like that, you know, all the action kinds of things.  That's what I did.
Speaker 1: In that regard, I know the--around the time that you were born, Walt Disney produced 'Zorro', and everybody wanted to be a fencer, you know.  And, you know, did you, you know, watch those kind of movies, 'The Three Musketeers', 'Zorro' and that sort of thing.  Did you--did they have any kind of special significance or were they just part of the action genre that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I watched those kinds of movies multiple times, along with everybody else in the neighborhood.  I mean everybody liked 'Zorro', right?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a regular television series called 'Zorro' and we liked that along with other popular shows like 'The Green Hornet', and, you know, things that kids at that age watched.
Speaker 1: But it didn't have any special significance to you?
Speaker 2: The action was, you know, where there was special significance.  But, and certainly, everybody at that time, if there were sticks and so forth, people would, kids would sword fight.  We didn't know what we were doing, but we had a good ole time doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Story_ID: 26350
Speaker 1: So, now, Henley High School [Holliswood, New York].  So you went there for two years.
Speaker 2: So two years in junior high school and then two years in high school for a total of four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the school went out of business.
Speaker 1: Well, what were your first two years of high school like?  Now, you're making good grades now.  You're really competitive.
Speaker 2: So one of the things that I recognized was that the grades that I made starting in high school would count toward college.  And I remember being very cognizant of that.  So it was like, if I ever got a B--well, they didn't do A, B and C, it was on a scale from zero to a hundred, everything was graded that way.  So you wanted to have a grade-point average of 90, 95, right.  So getting grades that were 70s and so forth, I was very conscious that this could be something that would keep me from getting into college.  So I was trying to get the highest grade-point average that I could.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you--had you projected where you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew that at age eight.
Speaker 1: Now, this is something now.  This is a story in itself.  Now, what happened at age eight that--now, the [1964 New York] World's Fair is going on, and all this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --these activities.  You're--
Speaker 2: And I'm here taking apart transistor radios and other things around the house, only a few of which I could put back together again.  And my mother [Joan Smith] concluded, I have a son who likes to tinker.  We need to think about what this person, this little kid needs to do in the future.  So we had those kinds of conversations.  What do you wanna be?  So I wanted to do something with science.  And so then she explained to me what engineering was about.  It was more of the applied side of science.  And this seemed like the kind of thing that I would wanna do.  And I remember having discussions about, well, you know, where do you go to college?  What are the schools?  And my mother said, well, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is the best place to go.  And I remember her telling me that at age eight.  And that's where I wanted to go ever since age eight.  So at that point, I was going to be a scientist-engineer.  The specifics at that point were kind of murky 'cause I didn't know the different types, but--
Speaker 1: I know that some of the engineers we've interviewed have a very--they take a very, you know, they draw the line, really, of science and engineering, say, I am an engineer, I make things, and not just a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't bright enough to know the difference at age eight (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, okay, so at eight, from age eight, you knew you wanted to go to MIT, though you weren't really kind of--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --sure of what it was, but you knew you wanted to get in.  And you knew you had to have good grade to get in?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Story_ID: 26351
Speaker 1: So, now, what were the first two years of high school [at The Henley School, Holliswood, New York] like and did you have the same teachers or were there different teachers coming in?
Speaker 2: So, there were different teachers.  So the teachers didn't, I mean they pretty much taught a certain grade, but the students in, that I traveled with, it was the same cohort of students, 10 percent variation perhaps.  So we all knew each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, did Henley have good science facilities?
Speaker 2: I would say, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More important, I think was the fact that the class sizes were small, and there was a lot of individual attention.  And the teachers were very good.  You know, there weren't discipline problems or anything like that.  So, yeah, I can't say that we had outstanding laboratories.  I mean we had basic kinds of things.  There was a chemistry lab, a biology lab.  We had a chance to dissect frogs, but I don't--I wouldn't say that our facilities were superior to what was available in the public schools.  The public schools, by the way, were pretty good, when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see, so were there any special teachers at Henley in high school that stand out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mrs. Moscowitz (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was an English teacher.  And she made English fun.  She was entertaining and very engaging.  Everyone loved Mrs. Moscowitz.
Speaker 1: And by English, meaning grammar, and did she teach grammar and literature and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But that's really where we learned grammar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so now, what about mathematics?  Were you a good mathematician at this--
Speaker 2: I enjoyed math.  I had a lot of fun with math.  And maybe that was one of my--science and math, those were my two favorite classes.  They were puzzles, you know, solving an equation.  It was sort of challenging.  It was like playing a little game.  I had a lot of fun with it.
Story_ID: 26352
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so after the first two years of high school, where did you go?  When Henley [The Henley School, Holliswood, New York] closed, this had to be a shock to your--
Speaker 2: It was.  It was a bigger shock to my mom [Joan Smith].  So there was no warning, at least as far as I could tell, that the school was in financial straits.  I mean maybe my parents knew and didn't share it with me.  But it was, I found out that the school was closing at the last minute.  It was the end of the school year, and I was told that Henley would be no more.  And I remember having to ask several times for clarification.  You know, I mean what does that mean because the concept of a school going out of business just hadn't registered with me.  So then, of course, the next question was, well, what happens?  And, you know, my mother and father [Windsor Smith] were looking around for private schools.  I had some friends in the neighborhood who went to John Bowne [High School, Flushing, New York].  And so I knew all about John Bowne.  This was one of the special schools.  New York City has a number of very special schools that are focused in different areas like Peter Stuyvesant and the Bronx High School of Science and those kinds of schools.  John Bowne was one of the special schools, but it's focus was agriculture.  It was located on the Queens College [New York] campus.  But it had very strong programs.  So one of the advantages of having a large school--this was a school of 5,000 students, is that you have many classes.  And they had honors classes, and the honors classes were really quite good.  And the teachers were amazing.  So I had a chance to go with my friends to John Bowne while I was in Henley, so I knew a lot about the school.  And I really wanted to go there, not to mention the fact that my friends in the neighborhood also went there.  And so that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell the last name.  It's John--what's the last--
Speaker 2: Bowne, he was a Quaker.
Speaker 1: B-O--
Speaker 2: The last name is B-O-W-N-E.
Speaker 1: Oh, Bowne, okay, all right.  It's almost like Browne, but without an "r".
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: John Bowne, okay.
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  So the Queens College campus had an elementary school, 218, a middle school, 219, and John Bowne, all on the same block.  It was like an educational park.
Speaker 1: Okay, John Bowne, so you--so, now, so these are your last two years of high school.  Now, was Henley co-educational?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I take it John Bowne [high school] is too?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, all right.
Story_ID: 26353
Speaker 1: Now this is the social part of high school [at John Bowne High School, Flushing, Queens], I guess, when you--did you run for class office or did you participate in any clubs or activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  So, let's see.  That's when I joined the fencing team and the swimming team.  And I was a little deceptive there when I was joining those.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened then?
Speaker 2: I was a little deceptive because there was a rule that they sprung on us in my senior year that you could not be on two varsity teams during the same season.  And fencing and swimming were in the same season.  So I sort of managed to not elevate that to anyone's attention and sort of got away with doing it.  But the reason for that was you could have competitions that conflicted, and it would make, it would mean that a person would have to make a choice between one or the other.  And that's what they didn't want to have happen.  So that was the rationale behind it. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you ever have a tight--I mean a tight scheduling conflict?
Speaker 2: I had one or two.  And I had to finesse them.  I don't remember what I did.  But the coaches were very understanding and sympathetic.  It's funny the way you like to remember things in your past.  So I'd like to remember myself in swimming as being very competitive and I did, I did very well in swimming.  Now, the reality is that the entire league that we were in stunk.  So I was a big fish in a very small pond, right.  So, but it kind of felt good and we had a good time.  Everything's relative.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, (unclear) New York City, a lot of people are there, you know, and if you're a decent high school swimmer, you probably were a decent swimmer.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Jamaica High School [Jamaica, Queens, New York] team, for example, they would just blow us away.  These guys were really, really fast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we had a good time.
Speaker 1: Now, why fencing?  What drew you to fencing?
Speaker 2: You know this was, you see, you mentioned, 'Zorro' and things like that.  That was the only exposure that anyone had to fencing.  So when I came into it, that's exactly what I was thinking.  And it just seemed like it was a really cool thing, and I wanted to do that.  I wanted to be up there--I had imagined perhaps I wouldn't be fencing on tabletops, but still, you know, I'd do all the swashbuckling stuff.  So I got there, and there was a coach, there was a team, and they put the weapons in our hands, and they showed us how you do the moves.  It was completely different from what you would see on television, completely different.  And then as you learn more about it, even though it was different, it was fun.  It was, first of all, a mental game.  There was a strategy that was involved.  There was a certain elegance associated with executing any one of the attacks or the defensive actions.  And you really got into this fast.  So the fencing team used to meet every day in the cafeteria of John Bowne High School, and we would fence for a couple of hours.  And I remember, after that we discovered that there was other fencing that we could go to in Brooklyn [New York].  And so Kenton Rafael, he was my--what was the right, he was my closest fencing buddy.  He and I, we used to fence a lot.  He was a lefty [left-handed].  After class, after fencing practice, sometimes we would go to the Tompkins Recreational Center in Brooklyn.  And we would fence there for another two hours.  And then we would come home and get back at eleven o'clock at night.  But I mean this was, you know, tremendous fun for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26354
Speaker 1: Now, fencing, the real sport of fencing, it doesn't seem--you know, a fencing match doesn't, from what I understand--correct me if I'm wrong, from what I've seen on television and such, it doesn't--I mean when you see Errol Flynn, you know, in a movie, in 'Robin Hood' say, he's fencing with Claude Rains for what seems to be a long time.  They're jumping over things and all this stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the fencing matches I've seen, they don't last that long.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Somebody gets stuck pretty fast, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: So it's, in that regard, so this is, what you're talking, describing is theoretical--, is theatrical fencing, which is fun to watch and so forth.  There's an analogy there between boxing and, the boxing that you see in the movies, Sylvester Stallone, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When you see a professional fight, it doesn't look like what you see with Sylvester Stallone.  I mean in the movies, people get hit time and time again, and then one guy is beat down, but then comes back and, you know, is not--none of that happens in real boxing.  So, it's similar in fencing.  One action, a parry-riposte.  There'll a touch and that point will be over.  And then you reset and you do another touch.  The notion of these exchange vollies of parry-riposte, parry-riposte, you may get one parry-riposte, one or two parry-ripostes, and then there's gonna be an off target or something else.
Speaker 1: So in, back in the day when people were really fighting duels with these foils and sabres and, they didn't last very long either, I wouldn't guess.
Speaker 2: So there was only one, so, foil, which is the weapon that I fenced, was called the practice weapon.  There was one, the epee is the dueling weapon, all right. And so if there was a dispute back in the old days, people would get an epee, and it was the idea, the first person to score, to get, draw blood, all right, was the winner.  Sometimes people died, but usually, it was just--
Speaker 1: Just got cut.
Speaker 2: You got cut, and then it was over, all right.  Well, if you were gonna turn this thing into a sport, that you wanted your kids to participate in, this blood idea, you had to get away from this, all right, 'cause this wasn't healthy.  So this was the beginning of modern fencing where it turned into a sport, motivated from these past practices, it transformed into a sport where there's judging and so forth and scoring and so on.  And safety was paramount.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26355
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were just talking about the difference between real fencing and theatrical fencing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, but real fencing is a strategic, you know, is strategy more important than say, speed?
Speaker 2: Everything is important 'cause it all comes together, right.  What you're trying to do is you recognize that if you do some action, you have to anticipate what your opponent is going to do to counter that action.  And you also learn from past experience.  You know, the last time you tried faint disengage, and you were parried.  So now you're going to go to the other side or attack a different target.  So it's all this, you know, strategy building, faking people out.  There's a lot of similarity with boxing.  You know, there're faints that you make to draw a reaction.  The same thing with fencing.  You also study people, off strip, to find out what their natural reactions might be and then try to exploit that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you started fencing, did you know of any African American fencers?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  As a matter of fact, I didn't even know that black people fenced.  What I found out is that a lot of them fence.  I mean there were a lot of black fencers in the New York City community.  And many of them were very, very good fencers, national champions.
Speaker 1: All right.  I think there's even a, historically, you know, the greatest swordsman in France at one time was Chevalier St. George [Joseph Boulogne, Chevalier de Saint-George] and, you know, Dumas' son was supposed to be really good, you know, yeah--his father, rather, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I had no idea, I mean starting out, right, I had no idea what the community looked like at all.  As a matter of fact, I didn't even know that there was a community of fencers in New York City.  But, you know, many of the good clubs, fencing clubs, were in New York City, and they produced the national champs.  So it was a great place to learn fencing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Moreover, just in the high school system, all the high schools had fencing programs, had fencing teams.  So there was lots of competition and lots of inter--what would you call it?  Well, we had division championships and then borough championships and citywide championships so it was very well organized.
Speaker 1: There are a lot of fencing programs around the county on the high school level.  I know even when I was in high school, all the schools in Dayton, Ohio had a fencing program.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's something that kind of flies under the radar.  You don't hear a lot about who the champions of fencing are, overshadowed by, you know, basketball and football and track, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And now soccer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so how did you do as a fencer in high school?
Speaker 2: So in swimming, right, I was a big fish in a, the smallest, very, very small pond here.  Fencing, there was only one pond.  And so I did well in high school.  When I went to college, I'm reminded by a buddy of mine, he tells me how terrible I was when I came in.  But, you know, the level of high school fencing, all right, was not that high.  But I did do well.  I mean we had competitions.  I remember the best, I took second in a citywide event.  So I was, you know, very happy with that.  More important is I just had a lot of fun fencing.
Story_ID: 26356
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about engineering in high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York].  Did you, were you--did you know you were gonna be an electrical engineer, you know?
Speaker 2: No, you know, in high school, I thought I was gonna be--and I changed my mind a few times.  First, I thought I was gonna go into physics, may astrophysics or something like that.  I was kind of fascinated by, you know, principles of Einstein [Albert Einstein] and time and all of this stuff.  That's at an age where you don't really know anything about it, just conceptually, at the 30,000 foot level, it sounds very exciting, and you wanna know more.  So that was kind of where I was.  So that was one possibility.  And the other was going into mechanical engineering and biomedical engineering.  These are two areas that seemed rather interesting to me, having no experience at all.  But my decision was really made in my freshman year when I was in college, that I narrowed in on what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, before we get you into college, let's get you through--now, did, when you were a senior in high school, you were still focused on going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did your prospects look like?
Speaker 2: So, let's see.  I applied--you never know, I mean whether you're gonna get in or not.  So I applied to MIT, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]--there's one school that I'm missing, I'm forgetting.  I remember Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio] was my back up.  It's bothering me that I'm forgetting the other one.  Anyway, so I ended up getting into all of them which was nice and I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you had good grades and a good, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --well prepared to do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, now were you in the National Honor Society, I take it?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called, in New York, that honors society was called Arista [National Honor Society].
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, I think it was A-R-I-S-T-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, this was, I think you paid money and then nothing happened.  It wasn't, we didn't, didn't do anything, right.  I was involved in the student government when I was in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, student government.
Speaker 2: --high school.
Speaker 1: Were you the, what position did you--
Speaker 2: As president, student body president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And that was an interesting experience because there was just tremendous apathy.  Nobody wanted to do anything (laughter).  So it wasn't like I won a tough election or anything like that.  I was, I think I may have been the only one running.  But, you know, it was a chance that, the student government was a group of maybe about twenty active people, and it was nice because we had a chance to try to turn a dormant organization into something that at least tried to do something.  And so, so it was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26357
Speaker 1: And, you know, what level of math did you have in high school?  Did you have calculus in high school [John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I think they called it pre-calculus, and I had AP [advanced placement] Physics and AP Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Were there any special teachers in the sciences, you know, at this level--in your junior and senior year in high school at John Bowne [High School, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So there were, the physics teacher and the chemistry teacher also taught at Queens College [New York].  And they were really outstanding.  I mean they, again, they made the subject fun.  They were engaging.  I remember Mr. Harris.  He was an instructor there.  He was probably Dr. Harris.  I'm not even sure if we knew that.  This was at the time when calculators were first becoming popular, and he had an HP-45, which just did everything.  And so I remember him sharing this gadget with us.
Speaker 1: Now, those were, in those days, they were expensive too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, incredibly expensive.  It's funny the things that you remember.  I spent eighty nine dollars for my first calculator.  I was a junior.  The calculator was about this big.  It was used and huge, and it had four functions, which I guess you can guess what they were.
Speaker 1: Four functions?
Speaker 2: Four functions, that's right, addition, subtraction, multiplication (laughter) and division.  That's what it did, yeah, huge thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't really a scientific calculator as we know today--
Speaker 2: No, no, mine wasn't, no.  Now, of course, the HP-45, that was a, that was a pretty sophisticated thing.
Speaker 1: That was eighty nine dollars for one that would just do the four functions?
Speaker 2: Four functions, that's right.
Speaker 1: That was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, but the thing that was neat, you know, so Mr. Harris, when we had equations and things like this, he would plug it into his calculator, and we were all amazed.  And he would come up with an answer, and I always had in the back of my mind, one of these days, I was going to get an HP-45.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And something like ten years later, you could probably get the same calculator you spent eighty nine dollars for, for ten dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and smaller and, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's amazing.  So, can, so did you have good counseling in high school or did it make any difference?
Speaker 2: Counseling, there was a counseling center.  But I mean I pretty much knew what I wanted to do, and there weren't that many choices.  I mean it was pretty much, what do you wanna do and where do you wanna go?  So I had in my mind what I wanted to do and where I wanted to go.  So I guess, I really didn't take that much advantage of the counseling.  There was an office there, a counseling office, where many of the students hung out.  And so because my friends were there, I would frequent that office quite a lot.  But it wasn't to discuss counseling.  It was just to hang out and have fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, basically, you had come up with your own course of action here.  Now, when you graduated, were you--did you graduate with special honors or anything?  Were you the Valedictorian or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I was not Valedictorian.  I was, let me see, the class size was about nine--it was close to a thousand, maybe 950.  And I think I was Number 51.  But they didn't have, they had a Valedictorian, but that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26358
Speaker 1: All right, so that summer did you--what did you do the summer after graduation [from John Bowne High School, Flushing, New York]?  Did you work or--
Speaker 2: I worked in a camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a lifeguard in a camp.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the summer of '74 [1974] or--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: '74 [1974], okay.  So you graduated in 1974 and that summer--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --worked in a camp, and anticipating the year at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, well, had you, you know, visited the campus prior to starting school?
Speaker 2: I did.  So we drove up--so this was at time--all right.  In New York City, you could not drive until you were eighteen years old unless you had driver education in which case you could drive at age seventeen.  So I was in the driver education class, and I got my license early.  So I was able to drive up to MIT with another friend of mine who was in my AP [advanced placement] physics class who also was accepted to MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we drove up and saw the campus, drove back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a four-hour drive, the longest drive I had ever taken by my--well, driving, right, Jonathan and I.
Speaker 1: So were you sufficiently impressed at MIT?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I would have been impressed with any campus.  I mean that was the first time that I had ever really gone to a campus to look around.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you have a sense of the history of MIT and the scholars that, you know?
Speaker 2: A little bit, but I mean I didn't read books on the history.  I had a, we had a friend, Yenwith (ph.) Whitney, who went to MIT.  He was maybe a little younger than my father [Windsor Smith], so this was a generation ago.  And he was a very impressive person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26359
Speaker 1: All right, so what was it like your first year?  Were you ready for MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: MIT was a very supportive environment.  The freshmen, so freshman year was all pass-fail.  There was a tremendous attention to the quality of education.  The professors used to fight over teaching the big, undergraduate courses.  So you had very distinguished, well-known people who are authors of the textbooks, people with Nobel prizes.  I mean they taught the freshmen or junior--sophomore level chemistry courses and physics courses and things like that.  And they were all done very, very well.  I remember the model.  So we had a, the lecture was maybe a hundred or plus students.  And then there were recitations.  So the lecture was Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and there were recitations Tuesday and Thursdays, where there were about maybe twenty people or so.  And then there were tutorials on Monday, which was one-on-one with a TA [teaching assistant].  And so it was really a great model.  I mean you got, heard, you hear the basic principles in the lecture.  You then have a little bit of interaction in the recitations.  And then all your questions, right, can, you can have them addressed in the tutorial sessions.
Speaker 1: Okay, lecture, recitation and tutorials, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, now, did you--your first year, did you take any electrical engineering at all?
Speaker 2: No, so first year is generic.  You don't declare your major until the second year.  So, you know, you took your chemistry, physics classes, math classes during your freshman year.  And then the next year, you started taking the electrical engineering courses and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your second year, did you then go into electrical engineering?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and who were some of the professors that you had or the personalities that you met, you know, at--
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, Professor Gertusos (ph.) was in, taught the computer science class that we had.  And, again, all of them had just these very engaging personalities.  I remember in physics, there was a professor who, we, they--we were talking about pendulopic (ph.) motion and things like that.  And (laughter) he was quite dramatic.  He chose to become the pendulum and there was a rope suspended from the ceiling.  And he was, you know, demonstrating the motion of a pendulum, as the pendulum, swinging from one end to the other.  And then we'd work the equations and things like this.  I remember a course that we had in vacuum tubes, okay, where he was, the professor was making the point about a vacuum tube is tolerant of heat, and he demonstrated with a blow torch and looked at the performance of the vacuum tube as he heated this thing up with a blow torch, you know, and you could see that the characteristics held over a wide temperature range.  But things were fun.  You know, there was always something to engage you every time you had a lecture.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was all, actually interactive, I mean, you know, you were saying engaging, not just talking, but something being demonstrated.
Speaker 2: You didn't fall asleep, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26360
Speaker 1: All right, now, did you fence at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, right from the start.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I remember as a freshman feeling frustrated because we had to wait two or three weeks before the fencing practice would start.  I wanted to start as soon as I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay, did MIT have a decent team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.  They had a very good team.
Speaker 1: And, okay, so how did you do in intercollegiate competition?
Speaker 2: I did well.  So my freshman year, there was a New England championship which our foil team won.  I was one of the three.  And I finished third in that collegiate championship, which I was very happy with.  And I started to get good my freshman year--I'm reminded by that friend I told you about, of how terrible I was when I first came.  But I did get better.  Perhaps at the time, when I became a junior, I was regionally competitive.  I was winning some of the local competitions or at least taking the two or three--second or third slot in some of the local competitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did fencing, the time it took to fence--I knew it competed with study time, but so how did you manage to balance (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that worked out just great for me because I needed two things, right?  When I got mentally exhausted from studying too much, you study six hours, eight hours, you know, you've just had it.  And you can study more, but you wouldn't learn any more, right, become saturated.  So I balanced the fencing and the studying, and when I was physically tired, after working out for three or four hours, you know, I was ready to study.  So that balance worked out very, very well for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26361
Speaker 1: Did you have a undergraduate project that you worked on for graduation, like a capstone project or something?
Speaker 2: So I, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you had to do an undergraduate thesis.  And so that's what I had to do my thesis year.  But one of the things that I did do, there's a period called IAP, Independent Activities Period, which is the month of January.  And so they have hundreds of different activities that you can do, sky diving, you can do different types of projects.  So I'd like doing an electronic, I tried to do some kind of an electronics project.  And so the first project I did was to make a stroboscope.  And I remember going to Doc Edgerton.  He's this legendary professor, the one who invented and pioneered the stroboscope, strobe light, and he has some of these classic pictures that he's taken with a strobe light, that are in museums and on display and so forth, like a bullet going through an apple, where it's just frozen in motion, just crystal clear, captured through, with the stroboscope.  So--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: And you probably have seen those kind--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I have, I have, and Edgerton, right, yeah.  I remember the name now.
Speaker 2: So I remember going up to his lab and I met him, and I was just awestruck.  Wow, this is Professor Edgerton, and he's talking to me.  And he's nice.  And so he was explaining about the strobes.  So I said, gee, I would love to figure out how this worked and to build it.  And so he gave me a schematic.  Now, I didn't know what to do with the schematic.  And I didn't have any of the equipment, but he helped me.  And he gave me some of the parts and got me started, and I was able to work with another guy in the dormitory who was, I think, a senior.  He may have been a first-year graduate student.  And together we made this stroboscope.  It was really quite a satisfying project.  My soldering improved a whole lot since my Heathkit days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how do you make a stroboscope?  I mean what is the, what goes into making a stroboscope?
Speaker 2: Well, you need a transformer.  You need to have the strobe light.  Those are perhaps the two most important things.  So this one used transistors.  It wasn't a vacuum-tube based thing.  But basically, there's an oscillator circuit that kicks the stroboscope on.  And you have to generate sufficient voltage in order to, to kick the light.  And so you wanna have that oscillating at a very fast frequency.  The strobe light is one that can charge and discharge very quickly.  So you can get that bright flash.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you need a bright enough, fast enough flash to catch that action with a camera, with a--
Speaker 2: So I, yeah, so the one that I did, I mean I wasn't trying to do photography with this.  This one just blink and, so one of the demonstrations, for example, that he had, he had pulsating water that would just be dropping.  And then you could shine the stroboscope on it at a certain frequency, and you would see the beads of water that appeared to stop, to just freeze.  And then you could adjust the frequency and get them to go backwards, or you'd get them to go forward.  You could create these kinds of effects with the strobe light.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what I had essentially was a frequency variable strobe light, that could be adjusted.
Speaker 1: So you'd pick up the action at a certain point and that's what you would see, even though the water is consistently dripping, you'd see the, you know--
Speaker 2: The little beads.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, beads--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --at one point in time.  Okay.  All right, so this was your undergraduate thesis?
Speaker 2: Another one was a music synthesizer.  That was another one that was fun to make.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26362
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a plan for graduate school when you were on the verge of graduation from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was, I saw a demonstration my freshman year in signal processing.  Actually, this was speech synthesis by rule.  And that's what made me decide to go into electrical engineering.  That's where I decided, when I decided what it was that I wanted to do.  We saw a demonstration--and you have to understand, this was a time when technology was in a stage of infancy compared to where we are now.  So there was a room full of computers involved in this.  And it was a program that was activated, and what the program would do, you could type in a word, a sentence--there was a dictionary associated with it, with about, maybe 10,000 words.  And so if the word that you typed in was in the dictionary, it would follow the rules to pronounce it.  But if the word was not in the dictionary, it had a set of phonetic rules for pronouncing that word.  And so I was just watching this demonstration, type the thing in and the thing would talk.  It was just fascinating.  This is what I want--I wanted to understand that, and this is the area that I wanted to get into.  So that was digital signal processing, and that's, that kind of shaped my direction.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there a--now, you went to--
Speaker 2: Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Georgia Tech--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for my graduate work.
Speaker 1: And was there, was there a reason why you didn't go to grad school at MIT?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, so, I mean MI--I thoroughly enjoyed my time there.  I was ready for a change.  It was quite intense.  The signal processing group that was at Georgia Tech was a mirror image of the signal processing group at MIT.  The, there's a book called 'Digital Signal Processing', and this was "the" book, 'Digital Signal Processing' by Oppenheim and Shafer, and in fact, that book coined the term "digital signal processing."  [Alan] Oppenheim was a professor, is a professor at MIT, and [Ronald] Shafer was his first student.  He was at Georgia Tech.  And so he was building this parallel, kind of signal processing community at Georgia Tech.  And, in fact, many of the MIT faculty members went from MIT after graduating with Ph.D.s to Georgia Tech.  And so it was the same style as MIT and the climate was a lot warmer.  And so that's the group--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --that I joined, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is 19--you got your--
Speaker 2: Seventy eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 26363
Speaker 1: So you continued to fence at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] as well, and there's a story about--'cause you were, at this point, you had reached a level where it was possible that you would fence in the Olympic games, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all right, so there's a story there.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: 1978, I had, fenced with the NCAAs [National Collegiate Athletic Association], and I took six in the NCAAs, after fencing that day, I took six in foil.  And I recognized that there was maybe a chance that I could, maybe, make a national team.  So I decided to enter the national championships which were gonna be held in Florida.  Now, I was working in Texas at the time.  So I was in Dallas, Texas, that area, the metropolitan Dallas area.  And I decided that I was gonna go to the nationals.  So I got a plane ticket.  I registered for the nationals.  I had to fly from Texas to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] where the national championships were.  So I have my fencing equipment bag, and I'm about to go on the plane.  Now, the weapons that we have, you know, they're very delicate.  The tips have to be adjusted.  You want them to work well.  You don't want them to stick.  So I was very protective about all of my equipment.  And so I was explaining to the lady as I'm entering the plane that I'd like to bring my equipment on as carry-on because it's very careful--sensitive.  And I don't want this to--and she says, well, what's in there?  And I said it was fencing equipment.  And she says, fencing equipment.  What is fencing equipment?  You know, foils, you know.  Foils, what is that?  Well, like swords--wrong thing to say.  Went to the baggage claim.  I was assured that nothing would happen.  There would be no, they'd treat it with kid gloves, and I was, received this assurance over and over again.  The plane lands.  We go to collect our stuff, and I'm watching as people get their bags, and I'm watching as the carousel goes around.  And then it stops.  And there are about six of us standing around waiting for bags.  And no bags are coming.  It's about eleven o'clock at night, and we have to compete the next day.  Now, they're starting to turn the lights out in the area, and we're going, our luggage is lost.  All right, so this was not bad.  What a way to start out the first time I enter a national championship.  So I was told by the person in the baggage claim area to just purchase whatever you need, and we'll reimburse you.  We'll work that out later.  So that's what I do.  So, the morning of the competition, before it starts, there're all these fencing vendors there.  I had to buy shoes.  I had to buy equipment.  I had to buy new weapons.  So nothing was broken in.  It was just the world's worst way to start off, and I think I ended up dropping my first bout.  Things just weren't working out, my first national championship.  And then I started to get warmed up during the day, and I was fencing people I had never fenced before, and I was going from round to round to round.  Anyway, a long story short, I ended up making the finals, and I placed third.  And so now, in the national championships, I had a bronze medal, and now I had points, which put me on the national squad.  And so here I am, now having points.  It's 1978.  The Olympics are in 1980, and I'm thinking, maybe, hey, I should think about making an Olympic team.  And it was something that I had never thought about before until that happened.  And so that was kind of the start of this.  In 1979, I went to Georgia Tech.  I went to the president, and I told him that I was going to take six months off and train for the Olympics.  And I was wondering if Georgia Tech could do anything and perhaps help me with this.  And I had a little budget of how much it would cost in order to go to Europe and to do that circuit.  And the president said, well, you know, thank you for letting us know about this, and I'll see what I can do, which kind of translated to me, as a polite way of saying, "Well, thank you very much, and here's the door, and I have other things to do."  About three weeks later, I got a call from the president to come to his office, and he and the athletic director, presented me with a check for $1,500 to go and do my training.  And I was just so taken by this, I mean this was a dream come true.  And so I was able to do that, and I went to the circuit, and I was thinking, now is my chance to do some extra training to get a leg up on all these other people who are gonna be competing for the four Olympic slots.  When I got over to Europe to do the competition, all these other people who I thought I was gonna get the leg up on, that's where they were too.  So we were all, right--they found funding some place or another.  So we did that.  Anyway, I ended up making the team in 1980, and, of course, as you know, we had the boycott which was terribly disappointing.  So we weren't able to compete in the 1980 games.
Speaker 1: Moscow [Russia] games.
Speaker 2: Moscow games, right.
Story_ID: 26364
Speaker 1: Okay, so President Jimmy Carter's administration basically boycotts the Olympic Games in Moscow [Russia].  So you don't compete, though you're officially known as someone who was on the team, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and so we did have a team, and, you know--the administration did everything they could, given the situation to try to help the teams and so forth.  So they brought us to Washington [District of Columbia], for example.  So we had a chance to meet our team and at least feel like a team.  And they did give some funds to the different federations to do some things.  So we took our training trip, and we went to China, actually, and did some fencing there.  So we felt a little bit like we had some kind of a game as we tried to prepare for the 1984 games.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  They boycott the Moscow games, but then send you to China (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Different countries, yes.
Speaker 1: They're both in the communist bloc--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and considered in those days, I mean that's just before the Cold War ended, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, the irony of that, it was to get the Russians out of Afghanistan.  That's why we were doing this because the Russians shouldn't have been in Afghanistan.  That was the--things change, don't they?
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  That's exactly what that was about, yeah.  The very Taliban--they were fighting the very Taliban that the U.S. is currently fighting.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 26365
Speaker 1: And Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], now, what was the science like at Georgia Tech and what was--were you, in terms of digital signal processing, what were you doing?
Speaker 2: So I was a graduate student there.  I remember we had two small computers.  These were mini-computers, and the programming languages or the operating systems were quite archaic by today's standards.  This was a time before word processors.  They were starting when I was, when I was in graduate school, we were starting word processors.  No one had a PC [personal computer], right?  You had to, you had dumb terminals and so it was a completely different era.  I had to take two years of classes.  So I worked on my master's degree first.  You have to take a certain number of classes, and then you, after you get those out of the way, then you continue working on your thesis work until you graduate.  So along the way, I picked up a master's degree in 1979, pretty much class only.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then continued research work.
Speaker 1: Okay, and continued to do your research.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were you working on?  I mean were you working on the same project all the way through your Ph.D. or--
Speaker 2: Yes, so I started my Ph.D. work pretty much in 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was working on something called "filter banks" for sub-band coding.  The idea there, so a filter bank is--in the area of digital signal processing, you have a signal, all right?  And so a filter bank is a set of filters that can decompose a signal into a subset of signals that have different properties.  And then what you wanna be able to do is to decimate them so that the total number of samples in the signal is the same as the number of samples after you've done the filtering.  So you don't expand the information.  You keep the number of samples, of signals the same.  And then the synthesis filter bank allows you to take those samples and reconstruct them and reconstruct the original.  So the reason why this decomposition is interesting is that it gives you another way of representing the signal, a way that you can manipulate that new representation of the signal in interesting ways and then reconstruct in a way that enhances the signal or something like that.  So we were looking at compression, compression of speech in particular.  If you were to digitize speech, you could fill up a disc drive with an hour's worth of speech, let's say.  If you compressed it first, you could store ten times the amount of speech on a disc drive.  That's the idea, the motivation behind compression.  The other motivation is if you're going to transmit a speech signal over a channel, that has a low bandwidth, you may not be able to transmit the full digitized signal, but if you could compress it first, transmit it and expand it, then you could get more traffic across the channel.  So that was the motivation, and there were a lot of researchers that were exploring ways of doing speech compression.  So that was the motivation behind the filter banks that I was looking at when I was a Ph.D. student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26366
Speaker 1: So in those days, in terms of the voice and music and that sort of thing, what was the state of digital technology?  I think most of what we heard, I guess on radios and on television was the analog then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, everything was analog.  Digital required tremendous amounts of storage, and it also required pretty big computers.  I mean every, all computers were big by today's standards, right?  But still, there was a lot of theoretical work going on, and I think that there was a general recognition that microelectronic technology was getting better and better.  And if you waited long enough, devices would become cheaper and smaller.  I think that was in the back everybody's mind.  So we weren't so discouraged by the fact that it took a lot of time to do the processing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have a note here that basically says that signal processing has its roots in numerical techniques based on the work of Newton, Euler, Gauss and Fourier--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Euler (phonetically, "Oiler") um-hum.
Speaker 1: I mean, so is digital signal processing dependent on calculus or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  There's a lot of math involved there.  So, you know, I mean one of the fundamental properties is that there's this concept of a transformation, how you take one representation and transform it into another representation and there are many properties involved in those transformations that allow you to preserve certain characteristics of the signal.  And then, of course, the transformations that are of most interest are the ones that are irreversible, that allow you to then reconstruct the original.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, now what--tell us about an FFT.  What's an FFT?
Speaker 2: FFT stands for Fast Fourier Transform.  I guess the modern credit for that was given to [J.W.] Cooley and [John] Tukey.  These are two outstanding researchers, who in 1965 introduced that algorithm.  The Fast Fourier Transform implements something called the Discreet Fourier Transform which is a signal representation that takes a set of numbers and then transforms it into a frequency domain representation.  So it gives you the spectrum for a signal.  It's a block transform, so it takes 'n' numbers and converts into another 'n' numbers that correspond to the frequency spectrum, if you will.  And it's reversible so that you can go backwards.  So what does that mean?  It means that you can take, let's say, music, and you can take the Discreet Fourier Transform and in a transform domain, you can see the high frequencies and the low frequencies and how high the high frequencies are, what the amplitude of the high frequencies are and so on.  Some, the people who like audio, for example, they may, in the frequency domain wanna boost the high frequencies or boost the mid range, right?  So that's what that does.  Many of the audio systems that are out there operate in analog or at least did in those days.  Now, much more is digital.  But if you want more precise control, right, you have much more latitude in the digital domain.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I think it was in the, in the '80s [1980s], we started hearing about Dolby digital and that sort of thing, commercial, in the commercial world, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Dolby sound and that sort of--so, how is that different from, well, I guess you explained it.  It's, you can manipulate digital signal a lot--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So Dolby was, Dolby was originally introduced to address a phenomenon that dealt with tape hiss.  At very high frequencies, you could have, you could hear the hiss from the tape, and when you played it back, it was audible.  And so what Dolby did was, it was high frequency emphasis.  So it would take the original signal.  It would boost the high frequencies and then when you applied the taping to it, the tape hiss would be below the signal threshold because you've boosted the high frequencies, and then in reconstruction, you would reduce amplitude boost of the high frequencies, but that would also reduce the tape hiss noise.  So the quality improved.
Story_ID: 26367
Speaker 1: Who is your advisor for your Ph.D. dissertation?
Speaker 2: Thomas P. Barnwell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also, a graduate of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], graduated in 1970.  He was the one who started the DSP [Digital Signal Processing] program at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and then after that, Ronald Shafer came down, and Russell Mersereau and that, that group actually grew to be quite large, about fifteen faculty members and a hundred Ph.D. students.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in your dissertation, what did you discover, you know?
Speaker 2: So, what I did, I described this notion of sub-band decomposition.  What my thesis work showed was that you could take a signal, decompose it into this sub-band representation, decimate that representation.  So the same number of samples going in was equal to the same number of samples that you had in the representation, and then reconstruct that representation exactly.  So before I did this work, you could approximate it, but you couldn't do it exactly.  And so my contribution in that work was to show how you could do it exactly.  And I also designed some filters that were optimal for doing that kind of decomposition.  After that, that work, there was another approach to the decomposition problem called "wavelets" that was introduced.  And it turned out that my solutions in the digital domain turned out to be the same solutions for wavelet-type filters.  And so we started looking at things in different ways, and it was a community that used to deal with filter banks, and this new community that was looking at wavelets, that started to have conversations together.  And the research community became very exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay, you decimate a signal, you mean divide it into tenths, I guess?
Speaker 2: Decimation involves keeping some of the samples periodically and then throwing away the rest.  So, for example, if you were gonna decimate two to one, you'd throw out all the odd samples and keep all the even samples.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you're gonna decimate four to one, you keep the first of every four samples and throw away the other three in each, in each set.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so this--you finished your Ph.D. work in 1984?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 26368
Speaker 1: All right, but in the meantime, as a fencer, you were in the National Champion--you become the national champion in '81 [1981] and '83 [1983], I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that was really quite exciting, and I had been in the finals fairly consistently, but the idea of winning, you know, it wasn't one of those things--I couldn't say to myself, I knew I was going to win.  So it was quite exciting along the way.  I, in the finals, I remember I ran up against Michael Marks, who had been National Champion for a number of years, and he was a tough competitor.  And I just remember the intensity of the bouts there.  I also remember the feeling of that last touch, after I won, and then it kind of dawned on me, wow, this is the whole National Championship, and it was quite a feeling.  That was in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's 1981?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Somebody else won in '82 [1982], I would guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if that's what, you know, so that was close (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was second in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: You were second, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you actually got a chance to feel what it's like to lose--to be in the--(laughter)
Speaker 2: Well, I was happy with any medal I got though, yeah.  Silver was--I mean everyone wants the gold, but, you know.  I'm happy that I, I got a medal.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in competition with the same person all--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --three years, say '81 [1981], '82 [1982] and '83 [1983]?
Speaker 2: The top group of fencers doesn't change dramatically from year to year, right?  There's a, you know, it's not a random kind of thing.  So.
Speaker 1: And I would imagine that a top fencer could stay a top fencer for a longer time than, say, a top hundred-yard dash man or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that pretty much true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in that you're not really relying on having the fitness of an eighteen-year old.  I mean it's more than just that.  You have to certainly be in shape, but there's a lot in terms of experience in which you can benefit.  So, so you can, you can have a good career for ten years or so.  Peter Westbrook, for example, he's been National Champion in sabre for, I don't know how many--it's at least seven [years], right?  And many Olympic teams.  So, you know, he's an example of somebody who's been at the top for a very long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sabre is like what we're used to seeing in the cavalry movies and that sort of thing, the, it's a broad blade with a--
Speaker 2: It is, except the competition sabre is a lot different from the cavalry sabre.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's lighter.  It looks different.  But it is a cutting weapon, and it's scored that way.  Target is from the waist up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Including the arms.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26369
Speaker 1: So, you went to the Olympics in '84 [1984], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And in '84 [1984], so this is the Los Angeles [California] Olympics, and how did it feel to finally get to the Olympics?
Speaker 2: That was a wonderful feeling.  I was so happy we weren't gonna boycott, right, no, not through that again.  Yeah, so then, it was interesting in that, first of all, when you make a team, the U.S. Olympic Committee does take of its athletes.  I mean they pay attention, and they make you feel special.  They try to create the environment so you can be successful.  They work out training times for you and so forth.  They handle everything that you need.  All your equipment and everything.  It used to be that we had to purchase everything ourselves, but when you make a team, you get budget for that, so you know, you know you have good equipment.  And that's really nice.  Of course, there's a lot of intensity involved in preparing for that.  And so you stay pretty much focused until your event is over.  But then after you finish competing, then you can enjoy the other sports and see, go to some of the other, you know, venues and relax.  And--
Speaker 1: How much does it cost to equip a fencer?
Speaker 2: Well, let me give you an idea of what I would pay.  It was about twenty dollars per blade, fencing blade.  And you, these are things that you break.  I mean they break after a period of time, so you can fence with them for a few months and then they'll snap.  So it can be expensive and you can go through weapons quickly.  But they were about twenty dollars a blade, and that was back in the '80s [1980s], all right?  Now, there's a greater variety.  I mean there are blades that you can purchase for eighty and a hundred dollars.  There's some cheaper kinds of blades.  What I used to do in order to survive is, we used to trade with the Soviet Union team when we would go to competitions, like the World University Games or the World Championships.  The Soviet team would get all of their equipment for free.  This is just the way the socialists did things, right?  Equipment, everything you need you get for free, but you don't get any traveling money.  You don't--you know, no other benefits.  On our, for us, right, we had to pay for all of our equipment, but because we live in our capitalist society, why we could get blue jeans and watches and things like this which they couldn't get in the Soviet Union.  So when we would come to these competitions, we would bring blue jeans and these watches, five dollar watches, and we would trade.  They would trade blades, which they got for free so they didn't care, right?  And we would give them cheap jeans and so forth.  Everybody was happy, right?  So I would come back with twenty blades, fifty blades, sell half of them and keep the rest of them, and that's the way I, many of us, you know, survived.  In fact, I still have a few of those blades left now which I'm using as I fence with our little team here.
Speaker 1: It's amazing.  Now, did the Russian government ever figure this out, I mean the--
Speaker 2: So that was very interesting.  I'm not sure if they cared that much.  I don't know.  But the Soviet Union was interesting.  The Soviet team, these guys were scary.  Look, I mean they never smiled.  You know, they always looked so mean, and they were always looking over their shoulder, like somebody was watching.  And my understanding is that there were KGB agents that were there.  So they did have to be careful.  But I also think that they understood the boundaries.  So although they would do this in secret, you know, it wasn't a show stopper if they did a little bit of trading.  They, they don't--couldn't defect, right?  But it was probably tolerated that they did this kind of thing.  And the reason why I say that is because they did it, and, you know, I never heard anyone refuse to trade.
Story_ID: 26370
Speaker 1: You made the '84 [1984] Olympic [fencing] team.  What about '88 [1988]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, so then something very special happened in 1985.  I had my first son.  And I also started working.  So after I got my Ph.D. in '84 [1984], I started a job.  And it turns out that fencing and a real job with a son are not so compatible.  I mean you can do it, but it's different.  And so I decided I wasn't going to just continue and watch myself degrade slowly.  I just wanted, I was gonna make a clean break and stop.  And so I made that change in about 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26371
Speaker 1: So what was your first job out of, when you finished your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: When I finished, so I joined the faculty of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was very happy that they decided that they would like to have me because I had lots of friends in Atlanta, and I was married, and we were very well situated, very comfortable at Georgia Tech.  So it was a perfect fit for me.
Speaker 1: So many scientists and engineers we interview do some kind of a post-doctorate, you know, somewhere.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Were you tempted to do that or did you--
Speaker 2: No, in, it varies from discipline to discipline.  In some disciplines, it's the expected norm.  In electrical engineering, it was not.  Now, a few scholars will do post-docs, but it's perfectly acceptable to go into a faculty position after getting a Ph.D. degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you started up, at Georgia Tech as a faculty member, a full faculty member in '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Right, came in as an assistant professor, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, assistant professor.  And, well, tell us about your career at Georgia Tech and what kind of research you were--did you continue the same research 'cause you were, it sounds--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like you were doing groundbreaking research in digital signal processing?
Speaker 2: Well, we like to think it's ground--, I mean, one individual certainly likes to think that.  I would say, I had the opportunity to work with some great students.  And when you do research in signal processing and in a lot of other areas, you know, it's not something that you do by yourself.  I mean we do this with graduate students.  And so you tend to work with your graduate students, contributing the ideas, a lot of the labor and a lot of the idea generation is done as a team and with the students.  So I was very fortunate to work with some great students during that time who now, all of whom are very successful right now.
Story_ID: 26372
Speaker 1: My first student or first set of students [at Georgia Institute of Technology; Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia], Brian George, in particular, you know, I worked with him.  And we developed an algorithm called 'Analysis by Synthesis Overlapping Ad'.  What does all that mean?  It was a technique inspired by work that was done by Quatieri and MacAulay at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where you took a signal and you broke it up into a set of sinusoids [sine wave].  And in the sinusoidal domain, you can do interesting things to manipulate the signal.
Speaker 2: What do you mean by sinusoidal domain?  What is that?
Speaker 1: So, to some extent, it's a Fourier representation.  So they're individual frequency components.  But what it says is that the signal can be represented by a set of sinusoids, let's say, forty sinusoids, each one of which has a unique amplitude, frequency and phase.  And when you add these four sinu--these forty sinusoids together, you get a very good approximation of the original.  So that's the decomposition.  So you start off with an original, like your speech.  I decompose it into the set of sinusoids, weighted set of sinusoids that, so you get a new set every twenty milliseconds or ten milliseconds or whatever the hop interval is.  But the nice thing about the representation is it allows you to do some interesting manipulation, like you can time scale the speech, make the person speak fast or make the speak--person speak very, very slowly.  Or you can change the pitch, make the person sound high, make the person sound low.  And you can introduce resonances, so you could make them sound different.  So that's the part that's exciting about it, is that you can change the quality.  And so over the years, we have used that model.  And we've done some things like look at, we've looked at singing, done this work with Matt Lee.  This is one of the activities that's been maybe the most fun, taking a singer who can't sing, processing the voice, and making that, turning that person into someone who can sing.
Speaker 2: Now, the, I think the first time I ever heard someone use a computerized voice was the funk musician, Roger, singing 'Computer Love', you know, through the--now, was that--I think that was his voice song into a mic [microphone] and then somehow they did something to modify his voice.
Speaker 1: Right.  So there're all kinds of different enhancements that you can do.  So one of the challenges, first of all, one of the challenges is, how do you do this in a way that computationally efficient?  The other challenge is how do you do the modifications in a way that sounds natural?  It's very easy to modify it, but you can start getting some mechanical, unnatural sounds that come along with the modification--
Speaker 2: Roger didn't sound natural.  And I think his goal was really to sound like a computer, I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when people thought a computer should sound like in the movies.  And (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So that's easier to do (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, what's harder to do is to make it sound natural, so it doesn't sound like it's been computer modified.  And so that was our goal.
Speaker 2: Now, this is something now, that there are artists, and I know '60 Minutes' ran a story about a year ago about artists who have been, I guess the way they framed the story, they tricked the public into thinking they could actually hit notes--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and frequencies that they really cannot hit.
Speaker 1: Right, so one of the things that's not that difficult to do is to make the change of the pitch.  So if somebody is a little off key, there's some simple things that you can do to bump that up.  But as you start to make dramatic changes in the pitch, then you start to run into some sounds that may sound a little artificial.  You can also time scale, but there are cases where you try to do dramatic time scales, and you'll start to hear artifacts.  So these are the kinds of challenges that we, we run into.  But in the case of the singing, what you really wanna try to do, our goal, was to preserve the identity of the singer, but turn the voice from a poor quality voice into a high quality voice, something that you would say, that person can sing.  And how do you do that?  So there were a lot of questions that we were, we were looking at.  And it was a lot of fun, trying to do that.
Speaker 2: So are, this is--it sounds like this involves as much art as it does science?
Speaker 1: A little bit of both because there is science--well, in the area of signal processing, particularly in audio, it's very subjective.  You know, the quality of the speech that you hear is measured subjectively.  It's not measured analytically, numerically, right?  It has to sound natural, and that's a judgment.
Speaker 2: I just wondered, wonder if you take the voice of [Luciano] Pavarotti [Italian operatic tenor] or even Aretha Franklin [American musician/singer]--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and digitize, you know, could you come up with a formula to, say make Matthew's [Hickey, videographer for The HistoryMaker] voice sound like Aretha or--
Speaker 1: And the answer is, yes, yes.  So those are the kinds of things that we've looked at, and, again, it's been, it's been a lot of fun.  So that same kind of technology we're using now on a slightly different problem, one that's arguably more useful, and that's for language learning.  We were approached by Maria Cooks here in the language department.  She teaches Spanish.  And she has to work one-on-one with lots--hundreds of students, trying to correct pronunciation, Americans trying to speak Spanish.  But the Americans have trouble getting the accent right.  And so she works with them one-on-one to pronounce, to improve the pronunciation.  But you can't do that when you have a hundred and 200 students in the class.  So she approached us and asked, is there a way of involving some computer algorithms that could help with this?  And so what we're trying to do now is to develop a system where a student learning to speak Spanish, can speak into a microphone, the system would identify the areas or the words that had been mispronounced, and then make the corrections in the voice of the speaker and then play it back to that person with the correct accent.  And this would be a learning tool.  So now, the student, instead of having to occupy Dr. Cooks' time, could work with the computer to improve his or her accent.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it's the same algorithm, but with a different--well, it's not exactly the same algorithm, but the same approach, using this overlap ad model.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: So that was the trajectory of your research at Georgia Tech when you were there or even today--as you still--
Speaker 1: Well, we did a lot of things.  I was just giving you one example.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that was the signal, audio signal processing piece.  We took that model, and we looked at synthesizing musical instruments.  Again, this is Brian George, and it was tremendous fun working with him.
Story_ID: 26373
Speaker 1: But I also did work in, on the theoretical side, with wavelets and filter banks, different types of decompositions, with different properties for enhancement purposes.  So you might, for example, want to decompose an image and remove noise from an image.  So, it's called de-noising.  So that's another popular application for these kinds of decompositions.
Speaker 2: You said for an image?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, an image that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So a graphic image?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Other things, one example that Robert Bamberger--, so he was the student who worked on this area, the decomposition--he was looking at trying to remove defects in fingerprints.  When you fingerprint somebody, sometimes there's a blob of ink, for example, that will obscure some of the ridges in the fingerprints, but you can take a decomposition like this and use it to remove those kinds of defeats in an image.  So there're a lot of things that you can do.
Speaker 2: So you end up with the pure quality of whatever it was, without the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's called image enhancement, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 26374
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about image morphing?
Speaker 2: I had the pleasure of working with a gentleman, Joe [Joseph] Monaco, he was doing his Ph.D. thesis with me [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  And we were looking at developing some techniques that would help us manipulate images.  And we were looking at how you might take an image and do warping of the image.  Now, this was at a time before morphing was popular.  We were just starting to see that, and most of the morphing examples at that time were done manually.  So people had to identify certain points in two images, line them up manually and then you could have the two images morph into each other, something that we, we're used to seeing now-a-days.
Speaker 1: Now, this was, I remember there was a video back in the '80s [1980s] that was really popular where the faces kept morphing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and changing as the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --song was going on.  And that was, people were just amazed at this.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is what we're talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's exactly what we're talking about.
Speaker 1: --one image blending into another, and--
Speaker 2: And to remind you, before that what people were doing was they were doing what was called cross dissolve.  So one would fade out and the other would fade in, right?  And if you remember some of the special effects in movies, like the 'Werewolf', the face would turn from a normal face into a werewolf.  It was just this kind of thing that faded from one to another.  But that was the state of technology.  So the idea that, in fact, that you could do some morphing was new and exciting.  So, you know, what Joe Monaco and I were interested in doing is to try to automate this so that you didn't have to have humans in the loop.  And so he developed some algorithms that would allow you to do the morphing.  And we had some examples that I love.  One is, my two children at that time were close in age.  They were young, and their heads were, you know, kind of similar, but clearly two different, two different--Kevin and Stephen, looked, two different, completely different.  So we were able to generate some automatic morphing images.  We morphed one into the other and I used to play that for them when they were little, and they would just crack up.  They thought that was the funniest thing in the world.  But--
Speaker 1: I bet they did (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: But it turns out that there're a lot of interesting applications for that in terms of how you might do coding and other signal processing activities.  That warping, the basic idea behind the warping algorithm has lots of uses.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there medical uses for this?
Speaker 2: Actually, there are.  One of the, one of those areas is in MRIs where they're trying to use an MRI machine to create three-dimensional volumes.  And so what the MRI will do is, you have some subject there, and it takes these slices of the image.  But what you'd like to be able to do is to see continuously from slice to slice, what the anatomy looks like.  And so being able to interpolate between those samples, you can use warping algorithms to do very high-quality interpolation.  And that we've done.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: David Frakes is the student who's worked on that.
Speaker 1: David Frakes, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, a professor at Arizona State University [Phoenix, Arizona].
Story_ID: 26375
Speaker 1: Now, at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], now, you also got involved in some mentoring, I guess with a project called 'EMERGE' [Empowering Minority Engineers-Scientists to Reach for Graduate Education], right?
Speaker 2: So EMERGE was an idea.  We were very concerned, along with many people in the country, over underrepresentation of students in engineering and scientific fields, the STEM fields, science, technology, engineering and mathematics.  And Georgia Tech was positioned very nicely because it's in Atlanta, and there's a large African American population.  And so I think the leadership at Georgia Tech, including--well, many of us, we felt that we could really do something nationally to try to increase the number of African American students that went into the STEM fields.  And so many people at Georgia Tech over the years had established some very good relationships with the Atlanta University colleges of Spelman [College], Morehouse [College], Clark Atlanta [University] and there were some nice pipelines of students who would come from those programs to Georgia Tech.  So EMERGE was about trying to get together the top Ph.D.-producing universities of minority students together, to work at a national effort to try to increase the number of African American and underrepresented students, Hispanic American students.  And so it was nice, so, tried to get that, that group together.  It consisted of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena], North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro], Spelman College was there.  We had about ten or twelve--North Carolina A and T, schools that were there.  And what we ended up doing was providing some support to the AGET (unclear) program, the National Science Foundation so, we were involved in helping organize some of those conferences and so on.
Story_ID: 26376
Speaker 1: You were involved in IEEE [Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers], and have been involved for a long time.  In the early '90s [1990s], I guess you were the chairman of the Digital Signal Processing Technical Committee?
Speaker 2: Right.  So this is one of the things that I think all professors in the field should be encouraged to do and many of us do that.  And that's just to get involved with our professional societies.  So my professional society being in electrical engineering, and electrical engineer is the IEEE, and there's a Signal Processing Society, which is one of the largest societies in the IEEE.  And so, we have an annual conference.  It's called ICAST [International Conference on Adaptive Science and Technology] which has about, over 2,000 people in attendance.  And there's another one in image processing called ISIT [International Symposium on Information Theory], which has maybe 1,500.  It's a fairly large community.  And so the DSP [digital signal processing] technical committee takes leadership in some of those conferences and in other activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, you've also been an advisor to the National Science Foundation [NSF] on microelectronic information processing systems?
Speaker 2: So that was, yeah, that was an advisory group to the National Science Foundation which, the term of service was just a couple of years, I think.  But what they were looking for is, is feedback.  I've been very impressed with the National Science Foundation because they approach administration scientifically.  I mean this concept of getting feedback from the customer, if you will, and then making improvements is well engrained in their thinking.  And so this was an example where they were trying to find out from people in signal processing what changes could be made, how things were going and so on.  I also had the chance to be involved in a program review, where they had external reviewers come in and look at how program directors in the National Science Foundation were making decisions and weighing in on that.  And what we found out was that they were really doing a very thoughtful job, I mean nobody knows this until you really look to see the details.  But the fact that they were asking for external people to come in to do this, speaks very well for the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26377
Speaker 1: Now, what have been some of your, what you would consider your more significant papers, I guess?
Speaker 2: I think we all have our favorites.  I think maybe the work on the directional decomposition.  That would have to be a favorite of mine, and this is the idea where you can do this kind of decomposition that I talked about, but you can create directionally related filters, right, of an image.  So it gives you a completely different kind of representation.  And this was the work of Robert Bamberger, and you can exactly reconstruct from that kind of decomposition.  So it allows you to do different types of enhancements.  That one has been, I think it's had a lot of impact.  Another one was the sinusoidal model, the overlap ad.  We've done a fair amount of work with that.  Let's see, oh, the work in the music, I guess which was an extension of that, I would also say was a favorite.  Oh, there was another one that I did with Steve Eddins a long time ago, and that was related to compression.  So we all use JPEG [Joint Photographic Experts Group] now, right, for compressing images and so forth.  There was something called JPEG 2000, which was an enhanced version of that.  And so we were fortunate to participate in some of that work, along with our colleagues throughout the world.  And some of our contributions and theory made it into that standard.  So that was very satisfying.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26378
Speaker 1: Now, 1996, when the Olympic Games were held at Atlanta, Georgia, you had a chance to carry the torch.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what-- That was pretty exciting too.  What they did was they took Olympians who were in Atlanta and involved them in the torch ceremony.  Well, I have a story actually, that, I can tell you for that.  Billy Payne [president and chief executive officer of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games (ACOG)] had this idea, I think it was around 1990 of bringing the Olympics to Atlanta.  And so he reached out to the local Olympians, and there were a group of us.  I don't know.  Maybe there were 10, 15, 20, not a big group.  And he was getting our advice on this, and, you know, we were all buddy-buddy and so forth.  And so finally, we got the Olympics and everything.  And the torch came to City Hall, all the way from Athens [Greece].  The last leg, there were ten people who were gonna carry the torch from City Hall to the stadium.  And I was one of those ten.  I was, in fact, Number 5.  And so we did our job, carrying that torch.  We didn't let a gust of wind blow it out.  We were faithful and delivered that torch to the stadium.  Now, I was thinking, once we got to the stadium, why, I would go in and watch the opening ceremony, along with everybody else.  That was what I was thinking.  But that's not what they were thinking.  They were thinking, you've done your job in delivering the torch.  Now, we're gonna close the door and goodbye and maybe you can--so, yeah.  So, that was a big surprise. So nobody thought that the-- You know, I thought, hey, my buddy, Billy Paine--, but that's not the way we did it, right?
Speaker 2: That's funny, a large bureaucratic operations sometimes leave some things out, you know.
Speaker 1: Every seat, they wanted to have someone pay for.  So.
Speaker 2: So I remember the last person to carry the torch up was Mohammed Ali, I believe.
Speaker 1: Mohammed Ali, now, he was inside, right?  So I'm sure he got to see the ceremony, but people--
Speaker 2: So you didn't get a chance to even see--
Speaker 1: No, no.  I got to watch it on television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is incredible.  Well, it's the kind of thing that I think that, you know, it should have been rethought or something, but--.
Story_ID: 26379
Speaker 1: Well tell us about like, anything else about Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] before we talk about you coming to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana]?  Now, you came to Purdue in 2003?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so maybe two things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a wonderful opportunity in 1991 to go over to France and to work on the French campus in Metz, France.  Georgia Tech was approached by the vice mayor of the region of Lorraine [France].  He had an interest in establishing a Georgia Tech campus in Metz, France that would be co-located, well, not co-located, but right across the lake from Supelec which is one of the premier engineering institutions in France.  And they were interested in this educational, international education park.  And they had a particular interest in dual degrees.  So a student could come in from France, for example, and get a degree from Supelec, a French degree, and a degree from Georgia Tech, an American degree.  And so this was a plus, having a degree from two different cultures, right?  That was the vision.  And so I had a chance to be one of the faculty cohorts to go over there and to teach on that campus, along with my kids and so on.  So we did two tours of duty.  One in 1991 and two [1992], and then a return visit in 1993 during the summer.  So that was really quite satisfying.  The other thing that I would mention is I was given an opportunity by the president to work in his office.  This is the president of Georgia Tech, not the United States.  I received a phone call, and in 1996--1997, and he asked me if I would be willing and interested to serve as the executive assistant to the president, which was an office in Carnegie, in the Carnegie Building, sort of next to his, and that was a tremendous exposure to administrative life, had the chance to sit on all the committees.  I was on the president's cabinet.  I saw how universities worked, got a first-hand view, quite special.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in your career at Georgia Tech, how much time do you think, I mean proportionately, did you spend, you know, teaching and doing research?
Speaker 2: I would say about 70 percent of my time was spent doing research and maybe the other 60 percent of my time was spent teaching.
Speaker 1: The other 60 (laughter).  So you worked long hours, is that what you're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I, you have to understand, I enjoyed what I was doing.  So it wasn't like, there was, you know, this--there's work, and there's fun.  It was a lot of fun in the work I was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So this administrative--now, did you, I mean had you, you know, sort of campaigned to have this position in the president's office to get in, you know, and to learn about administration?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was invited.  I'm assuming that he sought recommendation, well, he did, from Dan Papp and others, of the, of his predecessor, Dan Papp's predecessor. But he interviewed me and decided that he would extend the offer.  And so I was very pleased to do that.
Speaker 1: So they kind of, they picked you out as somebody who would likely make a good candidate for--
Speaker 2: Presumably.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or--
Speaker 1: So, as a future administrator on--did you--well, you said you liked the experience, but did that take away from your research and your teaching, I mean--
Speaker 2: So that part was tough because I was working essentially 8:00 to 5:00 [o'clock] in that office.  And then after I was doing my other stuff.  So I wasn't teaching during that time--well, I shouldn't say that.  I did teach one course per year, my digital image processing course.  But the, most of the time was in working with my graduate students.  So I did that after 5:00 and sometimes on weekends and so, yeah, there were long days involved.  And at that time, I had fifteen graduate students.  So it was a lot.  It was a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did that for how long?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is basically leading right up to the position you now hold--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --at Georgia Tech.  So--
Speaker 2: Purdue.
Speaker 1: I mean at Purdue, rather, at Purdue [University], I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 26380
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about how the, how you came to Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Right, so I had just finished doing a four-year term and asked to step down from that position.  I returned to the faculty and I was very happy and everything was going well.  I received a phone call from a colleague of mine, Jan Allebach who I knew professionally from conferences, for a long time.  I mean we, we go way back.  He, in fact, was very active in the same filter bank area that I was in.  So we shared lots of common interests, and he was a person that I trusted.  And so he told me about the opening of this new position for head of electrical and computer engineering.  And we talked a little bit, and I told him, well, you know, I really wasn't interested in moving.  And then he called me back and he--I think he called me back three times.  And it was on the third time that he shared with me the vision that Purdue had under Martin Jischke [president of Purdue University from 2000 to 2007] and really changed my mind.  It sounded quite exciting.  And so I started to listen more, and so I agreed to enter the race, right?  And so they ended up selecting me.  I was very grateful for that.  And they flew us up to--well, flew me up for an interview to see the campus and so forth and then brought the family up to do that.  And I think that they recognized that the big sell was to make sure that my family was going to be comfortable relocating because families vote on these kinds of things.  And so they sent the Purdue plane to the Charlie Brown Airport to pick up the family.  And this was really impressive for the kids.  The Charlie Brown Airport was maybe about a ten-minute drive from my house.  It's a small, private, commuter airport.  So there aren't any of the hassles of going to a big airport.  You drive in.  We parked fifty feet from where the plane landed.  There was no security to go through, walked our stuff onto the plane.  The pilot flew us there.  We landed at the Purdue Airport.  We were met there by colleagues at the end.  So anyway, the kids were just, they just thought this was the greatest thing in the world.  I think they were sold.  And then the other thing is they had a chance to meet the kids of the faculty members.  So they felt at home.  So that's how I was recruited to Purdue.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26381
Speaker 1: And, now, Purdue [University, West Lafayette] has, one of the first things, I think was a capital development--I mean a project to build a new facility, right?
Speaker 2: So there was a capital campaign--
Speaker 1: Campaign, yeah.
Speaker 2: --going on, right.  And this was the largest capital campaign Purdue had ever had.  They, it was a one and a half billion dollar [$1.5 billion], plus, campaign, great leadership in this area.  It was a distributed campaign, which meant that all of the departments and colleges had a fund-raising goal.  So I came in there with a fund-raising goal--I inherited a fund-raising goal of a hundred and ten million dollars [$110 million], which was kind of scary.  So if you had to ask, you know, what was the, what kept me up at night?  That was it.  I took over from Kent Fox [ph.], and at that time, I believe fifty-seven million [dollars] had been raised.  So we had a ways to go.  And I was very fortunate to have a crackerjack development officer, Margarita Contreni.  We made many development calls together.  It was really a joy working with her.  It's wonderful to have a great development staff and, and others.  And so we were successful at the end.  In fact, we came in at 120 million [dollars].
Speaker 1: Okay, so the new College of Engineering was opened in 2008, right?
Speaker 2: The Armstrong Building?
Speaker 1: I guess that's what we're talking about.  I'm thinking.  Is that--
Speaker 2: That I'd have to check.  So, so the College of Engineering has a new building, the Armstrong Building.  I wasn't involved in raising funds for that.  I was involved in raising funds for the electrical and computer engineering's new building, which is called Lang Hall.
Speaker 1: Lang Hall, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that one is still being, in the process--so we finished the campaign--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the building is still in the process of being built.
Story_ID: 26382
Speaker 1: In 2009, after serving for six years as head of electrical and computer engineering [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], the position of dean of the graduate school came open.  And it seemed like a wonderful challenge to me.  And I really became excited about this position.  And so I applied, and I was fortunate that I was asked to take on that position.  So I became dean in February of 2009.  And as part of that, my philosophy is I always like to get involved in the national organizations associated with the position, right?  So as head of electrical and computer engineering, that was the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association.  I was active in that.  Now, that I took the role of dean, I became active in the Council of Graduate Schools [CGS].  And so one of the, the Council of Graduate Schools has a staff of about thirty.  They're located in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and it consists really of all the deans of graduate education throughout the country, pretty much, I mean almost all of them.  And there are different projects that they fund.  And one of the major issues that we all have is completion.  Not everyone who enters a Ph.D. program graduates, and, in fact, the number CGS was reporting, 57 percent of the students, according to their report, who entered into a Ph.D. program, graduated.  The rest of them did not.  And so the question was, how do you understand the factors that are involved in student success, students completing Ph.D. programs?  CGS funded a study.  We were fortunate enough to participate in that, and so, through that, we learned a lot about our programs.  We were able to do surveys and various types of assessments.  We were also funded to do a similar survey and assessment project at the master's degree level, which is ongoing now.  We're about to finish that.
Speaker 2: What was the biggest obstacle, I guess, to completion for students?  What did you find?
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of us did assessments and surveys on--we did those on our campus and our colleagues did them on other campuses.  And they've been done nationally.  And it's interesting that when we compare notes, we all come up with the same answers.  The two most critical factors are financial resources and mentoring.  So the financial resources, you know, you have the money that you have.  So that one is harder to address.  What it says is to try to perhaps increase fund-raising and do what you can to provide more support to students.  But the mentoring is something that we can address.   And that just deals with interactions between professors and Ph.D. students.  And so we're working very hard to work with faculty members to be good mentors.  And there's kind of a checklist of things that we've put together that you can do that will help students complete the program.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, from what I understand, the graduate school here at Purdue is ranked among the best in the country, under your leadership?
Speaker 1: Well, I wouldn't want to take credit (laughter), I'd love to take credit for it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We're gonna give you all the credit (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --but I just not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I understand, but I think 'Newsweek' and some other, there have been polls taken and--
Speaker 1: So what perhaps is slightly more accurate to say is individual graduate programs are ranked by different agencies.  'U.S. News and World Report' is perhaps the one that is most known.  And they will rank programs in engineering.  They'll rank programs in education, in management and so on.  The NRC is another one, National Research Council.  They also do a ranking of Ph.D. programs, and they've just finished theirs a few years ago.  So these are different ranking organizations.  And Purdue has done well.  We've done--we've had many programs that have faired very well in that.
Speaker 2: What's the strength of Purdue's graduate program?
Speaker 1: I think that as in any university, you--well, few, maybe there are some universities that are uniformly strong in everything, but usually there are some areas of strength that you can point to.  Purdue, historically, has been strong in engineering.  It's known for engineering.  It's been very strong in agriculture.  There've been a number of science programs, chemistry, for example.  There's some specialty areas that are very well regarded.  And there're pockets of excellence like that in Purdue throughout the entire system.  So, we've, we're trying to focus, and we're trying to leverage those things to strengthen the programs that we have.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, and--well, what are your, you know, future, you know, I guess the future immediate goals, I mean of the graduate program here at Purdue?  What do you see that has to--that needs to be done?
Speaker 1: Well, I think we have a strategic plan which we put together, which is, you know, it's a nice thick document which has a fairly long list of things that we would like to do.  High on my priority list is to improve the completion rate at the Ph.D. level and reduce time to degree.  Right now it takes six and a half years or so for students to graduate with a Ph.D. degree.  I'd like to get that down to five years.  So that's one of the things that's on my target list.  The other thing that is an opportunity for us that I think is very exciting and would like to get my hands around, we have five campuses, as I mentioned before.  West Lafayette is the main campus.  This is the research campus.  We have five other campuses that are called regional campuses.  And their mission is supposed to be to serve the community, the region.  So the students in the region and the local industry in the region.  Historically, we have not worked efficiently together.  We've not collaborated and communicated.  And so what we're trying to do right now is to develop a system-wide strategic plan to serve all of the students in the state as well as the local industry.  And if we do that, we will serve all of our students better because we'll be able to leverage resources on all of the campuses.
Story_ID: 26383
Speaker 1: Are you still doing research?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not fifteen students worth.  I'm working with two students right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're working on that language learning project.  We're doing work in accent detection and synthesis and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It's good that your students--I mean so many people involved as engineers and scientists get involved in administration, and they don't do their research anymore.  They don't--it sloughs off.  But you're still involved.
Speaker 2: And that's because it's fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I, I really do feel fortunate that I'm in a position where I can do things that are fun.  And certainly, working with the students and doing this kind of research work is, it's more like play than work.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 26384
Speaker 1: So do you see yourself as becoming a [university] president one day or are you, is that something that's on the, in the future?
Speaker 2: You know, it's possible, but I will say right now, I am enjoying what I am doing.  I think if I were to change positions to a provost or a president's position, I probably would not enjoy it as much.  And the reason why I say that is because right now, I have the free time to be proactive in a number of projects that are really exciting.  And I don't have to spend as much of my time handling emergencies that come up.  When you're a president, there's a higher percentage of your time reacting to things that are beyond your control, but things that need to be addressed.  And so I'm enjoying this balance that I have right now, and I know that that same positive balance does not exist at the provost level and the president's level.
Story_ID: 26385
Speaker 1: Now, what's the landscape look like for minority students now in the sciences here at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: I think the opportunities are tremendous in the STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] fields.  If we look at projections, the expected job growth and so forth, all of those indicators are very positive.  So we are pushing STEM education.  We have had moderate success in terms of attracting underrepresented minorities at the undergraduate level.  We have some very good people in place here working in programs.  Our numbers at the undergraduate level have oscillated up and down just a little bit.  At the graduate level, I'm happy to say that we've had a steady increase of numbers of underrepresented minority students entering our graduate programs.  And we hope to continue that.  And the way in which we do is with outreach programs.  We try to establish connections with other schools that have high underrepresented minority populations, build bridges, reach out and try to attract students to come here.  We bring them on campus.  We show them the campus.  We try to get them connected with faculty members who might be doing work that these students are interested in.  So these are the kinds of programs that we have in place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26386
Speaker 1: And we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you certainly want students who come here [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] to get a good education and to receive good mentoring.  So that part is very important.  We also recognize it's important to have a strong support of community.  It's very easy to have someone who is in a minority population come to a large campus, majority campus like this and feel isolated.  And so one of the areas that we can help is to help people network, to build a community here so that people feel comfortable.  And I think that we're doing a reasonable job of doing that.  But, you know, there's plenty of room for growth.
Speaker 1: What are some of the programs, is there a cultural center or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Black Culture Center is one.  We have the BGSA, the Black Graduate Student Association group which is a student-led group.  And they have a banquet, a signature banquet.  I would say that of the student organizations, that group probably has "the" most impressive student banquet of any student group.  And they're pretty active.  One of the activities that they do is something called Graduate School 101, Grad 101.  It's designed to show undergraduate students what graduate school is about.  It's open to the entire community.  So, you know, all students are invited.  And attendance is really very good, one of the very successful programs that they have.
Speaker 1: Good, good, okay.
Speaker 2: We have a variety of different--there's the Minority Engineering Programs office, run by Virginia Womack.  She's been doing that now for a number of years.  That's a very successful, strong program.  They have a summer boot camp for students who are coming in, to prepare them to be successful once they enter--this is at the undergraduate level.  And other colleges, here it's in engineering, but in science, they have programs they have programs that are like that to help minority students.
Story_ID: 26387
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of upward, underrepresented minorities, how does your faculty look?
Speaker 2: Our numbers, numerically are improving.  We would like them to be improving at a faster rate than they are.  But I'm glad that they're improving.  So that part is good.  I think we're starting to change the culture.  We have an advance grant.  We received an advance grant from the National Science Foundation [NSF].  And one of the things that we--I'm talking about everybody, right, has learned from that, is there is something called cultural bias that can be in play in hiring committees where sometimes, underrepresented minorities--and not intentionally, but aren't given fair consideration.  Let me give you one example.  There was a study, and we use this as a point of discussion when we have these groups, hiring committee workshops.  There was a study, and there're a bunch of studies like this, where you can take resumes of students--of applicants for a position, and you can assign African-sounding names to half of them and white-sounding names to the other half.  And then you pass them out and you distribute them, and you ask a community to score them.  Do you wanna interview this student or do you not want to interview this student?  And the group that has the African-sounding names doesn't do as well as the ones with--and you know, this is, this is, these are blind.  These are just resumes, right?  You just know what you have there.  And you can mix them up, and you get the same result.  So this is an example of this unconscious bias that, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But you said the names are randomly assigned, and it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that the CVs--
Speaker 1: --has nothing to do with, necessarily--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it has nothing to do with, the quality is the same, okay?  The only difference is one has African-sound names and the other one has white-sounding names.  But the results are split by, by that factor, which shouldn't be the case.  So the point there is that when you're on a search committee, you have to be on guard that you don't bring in any of these kinds of subconscious biases.  And it affects not only minority applicants but also women.  And so having people educated about this has had a result in terms of how our search committees have functioned.  And that's one of the reasons why, I think, recently we're doing much better.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would you say that racial bias is sort of an unconscious activity that people are swimming along in a murky, you know--I mean they just don't necessarily--it's not like it's, as deliberate as it is cultural--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That's correct.  I think the more significant factor is where it's not deliberate.  And, you know, the interesting about it, it's not like white people are discounting black people or men are favoring men and women are favoring women.  It doesn't break down that way.  This is just the entire population is doing this subconsciously because you have this idea in your mind, like a doctor should be a man, not a woman.  And you don't think about this.  And so the point is, when you do recognize that you could have a subconscious bias, then you can rethink and you can revisit your selection.  And that process has made a change in terms of who we've hired and who we've brought in for final interviews.
Story_ID: 26388
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've accomplished to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would go back and change or do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Ooh, wow.  So certainly, there have been lots of mistakes that I've made along the way, and that I, you know, would love to change.  But I think overall I, I am happy with this move.  When I decided to move, when the family decided to move up here, we weren't exactly sure how it would turn out.  I mean we thought it would be positive.  But it turns out, it's been really very, very good.  The school system in Atlanta [Georgia], as you start to get into the high school system, is not very good.  And so the education for the kids was really a strength.  I mean that worked out very, very well.  I think overall, we're very happy that we made the move.  So I wouldn't wanna change that part of it.  You know, there're probably some other things that one might change.  I mean now, I know, for example, in hindsight (laughter), I could have done a better job in some of the fund-raising.  I know the dispositions of some of our donors and what they're resonance frequencies are.  So knowing that now, you know, I would have been more efficient.  But, you know, any time it's hindsight, of course, you're gonna be able to do a better job.
Story_ID: 26389
Speaker 1: If you can look back over your career again, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, I think that--well, certainly, in the digital signal processing community, it's probably the sub-band filter banks that we designed, exactly reconstructing filter banks, the wavelets.  You know, my name is attached with the Smith-Barnwell [after Mark Smith and his Ph.D. thesis advisor, Thomas Barnwell] filters.  So that one is, I think, probably fairly well known.  The directional decompositions with [Robert] Bamberger, that's receiving a lot of attention.  So I would say that.  I think in terms of administratively as a department head [Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Purdue University], I've been on the ECEDHA, which is the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association.  This is our national organization.  I've been the one who's been developing the survey tool for that.  And so that allows for the department heads to share data and so on.  And so that's ongoing, and I think that's been very useful.  Now, I'm starting to work with the Council of Graduate Schools.  And I hope to do something that has impact with them, but I'm just starting with the Council of Graduate Schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, as a fencer, do you have a particular distinction as an African American fencer?
Speaker 2: Well, there are a number of African Americans who have been in Olympic games and who have been national champions.  So that part isn't a unique distinction.  But in signal processing, I'm the only fencer (laughter), that I know of in that community, which is kind of nice.  And I'll tell you a story.  There was, the fiftieth anniversary of the Signal Processing Society was a few years ago, somewhere around 1996.  And the torch--or maybe it was 1997 or thereabouts.  And, of the--I was running with the torch.  And the organizers of this, this fiftieth anniversary apparently found this out.  So the fiftieth edition booklet that they put out for the presentation included all of the giants in signal processing.  But then there's me in there, and the reason why I was in there was because I was the only signal processing person who was carrying an Olympic torch.  So I was rather flattered by that, until I realized that among all these distinguished people, I was the only one in that volume who wasn't wearing pants, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 26390
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  Now, you've got like--you've mentioned three children, I think, in this discussion--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --two sons, and a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right, so I had three children and they were all born in Atlanta [Georgia].  Making this change up to Indiana was somewhat challenging for them.  They are warm-weather people.  And coming to a climate where you have snow wasn't so easy for them.  I always tell the story about Stephen, my oldest son, when we first got here.  He was to start going to Harrison High School, and the bus--we were staying in an apartment at that time, and the bus stopped maybe about a hundred feet in front of the door of the apartment.  And I was telling Stephen, now, when the bus comes, you know, you just walk up there and hop on the bus, and you go.  And you can see the bus coming.  And he says, well, dad, would you drive me to the bus stop and wait?  That way I can sit inside and to be warm.  And I'm saying, well, Stephen, if you look at the window, you see, you can see when the bus comes, and then you can just walk to the door.  It was this cold thing that we had to sort out.  Well, I didn't wanna be driving him to the bus stop every single day, so we had to kind of work through that a little bit.  But we got over that barrier, and all of them now are, I think, used to the colder weather.  That was one transition.  So the kids are now, they're older.  Stephen has graduated, Kevin has graduated, and Jennifer is about to graduate.  Stephen is now working at IUPY.  So he's part of the outreach--campus outreach program at IUPY.  Kevin graduated with a degree in biology, and he's rethinking what he's going to do for a career right now.  He was looking at dentistry, and so we're, we're looking at that right now.  Jennifer is a senior in high school--in college at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana].  She's here in Purdue.  She's gonna be finishing up.  She decided to major in art, which is about as orthogonal as you can get to engineering.  And so we'll see what she's going to do.  But she thinks she's going to go into a campus ministry activity.  So, I will find more about the specifics, I think, over the next couple of months.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you how you met your wife and that sort of thing, but can you tell us?
Speaker 2: But of us, my wife and I, were students at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta] in the early--well, the late 19--1979 is when we met.  And we met at a function for graduate students.  And we ended up getting married in--two years after that in 1981.  So she was getting her master's degree in City Planning, and I was working on my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 26391
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't discussed that I need to raise before--oh, I didn't ask you if your--now, did your parents [Joan Smith and Windsor Smith] et a chance to see you, you know, get your terminal degree and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes, so they were there for, certainly high school and the MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduation, master's degree and Ph.D. degree.  And, yes, my grandmother passed away in '81' [1981], so she wasn't there to see my Ph.D. degree, but everyone else was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I read an interesting story in the research that, about you and your parents at the Olympics watching the highlights of the other matches (laughter) determine, you know, you know, strategy, I guess, you know, playing the replays of the other matches and watches those at the Olympics, is that accurate?  Or watching the other fencing matches at the Olympics on television, you know, as they broadcast them so you could have some idea who you were facing?
Speaker 2: Right, right, so I think I was the one who was perhaps the most interested in watching fencing stuff.  They--, as a fencer, I have to be careful.  My wife tells me this.  When fencers get together, as a group, let's say for dinner, and she's been--she joined me, for example, at the World Championships in Rome [Italy] where she was the only spouse in--, among all these fencers.  And all we talked about was fencing.  And so she was used to kicking me under the table, when we start to do that.  So I have to remember not to do that.  But it's very easy when you're a fencer and you're watching things on television, you can get engrossed in this.  And someone who's, doesn't fence before, they may not appreciate it at the same level.  So my family watches it a little bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just thought it was just kind of a, it just spoke to the dedication your parents had to you that they would sit down and watch fencing with you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 26392
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think my answer would be the same as the answer from a lot of people.  I'd like to be remembered as someone who made a difference, someone who made a change that had a positive effect on people.  And that can come at several levels.  But something that made a positive change.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 26393
Speaker 1: All right, so this is, this is my wife, Cynthia and me.  This is a wedding picture.  We were married in August, 1981.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: All right, so this is a baby picture.  This must have been 1956 or 1957.  And that is me.  I should say that is "I."  But people don't talk that way anymore.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture from elementary school.  I believe this is first grade, so I'd have been six years old.
Speaker 1: And I believe I am nine years old in this picture or am I seven?  No, wait, I think this one's seven.  I think I'm seven in this one.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the first vacation that we took as a family out of the country.  That's my middle son, so going from left to right, I'm on the end on the left.  In the middle is Kevin and my wife is on the right.  And we're in Santiago, Chile.
Speaker 2: And this is the rest of the family in Santiago, Chile--oophs, we're missing Stephen.  But going from left to right, my daughter, Jennifer, next to her is my wife, Cynthia--oophs.  I'm in the middle and Kevin is on the left--on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So we have Thanksgiving dinners over my wife's parents' house, and this is one of those Thanksgiving dinners.
Speaker 1: Okay, this would be 2002 when I was applying or being recruited to take the position of electrical and computer engineering department head.  And that's the family getting ready to board the Purdue [University] plane.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) everybody by name for me?
Speaker 1: Oh, I can do that for you.  Going from left to right is Kevin, I'm in the back, next to me is Stephen, then Jennifer and then my wife, Cynthia.
Speaker 2: Okay, because we haven't seen Stephen.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: This is my mother [Joan Smith] and father [Windsor Smith] fiftieth wedding anniversary celebration.  This was in 1999.  Going from left to right, is my wife, Cynthia, my Aunt Dorothy, my cousin, Barbara, my father at the head of the table, my cousin, Ray, Stephen, my oldest son and Jennifer.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my graduation from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  I'm receiving my Ph.D. degree.
Speaker 2: Okay, and about what year is that?
Speaker 1: 1984.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's right.  I knew that.
Speaker 1: This is my high school graduation which you probably know from the 1960s attire there.  It looks like 1960s--it's actually 1974.  Oh, going from left to right, my father, my mother.  I'm standing there with the water board, and then my Aunt Dorothy.
Speaker 2: Name your father and your mother for us.
Speaker 1: Windsor Smith and Joan Smith, Dorothy Smith.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is my wife, Cynthia.  This is probably 1981.
Speaker 2: This is Christmastime at the Smith house.  I'm being joined by Robin Reed, a dear friend who is on the left, and my father is sitting there in the middle, sandwiched between a bunch of gifts.  The rest of the family is out of the field of view, but we're all there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That same day [Christmas].  I'm sitting on the left, and my mother is in the middle, surrounded by presents.
Speaker 1: This was my first international competition on the international [fencing] squad, representing the United States.  This was in Mestre, Italy and we were fencing the Italian team.  And this is around 1979, if I remember.
Speaker 2: This is my first parade.  I'm sitting in a car.  This is in Atlanta.  This would be 1984 before the Olympic games [in Los Angeles, California], and this particular car had the local Olympians in it.  Sam Graddy [American football player], and I've forgot the other one.  I'm here in the middle, in between these two.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was the World University games in Mexico City [Mexico] in 1979, that was my entrance pass.
