Story_ID: 12748
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer with the HistoryMakers.  And the videographer is Mike Humphries.  Sir, would you please state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Howard Saffold, H-O-W-A-R-D, S-A-F-F-O-L-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 5, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: We're at the HistoryMakers headquarters, 1900 S. Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm CEO of a community-based organization at this point, called The Positive Anti-Crime Thrust [Inc.], and I'm a retired Chicago police officer.
Story_ID: 12749
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, soup.  I like seafood soup, vegetable soup--
Speaker 1: Why--I usually don't do this, but why soup?
Speaker 2: Well, soup is probably one of the easiest things for me to get full on.  And generally, it's, it's sufficient for a meal for me, although I eat more than soup, but my favorite is the soup.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'd probably say blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Late spring, early summer.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true."
Story_ID: 12750
Speaker 1: Can you state the names of your parents and spell their names for us?
Speaker 2: My father is Dewitt Saffold, D-E-W-I-T-T, S-A-F-F-O-L-D.  My mother is Eva Saffold, E-V-A, S-A-F-F-O-L-D.
Speaker 1: And do you know when your mother and father met?  Do you have any stories about that?
Speaker 2: Well, no, not--they, they met as teenagers in Mississippi, back in the 1930s.  And they got married during that time, probably 1934, '35, moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1934 or '35.  Were they--did they both live in the same town in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my father lived closer to Lexington, and my mother lived in Holmes County.  And what I understand, it's a 15, 20 mile difference in terms of where they lived.
Speaker 1: And you were born--what's your birth date?
Speaker 2: January 26, 1941.
Speaker 1: And can you give me the names of your siblings and the order of their birth?
Speaker 2: Well, the oldest was Joe Saffold, born in 1937; the next one would be Jesse Mabel Safford, born in 1938; Henry Saffold born in 1939, and the next one would be Ella Saffold born in 1943, and then Jerry Saffold in 1945, and then Herman Saffold in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're between the--you're second to the youngest, I guess.
Speaker 2: I'm right in the middle.  I got two boys and a girl over and two boys and a girl under.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wasn't paying attention then (laughter).  Can you tell us, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he started out I guess being a, a steel mill worker.  He got, his health got bad as a result of the steel mill.  He then started to sell Fuller Products.  And he started his own little restaurant.  So he was an entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: Now, is this in Mississippi or here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, he came to Chicago almost as a young kid, you know, as a teenager.  This is in Chicago, yes.  I think everybody from Mississippi started farming first (laughter).  I'm not sure that he was a farmer, but he came as a young man.
Speaker 1: Okay, the occupation he stayed with the longest was probably what?
Speaker 2: Well, he--actually, he died as an Inhalation Therapist, which he started doing much, much later in his career.  He, he started to do that probably in the, in the '70s [1970s].  And he did that for about 20-some years.
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  What did she do?
Speaker 2: Basically, a housewife.  With that many kids, she was a housewife.
Story_ID: 12751
Speaker 1: What are your memories of your childhood?  What were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the neighborhood, you know?  What do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born on the near North Side of Chicago [Illinois], which would have been classified as an industrial strip.  Right in front of my house was a construction company called Chris Paschen Construction.  Behind my house was a Sieben's Brewery.  To the, just the north of my house was Jefferson Ice Company, and to the south of my house was White Way Sign [and Maintenance] Company.  So I had a whole lot of industry directly in, in the environment I lived in.  The street that I lived on, Clybourn Avenue, had a big red streetcar that came down it every day.  So the sounds were very distinct.  You knew when the air hammer was working.  You knew, you could smell the brewery.  You could see the White Way Sign Company's big fluorescent light.  Back in those days, it was quite a scene.  And, and an ice company, where people drove in and out all year long buying ice cubes and blocks of ice.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: The early part of my school years was spent on the Near North Side.  I went to Manierre Elementary School, which was about 1420 North Hudson in what we call the Cabrini Green area now.  I went to [Robert A.] Waller High School for a year.  And then my family moved to the West Side, and I ended up going to [David G.] Farragut High School on the West Side of Chicago.  And that's where I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Was your family very close?  I mean did you all have a pretty good home life?
Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, you didn't have any choice.  You couldn't wander around (laughter).  You were either in the group or you were not in the group.  So, yeah, we were very close.
Speaker 1: And the community, was it an all black community or was it mixed?
Speaker 2: Not really.  We had--the school that I went to was a, I guess what you call a microcosm of, of America, you know.  We had every white ethnic group, Polish, Italian, Irish, Jewish attending there.  We had Latinos.  We had Chinese and Japanese.  And, of course, the African Americans were the smallest of the population in that immediate area, but it was pretty representative in terms of population.
Speaker 1: What kind of things would you do as a child growing up in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had, we had a lot of things to do.  There was--we were in close proximity to Chicago Park District, Stanton Park and Seward Park were close by.  We were close to the Isham [Memorial] Y, YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] at North Avenue and Ogden.  That was a close-by place.  We had the Olivet Institute that was close by.  It was recreational.  We weren't that far from the Oak Street Beach.  We could walk to it.  We weren't that far from Riverview [Park].  We could get there, but now when you start talking about money, well, that was probably one of the largest amusement parks in the, in the area that we lived in for sure.  And we were creative youngsters like most people.  We could make a scooter by using worn-out roller skates (laughter).  We could make a bow and arrow with cut-off tree limbs and, and string and bamboo poles.  We could do a lot of things as young kids.  So it was always a lot to do.  There was also a rubber factory close by, Hines Rubber Factory--well, [Edward] Hines Lumber [Company], and, and they had a rubber factory next to it.  So using rubber bands for sling shots and things like that, I mean we had, we had enough to keep us occupied.  It wasn't boring.  We had at least three theaters in the area that were within walking distance.  So, you know, we were in a--there was a very strong Italian presence in our local community.  So there were annual Italian feasts that--like outdoor carnivals during the summertime that everybody sort of participated in.  So it was not bad.
Speaker 1: Was there a specific, I mean another name to the neighborhood other than just the Near North Side or was it--did you have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I never knew that.  I never knew the, the neighborhood name.  It was just the 'hood (laughter).  I mean we didn't call it the 'hood then, it was just the neighborhood, you know.  But we did have the low end and the high end as we called it.  But I never really knew that to be the, the greater Lawndale area as it was called when I first moved to the West Side.  It was the Douglas Park area.  So I don't think we had a name over there.  We were close to, to several, several areas of the city, but it wasn't, it wasn't a neighborhood nomenclature that I was familiar with.
Story_ID: 12752
Speaker 1: Were any other significant adults around, like did you know your grandparents or--
Speaker 2: No, I never met grandparents on either side.  Neither of them ever moved to Chicago [Illinois].  My, my father's [Dewitt Saffold] parents [Henry and Mary Randle Saffold] were both deceased while he was still a very young teenager.  My mother's [Eva Saffold] parents died in her early 20s.  So I never got to meet them.  I'm told that I was there once as a newborn, shortly after I was born, but I never got to know them as, as grandparents.
Speaker 1: So do you think that was a reason for your father moving to Chicago, because his parents had passed?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, when I listened to him talk, there were several young men in the South where he came out of that were sick and tired of just the traditional Southern treatment of young, black men.  So they headed North for, for the Promised Land everybody was talking about.  So he just packed his stuff up and moved, and I don't think there was anything to stop him.  I don't know that it was directly related to the loss of his parents, but that was nothing to stop him from doing that.
Speaker 1: Did he ever go back a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, he--eventually, when we were, we were young, him and his buddies would take trips back when they'd get a car that could hold up for the trip, you know.  They didn't go training riding, they went in cars.  And I, I'd say, you know, they would go once or twice a year when I was real young.  And as he got older, as we got older, I think the finances for that kind of trip became more and more scarce.  But, yes.
Speaker 1: So, so what kind of a person was your father?  What was he like?  What was he like?  What are you're your memories of you father?  Did he tell you stories of life in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: My father was--I would just say a very mild-mannered, extremely sensitive in terms of what was going on around him, world, current events.  He was, he was concerned about what was going on in the world.  He didn't go to the military because he had kids, but he talked a lot about those--you know, I was born 1941 so World War II went on while I was still getting old enough to go to school, so there was a lot of talk about the war.  He was basically a guy that wished he had more education, wished he had more resources, a very high principled man, very family oriented.  He spent a lot of time teaching things that, that he thought we needed to know in terms of what the world was about; very excited about us learning the salesmanship of Fuller Products.  He taught me to carry a suitcase full of Fuller Products at about 12, 13 years old.  No-nonsense guy, though.  He didn't--I never heard him curse.  So (chuckle), never heard the guy curse; never heard him really go way up with his voice unless he was hollering at one of his kids, you know.  So he was a pretty decent fellow.
Speaker 1: He sounds like a pretty strong (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, to me he was a strong image.  I mean he had to interact with the neighborhood we lived in, the school we went to was predominantly white.  And he had to interact with people about treatment of his children and he, you know, he--I learned a lot about how to negotiate with store owners and negotiate with people at Maxwell Street.  We used to do a lot of stuff at--Maxwell Street was in the immediate area.  So just learning the art of negotiating and interacting with different cultures and interacting with, with people based on--I mean he--to be a non-formally educated guy, he knew human nature pretty well.  He spent a lot of time studying people.  I thought he was an educated psychologist because he could, he could, he could talk his way in and out of things in a very comprehensive, decent way.
Speaker 1: So were you and your father close?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Now, your mother, now, did--what are your impressions of your mother and reflections on her?
Speaker 2: Well, she was, she was the one that would declare war first on behalf of her children (laughter).  She, she was a real strong matriarch in terms of what her principles were.  She had brought a lot more of the farm, farming attitude with her cause she had a large family.  And they, they stayed on a farm.  And she, she got experiences that I don't think he got.  I don't think he spent as much time on a farm, and he didn't have siblings like she did.  She came from a big family of sisters and brothers.  So, she was a, a different spirit.  They were a perfect match though.  Initially, they, they had different personalities, but you knew they both cared about you so, you know, she was very close to us also.
Story_ID: 12753
Speaker 1: What kind of a young man were you, in school and in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I was like excited at three about going to school cause I had brothers and sisters already going.  So school was always a very attractive experience that I kept looking forward to.  It, you know, when I got to the elementary school level, it was all studying, trying to be a high achiever and competing with the ethnicity of the, the classroom and stuff like that.  And so my first 8 years I was, I was flying high.  I did real good.  I didn't in trouble until I started trying to go to high school (laughter).  But, yeah, my K through 8 was very, very exciting to me.  I learned--you know, back in those days, I don't know how it was in predominantly black schools, but in the school that I was in, we used to compare notes with our cousins who lived on the opposite side of the street and went to a predominantly black school.  But we read things like Scholastic Magazines.  And you were actually looking at what was going on in the world in 4th and 5th grade, you know.  I mean, you were talking about national budgets and stuff like that.  It was, it was, you know, and they, they were introducing you to classical music and, you know, it was, it was almost like you were, you were looking for a television set before they even created it because they, they talked about it in, in the text, you know, this coming soon.  You know, everything was futuristic in the schools that I was going to.  So, it was, it was quite a contrast in terms of what--
Speaker 1: What was going on in the other schools?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, all I'm saying is, it, it seemed as if, even that early, you could see the difference in the textbooks that we were bringing home, the, the newness of the books that we had and the used product that my cousin and those guys (laughter) were getting exposed to.  I mean it--even the level of conversation.  I mean you know, you, you--we were talking about places.  And these guys were talking about incidents as young kids, you know.  It was like another, another kind of spirit when you say, what went on in your school today as opposed to what I--we had some very interesting discussions in terms of how, how disruptive an environment could be, just across the street and down the road.  I think it was an early, early indicating that there was double standards.  I mean we were, as kids, we had to go to certain schools because of the--our school had burned down, part of it had burned down.  So we had to go to a Catholic school for certain classes during the day.  And so we had to learn catechism and stuff like that.  None of my cousins knew what we were talking about.  They didn't know about cata, catechism and stuff.  But it just kind of broadened your horizons a little bit.  And like I said, we had the, we had, we had Japanese and Chinese and Irish and Polish individuals whose parents seemed like traditional ethnic cultures.  So we had bake sales in the school, we might have 15 different kind of cookies up there (laughter).  So it was another kind of ballgame.  It was a very interesting experience to, to know, first of all, that you're poorer than everybody in the school.  But in terms of academic achievement, you had to compete cause it was mandatory.
Speaker 1: And so you were a good student?
Speaker 2: I was an excellent student.  I told you I, till the 8th grade, all E's.  I mean I didn't fool around because my father [Dewitt Saffold] had us doing competition kinds of things with spelling bees and reading and stuff like that.  And I could actually out-perform the siblings that were right over me.  My older brother was a little sharper, but I could give my brother [Henry D. Saffold] and sister [Jessie Mabel Saffold] right over me a little contest every now and then.  I mean I, I was fascinated by long words.  I loved spelling; I loved reading at that time.  Again, I wasn't tainted yet (laughter); still, you know, very education-oriented, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about high school.  Well, let's go back in grade school.  Who were your favorite teachers?  Did you have a favorite teacher?  Was there anyone there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, there were, there were a lot of them.  There were a lot of them, and back in those days I think the quality of teachers--although they, you know--the ones who would be outstanding were more the ones who had an overt resentment towards you.  And that was just one or two.  You could almost tell.  They didn't, they didn't really care about you.  I had a, I had a lot of dental problems as a kid, and the dentist didn't want to be bothered with you.  Or you could tell when you, when you got in there, and he started fooling around with you, you know.  But the gym teacher that I had as a, a grade-school student had had my older brothers and my older sister.  So they kind of knew the family.  They were looking forward to the, they'd, they'd have stories about what your older brothers and sisters did.  Music teacher, you know, the guy wanted to teach you all kind of ethnic songs, you know.  You'd learn a Mexican song; you'd learn an Irish song, you know, things that you remembered.  Reading and, and math and arithmetic as they called it back in those days, you know, it was, it was kind of exciting to have the, the teacher pay particular attention to how well you're doing and spend time with you after the regular school day and actually keep you late and talk to you about where your deficiencies are and stuff like that.  I did pretty good in, in grade school.  It was, it was--I think, as  a matter, some of my friends said, if you hadn't gotten that one, you probably wouldn't have had any education (laughter).  But it was a pretty, pretty sufficient preparation for higher education.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a rewarding experience in grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it, it was exciting.  I mean the, the downside of it was, you didn't, you know, you didn't have the clothes.  You didn't have the, the extra milk money, you know, that kind of stuff.  You know, back in those days, you had to bring 6 or 7 cents for the week to get a bottle of milk every day.  And if you didn't have it, it was embarrassing, (laughter) you know.  You, you know, you wore hand-me-downs.  So you were always struggling a little bit with how you looked cause most of the, the students there parents were in education.  And there was a lot of school teachers, a lot of self-employed people, like that.  So it was, it was a struggle, you know.  We're from a big family so you, you notice your, your--the difference in how you dress and stuff like that, you know.  Everybody kind of looked around it, but, you know, it was like those little poor kids from over there on Clybourn, you know.  But other than that, the, the quality of the education was right there.
Story_ID: 12754
Speaker 1: So what was high school like?
Speaker 2: High school got more interesting.  I didn't know anything about racism.  I didn't, I mean we had, we had friends and associates that, you know, it was just, they just played, you know.  We didn't--nothing about no race, but once I graduated and went [Robert A.] Waller High School, which was on the Near North Side [Chicago, Illinois], Orchid and Armitage, you know, but that was--you were, you were out of the 'hood at that point, you know.  You had to walk through enclaves of, of ethnicity to get to Waller.  And so the first year of high school was, was very interesting.  I mean it was, it was the--my first introduction to what happens when, when little gangs begin to form.  I mean there were, there were white gangs.  I remember some of the names, the Cleveland Aces and the Deuces.  I mean these guys had 14, 15-year old guys being led by 17 and 18 year-old older brothers and sisters.  And they were being taught to, to go to war, you know, with--so we had some pretty interesting run-ins at, at Waller High School.  It was a, a grade school up there that they held summer school in.  Instead of in the high school, they would open up [Philip D.] Armour Summer School.  So black kids would have to come there that weren't on my block.  These were the ones that lived on the other side of the street that went to the predominantly black schools. So we're talking in the early and middle 1950s, young kids--I'm 12, 13 years old.  I'm getting introduced to serious racial confrontation with young, white teenagers.  So that became interesting.  My parents went through a period of, of marital problems.  And I ended up transferring, going to school on the West Side of Chicago, which was--[David G.] Farragut High School in the '50s was predominantly white.
Story_ID: 12755
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about [David G.] Farragut High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I transferred to Farragut from [Robert A.] Waller [High School] in about 1955.  And, of course, that was, that was the new area for blacks migrating from the Near North Side.  Douglas Park was what it was called.  We, we bought our home from Jewish residents over--the whole community was transitioning from predominantly Jewish to African American in those years.  And Farragut was located up like the 23, 2400 block of Christiana.  So you were now outside of the, the little belt where the Jewish and black transition was, was taking place.  And you were into ethnic white again.  And the first real serious tragedy.  It was a young kid that got murdered that went to Farragut, almost during the time of Emmett Till.
Speaker 1: Is this was a black kid?
Speaker 2: A black kid got murdered on 55th and Kedzie.  He got beat to death with a hammer, while waiting on the bus transfer.  And this was like, maybe 1956 or '55--'56, right in there.  And that had a tremendous impact on that school.  I mean that, that, that began a whole era of racial incidences at this school.  I mean Farragut was, when I started there, probably 8, 10, 12 percent African American.  Then it became, you know, what it is today, predominantly Latino.  But the transition from black and Latino moving into the area was, was pretty interesting, pretty interesting time.
Story_ID: 12756
Speaker 1: But my academics suffered, you know.  I, I got--in my high school years, I began to get a little top heavy in terms of experimenting with what they called social clubs back in those days, gang activity is what it was, amounted to.  Just, you know, I always had a, a high school job, I mean after-school job.  So that really kept me out of real serious trouble.  But I always had money, and, and money and, and distractions can be problematic for a young man.  So I--
Speaker 2: Were you involved in sports at all?
Speaker 1: Well, I, I couldn't, I couldn't play sports because I always had a full-time--I had a, started out with a part-time job, but it actually became a full-time job in a plastic factory almost for three, three of the years that I was in high school.  So, and it was almost of necessity too because, you know, I was still broke.  I was still very poor.  So to not have the same dressing problem that I had at Manierre [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], it was necessary to work.  You know, you had to, you had to go to work.  So I started out with a job in my freshman year as a messenger down in the Loop, you know, delivering for A-1 Secretarial Service.  I used to carry cylinders of transcribed, you know, what do you call them--anyway, they were dicta, dictaphone tapes; bring them to secretary.  She'd transcribe them, and I'd take them back to the business.  I did that for maybe a year and a half.  And then I had to have more money, so I then graduated to a full-time job in a plastic factory.  So I never played sports.  I played the intramural stuff, you know.  You had to take gym; you had to play a little this, that and the other, but never for a team cause I was never available for practice.  Plus, I didn't weigh much, you know.  I was kind--and I wasn't that tall.  So I wasn't that heavy for basketball, football, you know.  You'd just go out there and get bumped around a little bit, but I wasn't, I wasn't athletic material back in those days.
Speaker 2: So what hours would you work?
Speaker 1: I was actually working from 4:00 to 12:00.  When I, when I got out of school in my first--well, when I transferred there, I was like about to go into the sophomore year, you know.  So I had a job that, that started at 3:30.  I would get out of school--my last class was like 2:15.  I'd catch a Kedzie bus down to the el station at--or walk down to 19th and Kedzie, and take the train downtown, get off at Dearborn and Van Buren.  And that was the building right there, 343 South Dearborn.  So I did that for--
Speaker 2: That was the Fisher Building.
Speaker 1: That was the Fisher Building, exactly.  And my aunt was a, was a housekeeper, you know, a janitor in the building.  And the secretary asked her did she know any young kid that wanted to earn--I think I was making about 13, 14 bucks a week, working 4 hours a day.  I mean it wasn't a lot of pay.  She always told me I'd get good tips if I'd just treated the business people right.  But I don't--they were all cheap.  I don't, I never did get--(laughter) I don't remember getting paid well at all.  But, yeah, I did that for about, about a year and a half.  And then my brother, my older brother, had a job at a plastic factory.  And I was about almost 17.  I was gonna be 17.  And so I started working there at 4:00 o'clock.  I had a--from 4:00 till 11:30 at night for all of my high school career.
Speaker 2: So you were busy in high school.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean, you know, I got--I learned the ethics of work early.  I mean like I said, as a, as a, as a young kid, I was carrying a Fuller [Products] cosmetic briefcase at 12 and 13 years old.  My father [Dewitt Saffold]--he was a very sick man after that steel mill turned him a loose.  His, his lungs were shot.  So he was like scraping to do what he could do.  So a door-to-door salesman, but he had to have help because he couldn't do the walking like he--up and down those stairs and stuff like that.  So I was the guy.  My other two brothers [Joe L. and Henry D. Saffold] had other kinds of jobs, so I was his guy.  So after that I just learned to work.  I mean, you know, working was--if you didn't have a job, you were, you were a ne'er-do-well in my household (laughter).  Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay, so you said you involved in--and your grades suffered--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I began to--I, you know, the, the challenge of really getting into chemistry and biology and literature and, you know, the kind of stuff that, that you needed to do to do well in high school, I ducked that kind of stuff.  I mean I, I'd come home 11:00, 12:00 o'clock at night, I was barely keeping up with, with C's, you know.  And, but I got comfortable with it cause I said, well, I'm gonna have a job when I finish this anyway.  I mean I didn't have aspirations for college after about the second year of high school.  I just kind of started looking at things as if I was gonna have a job, you know.  And a blue-collar job at that.  So, you know, it just kind of took a toll on my academic spirit, you know.  I wasn't that interested in, you know, just trying to be a high academic achiever at that point.  And little did I know, you know, I would pay much later, but, you know, that was just my thinking.  That's where my head was.  And, you know, my, my father was a stickler for, for the grades, but he was waning in terms of his ability to, to make you do well in school.  He could only encourage you to do and make sure you go, but, you know, when you came back with a course book, you know, he, he had to, he had to take into consideration that, you know, well, he's a growing boy.  He's working, and he's doing this and that.  So he started giving a little slack there because, you know, like I said--
Speaker 2: And you'd just moved into a new house, right?  I mean you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, but what had happened, the bills were not any, any less, but, you know, the, the environment demanded an economic responsibility.  So there was no money for me to come out of anybody's pocket.  I had to get my money.  So that, you know--the grades suffered.  It's as simple as that.
Story_ID: 12757
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier that your mother [Eva Saffold] and your father [Dewitt Saffold] were having some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They separated.  That's what it amounted to.  And so the, the--he had to take the, the ones who was most difficult to manage (laughter) which was, you know, like my older brother.  He had married by then.  So it was, it was three in my age group.  I was the youngest.  And she kept three, which were the youngest.  And so I went to--I had two homes, two communities to grow up in.  And I, really, I got distracted because, you know, I'm 15, 16 years old, I mean, and moving into a new neighborhood, meeting a whole lot of new people; running into some things that, that weren't over on the North Side [Chciago, Illinois] and at the same time, commuting back and forth over there with the--also.  So I had two crowds, two bus fares (laughter), two obligations for social life.  I mean all these distractions became rather pronounced as you got into your teen years.
Speaker 1: Did your mother live north or your father--
Speaker 2: She lived north, he lived west.
Story_ID: 12758
Speaker 1: When you graduated from--tell me about your graduation and what you were thinking about?
Speaker 2: Well, from grammar school, it was, it was a big deal, man.  I had a shoe string necktie, some blue suede shoes (laughter).  I was dressed to kill.  And that was my first suit that I bought.  You know, it was very exciting.  High school was another issue.  By the time I graduated from high school, I had had a very tumultuous senior year.  I had gotten suspended from school.  I had some celebrity kind of guys in my class, you know, high achieving kind of guys.  So I, you know, I just kind of--I began to feel the sting of you, you didn't do your homework; you weren't paying attention to the classes, etc.  So I spent an extra semester in high school.  You know, I said, the people thought I worked there, I had gone there so long, you know.  But, it, it was the beginning of a reality check, graduation from high school was like, what are you gonna do?  You know, what plans have you made, because I had--my aunt, I had one aunt that was pushing me to go to college and encouraging me from the standpoint of, I'll help pay for it.  You know, just go.  And I had another element saying, let's go to the military, you know.  Let's go see the world.  Let's go to the Army.  So I got a job right after high school.  I graduated in the summer, got a job in the, in the fall.  And by that winter, I was, I was signed up to go into the military.  So I, you know, I just skipped college altogether.  I didn't even talk about college.  I said, if I didn't--I wasn't prepared for those last exams in my senior year, what am I gonna look like as a freshman in somebody's college or university.  So I think I was a little intimidated and certainly wasn't, wasn't near as motivated as one would want to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, what branch of the service did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I volunteered for the United States Army.  I was what they called RA, Regular Army, very naïve about what that meant.  Me and one of my closest friends signed up on a buddy plan.  And we were together long enough to leave the recruiting station.  I didn't see him (laughter) for three years, except when we came home from basic training, you know.
Speaker 1: So they didn't tell you the truth.
Speaker 2: They tricked me, oh, yeah.  They, they tricked me big time.  They told me, you know, "Be all you can be" or something, whatever their slogan was back in those days.  And my father [Dewitt Saffold] was, you know, he was pleased about it because I was, I was a candidate for trouble if I wasn't careful.  I mean I was, I was trying things at that time.  I was, I was experimenting with the world.  And so, you know, when I decided that I wasn't gonna go to college, his next question was, what are you gonna do?  And I'm like 19 then.  And I said, well, I think I'm, I'm gonna try to the military.  And he was very pleased, you know, can't get hurt there.
Story_ID: 12759
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned being involved in the street organizations.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You want to talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know, you know, how the wannabes, we had, we had a couple of groups that were coming up in that area at that time.  Very early on, we had gangs from, coming Down East, we called Down East down in the Maxwell Street area.  Braves and the Tomahawks.  And then the competition, as you crossed coming west, you know, you had the Chaplains and the Clovers.  And these all preceded what we later learned and hear about in terms of [Conservative] Vice Lords and Blackstone Rangers.  These were the harbinger to young street organization, which was mostly athletic.  But you got into fights in, at softball games.  I did play a little softball with, with my group.  You got into fights at basketball games.  You know, I tried to play a little basketball, although I hadn't practiced any with the, with the high school experience.  So I'm out there slipping up and down the steps without any training.  Okay, so you know, it, it got to be kind of challenging because, oh, I guess, the first kid that actually got killed, I was, I was like in my third year of high school.  And a kid got stabbed to death in a, in a, at a social function, a little Friday night social function.  And that was the beginning of hard weapon involved kinds of stuff.  And the street that I was living on, the area that I lived in was just beginning to become threatening in terms of teenaged violence and young, young gang violence in a real sense.  And so, you know, everybody was kind of glad to see me leave the scene, go someplace that they might be able to, to redirect, you know, my, my attitude in that way.
Story_ID: 12760
Speaker 1: What was the Army like?
Speaker 2: The Army was like a wake-up call (laughter).  Ah, that was, that was a trip.  You got to think about a guy now coming off a block in Chicago [Illinois].  And my first stop was Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri.  But that was a very short stop.  But my basic training was in Fort Hood, Texas.  And there might have been about two or three African Americans in, in my company.  And they were from cities, you know, they weren't country boys.  And most of the white guys were country boys, and they were Southerners.  So then that was a, that was the first real experience.  I mean I must have had a fight every other day about something that had to do with race or something that had to do with recruit--I mean a, beginning--what do you call Army, I've forgotten the term, of a brand-new soldier.  Back in those days they had so many nicknames for you.  But it was, it was, it was an interesting challenge to say what does a guy from the city do in a, in a military environment, who came to the, to the table headstrong and very naïve about what the military could do with your freedom (laughter), you know.  It was just a rude awakening.  It was, it was an experience.  That first few months was the, was the kind of stuff that you, you had to make some decisions and you had to kind of come to grips with whether or not you were gonna be a responsible person or you were gonna spend a lot of time in the military and most of it bad time because that's what--I got introduced to the disciplinary system very early.  And, and it was helpful.  It was helpful in the long run.  But the initial shock was like, what have I gotten myself into?
Speaker 1: But did you stay in, did you stay in the States when you were in the service?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, actually, during the time that I was in there, they were still sending people overseas by what they called MOS, Military Occupation Status.  And so I got into clerical stuff.  And because I was in clerical stuff, I had a lot to do with personnel administration in terms of my training.  And I could actually decide where I was going because I was the one that was processing people to go overseas and back.  And so I got married right after basic training, and I decided I didn't want to go overseas.  I wanted to stay stateside.  And that's what I did.  I had a lot of transfers.  I must have been on 15 different army posts, all stateside.
Speaker 1: Did you meet your wife (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, she, oh, yeah, she [Carol Randall Saffold] was my high school sweetheart.  Yeah, she, she kept me out of a lot of trouble.  She was one of the reasons I kept a job too.  I always wanted to take her some place, always wanted to be able to afford a theater.
Speaker 1: That's an important part of your high school life.
Speaker 2: Oh, buddy, I mean, you know, if you didn't have no money to take a girl to the show, who were you?  I didn't have a car, but, you know, I've got bus fare.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're married in the military and you basically stay stateside, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I was able to bring her with me after about the first year and a half--first year.  And so I ended up spending--she had to follow me around a couple of times.  And then I got an assignment in Fort Belvoir, Virginia for the last 14, 15 months of my three-year hitch.  And so that kind of stabilized a little bit.  We lived in Washington, D.C.  I commuted back and forth.  She got a job at, at a hospital there in D.C.  She was a young nurse or beginning a nursing career.  So, you know, it started to look kind of bright.
Story_ID: 12761
Speaker 1: And just before I got out, I applied for the Metropolitan Police Department.  And it was, it was all downhill after that (laughter).
Speaker 2: While you were in D.C?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  In Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, like I said, I was, I was getting used to Washington, D.C.  They had announced a police exam.  And I had about 120 days left in the military.  I took the exam, passed the written exam with flying colors, began to get the communications and correspondence from the police department, taking me from phase A to phase B.  So finally--and on the post where I was stationed, you know, the big talk was, you know, Saffold is gonna be the police in town.  We can't go to D.C. no more.  This guy is gonna be there, you know.  And that was my first introduction to discrimination in the police department.  I, I took a physical exam and the guy told me that I didn't have six natural or filled molars.  Now, the Army had, had so much dental work on me I was, like I had a false tongue almost, you know.  They had pulled half my teeth and replaced them.  But they wanted me to have 6 natural or filled molars.  And the guy who told me this, he kind of remind you of Gomer Pyle, you know.  He--but he's police, you know.  And I said, you know, I'd like to see that in writing.  What, I mean--am I--I wasn't applying for the K-9 unit, you know.  I was indignant.  I was upset because I had got in the 90 percentile in terms of the written exam.  And because of my job in terms of that clerical, administrative work, you know, I was steeped on reading rules and regulations and Army regs and stuff like that.  So I, you know, test taking was easy.  And I was giving tests to people.  But anyway, the long and short of it is, they sent me a very disappointing rejection saying that you didn't pass the physical.  So, you know, I was down to about 30 days when I got that note.  We was--cause I had actually cut my ties here, you know.  I wasn't even looking for a job here.  I, I would have spent that time looking for a job in Chicago [Illinois] if I knew I was coming back here.  But I was pretty, you know, confident that I would be there.  And with my wife [Carol Randall Saffold] working at the, the Walter [Reed] Memorial Hospital, we had it all worked out, you know.  I said, oh, we're gonna be all right here.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1960--
Speaker 1: This is--I, I got out in 1962.
Story_ID: 12762
Speaker 1: This all happened between September and December of '62 [1962].  I got out [of the military] in December of '62.  And so I had to come back.  I had to come back here [Chicago, Illinois].  And I wasn't really prepared for coming back because I hadn't--you know, you--what kind of nest egg you got there.  I'm, you know, getting separate rations and stuff, but you wasn't making no money.  I mean I was getting a hundred and some dollars a month, you know.  But, so I came back here, and I started working for the VA [Department of Veterans Affairs] for about a year.  Then I drove a CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] el for about a year and a half.  And then somebody announced a Chicago Police Department exam.  Now, we're into 1965.  And so I took that exam and got hired and became a Chicago P.D., yeah, November, 1965.
Speaker 2: Was that a big deal in 1965, or were there, were there many black officers on the force in '65 and what was the climate like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, actually, the climate was--well, it was--I think blacks were about, maybe 13 and 14 percent of the Chicago Police Department.  And in '65, they probably did more hiring in '65 and '66 [1966] than they had done in all the prior years in terms of percentage wise.  They hired quite a few blacks.  They brought the percentages up about 3 or 4 percent.  I mean from '65 to about 1970, the population grew to about almost 16 percent.  You know, so it went from about 13 to 16 percent overall.  So I'd, I would say that they hadn't hired those percentages for quite a while.  Everybody that was on after the merger of the Chicago Park District with the Chicago P.D., the blacks that were on that, that, that made the numbers larger had by and large come from the Chicago Park District.  So new recruits in the '60s [1960s], you know, I mean we were, we were in the, were in the Civil Rights era, you know.  And a lot of pressure was being applied to police departments across the country to do some hiring.  So I think we were benefactors of that, that thrust, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, why did you want to become a police officer--well, first of all, what was your impression of the Chicago Police Department from the outside--
Speaker 1: Actually, I didn't, I didn't have a, I didn't have a good reading of it, to be honest with you.  When I left in, in '59 [1959] going to the military, I hadn't had a lot of bad experiences with the police.  I'd been in a lot of scrapes and stuff where the police will--involved in my shenanigans.  But in terms of brutality and discrimination and stuff, I was kind of naïve.  I didn't, I didn't really--you know, we always had the same one or two black police officers in our neighborhood.  We knew them.  And they knew us.  So that was your relationship.  I mean we had some, some guys that had been around, you know, since the early '50s [1950s].  And that was my only exposure to them.  There were a couple on the West Side and a couple on the North Side that were my extent of the whole Police Department.  My father [Dewitt Saffold] had a, a good buddy that was a police officer on the North Side, who used to catch a ride with us to his station, Hudson Avenue Station periodically.  And he was the only guy I knew.  He was a nice guy, you know, big, robust guy.  So I didn't know what I was getting into.  I had, I had no friends that had been law enforcement people in my age group.  I had no idea what the temperament was gonna be in terms of blacks coming into--you know, I mean I thought I had left that in the military.  I kind of thought that my, my racial confrontation kind of stuff was, was in the military.  So I'm back in Chicago.  I drove, like I said, I drove an el for a year and a half.  CTA didn't look racist to me, I mean for whatever reason, you know.  And I was a conductor, motorman, switchman.  So I said, well, you know, they opened this up for me, and now I--but little did I know.
Speaker 2: Did you become a police officer for economic reasons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was more economic and some, to some degree, social.  I mean it wasn't like--police didn't have a bad reputation.  I mean, you know, I, I figured I was qualified from street experience, you know.  I know I, I could be the police.  I kind of thought I knew my way around in terms of, if I was trying to clean up the neighborhood, I knew the thugs already (laughter), you know.  If I was trying to make a good impression on continuing in a career development mode, it was a step up from, from CTA, you know, in terms of status, I guess.  But I wasn't excited about the power aspect of it, and I wasn't really excited about the reputation of it.  So I guess it was more economic than, than anything else.
Story_ID: 12763
Speaker 1: Before you join the police department, was there anything about CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] that--was there some dissatisfaction with CTA that may have caused you to seek out a job?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it kind of helped, they kind of helped me make the decision to, to leave there as a career--from, from that career.  But initially I said, well, you know, this looks like a pretty good job, blue-collar job.  It doesn't require a lot of stuff.  I hadn't decided I wanted to go back to school, etc.  But about maybe 4 or 5 months before I had actually gotten a success, a result from my police exam, I was still undecided.  I said, I was gonna take the exam, prepare and, etc., but I hadn't totally decided I was gonna make the move.  And CTA is, you know, clock driven, I mean, you know, if you don't come to work on time, you've got a problem with CTA.  Well, this particular morning, and I didn't have a track record of being problematic.  As a matter of fact, you know, I was very comfortable that I, I knew what I was doing when I picked my assignments.  You know, you pick every other month or so.  So I was comfortable with the time of day I worked, and, etc.  But I had a tragedy in the family.  As a matter of fact, my young son died.  And I was due at work like two hours after that happened.  And I called in to tell the clerk what had happened.  And his response was, there's nothing wrong with you, is it?  You know, as if--I mean this cat was, it was so, it was so shocking to me cause I had never really paid attention to anything along those lines.  You know, I mean if you don't have a problem with your supervisor or a problem, you ain't got a problem with a clerk, you know.  But this guy was the one who had to reschedule someone to take my run because I was right up on that time of day to be getting ready to report.  And that just knocked me to the floor.  I ended up--I was at the emergency room of Franklin Boulevard Hospital when I called this guy.  And they were making decisions, and working on my son at the time, you know.
Speaker 1: How old was he?
Speaker 2: Young baby, young boy, young boy.  And anyway, the long and short of it is, when I finally realized what had, what had happened there, I got a call from the Station Superintendent or somebody that had got the word that was a little more prepared to deal with employees than this clerk was.  And he sort of, you know, offered his condolences and told me about, you know, what the, what the procedure for taking time off with death in the family and that kind of stuff.  But it, it was like a early warning to me.  I'm saying, you know, this is, this ain't really a career kind of place because I worked--I don't know if you know, back in those days the bus drivers were more African American than the rapid transit operators.  There were a lot less rapid transit operators of color.  So it was sort of like, you know, I was in, in another branch of the, of the service.  And I, I was of the impression that upward mobility for supervisor and stuff like that were, were more possible in that union and that particular group than with bus drivers, you know, that, that--but, this, this--that kind of turned me into another kind of animal.  I had a general attitude about the agency that I said, you know, and here we go.  So I just kind of looked forward then to going to the police department.  And it was like maybe, less than 4 months later I was actually being hired, you know, by the Chicago P.D.
Story_ID: 12764
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first day like on the Chicago [Police] Department, you're in training, I guess--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, at that time, you had eight weeks of training with the Chicago Police Department in the Academy.  And in about the first week, you start to wear an Army-looking uniform.  And about the 8th week, you start t put on a blue uniform, but it was a recruit patch.  Everybody knew you were brand new and that kind of stuff.  But it was so interesting that first eight weeks.  You, you did part of that in field training.  You'd go to a police station, and I ended up going to Fillmore, which was a predominantly black district in terms of the city population.  But it was majority white police officers.
Speaker 1: Where is that?
Speaker 2: It was--Fillmore Station at that time was on Pulaski Road and Fillmore, which is like 1100 South on Pulaski Road, right in the middle of the--and so the recruits that went there was dealing with, you know, a population that was, you know, you might run into a seasoned veteran once in a while in the lock-up, cat done been to jail a whole bunch of times, you know, cause it wasn't a prison.  It wasn't the county jail, just an overnight holdover kind of station.  But I, I remember distinctly, one of the guys that went to, to Fillmore as a recruit in training with me, that obviously hadn't been around black people for a long period of time.  And the guy in the lock-up was ordering this guy around.  I mean the guy had on a uniform, and we're both police--what they call cadets almost, I'm like a recruit.  And, you know, they, they give the prisoners a sandwich or something.  So we're working the desk.  You know, that's on the job.  You, you weren't on the street.  You're in the desk, you're in the lock-up, you know, like that.  And he asked the guy for a baloney sandwich.  He asked the officer, could I have a baloney sandwich?  So the guy goes up to the desk and gets the baloney sandwich for him, and about an hour later, he passed by the guy, and he said, I want another sandwich.  And the guy said, I can't give you but one.  And he called him a name, and threatened him.  And he went and got the sandwich and brought it to him, you know.  So it was kind of amazing to me because I'm saying, now, we're gonna be back in the training academy.  And everybody's gonna be telling war stories about what happened to them.  I said, I've got to tell on you (laughter).  Here, you, you're--you know, and true enough, this guy became one of the focal points for my entire police career in terms of how he turned from a, from a, a very intimidated, scared kind of personality to a, gruff, rough, blood and guts kind of guy after they gave him that gun and badge.  I mean it was, it was just amazing to me cause we didn't have guns and badges yet in that first--but it was the introduction to what the internal side of the police department was like from a recruit perspective.  How do you get introduced to this para-military environment?  And what kind of character fits into this mode or this mold?
Speaker 1: You're saying that the police department could, in essence, turn a Dr. Jekyll into a Mr. Hyde?
Speaker 2: Oh, listen, I mean, if you want to, if you want to--at first I, I experienced it, experienced it in the military.  But obviously, we weren't in combat.  But, you know, when you see a guy going through the, through basic training, getting introduced to throwing grenades and introduced to firing real live ammunition and stuff like that, getting used to being chewed out about not having his equipment and stuff prepared or, or in operating order and stuff like that, you get a kind of feel for the personality of the guy.  You know, like I said, I'm off the block, half-wild with my notions about life, but I can adjust to this para-military stuff because I'm in competition with other men.  I'm saying, you know, okay, everybody got to do this, you know.  But it began to give you a flavor of that false sense of, of authority that, that kind of seeped into the, the psyche of the, of the, in the military.  And I said, ah, well, cause I, I could see it, you know, as we got into advanced individual training and stuff like that.  But I thought it was just the military, you know.  I said--cause I mean some of these guys--even the, the supervisors in the military, the sergeants and stuff like that with the rank, if you got into a poker game with them, if you got into a crap game with them; if you got into a physical confrontation, while you're town drinking, you, you learn the real personality.  You know, you start to say, okay, I see what I'm dealing with here.  I mean, you know, he's a terror cause he's got a bar or he's a terror cause he's got, you know, stripes, etc., etc.  But I hadn't made that equation to the police department.  But, yes, I mean it was a, it was an awakening--even down to the kind of rhetoric that they used with hyping the guys up to go and work in a particular community.  I mean they, they had, they had put stigmas on the community where I came from in such a way that, you know, you could--you'd have to almost say, you know, I can see the, the chemistry coming together here.  Here's a guy that was very timid in the Training Academy.  All of a sudden he's got a pistol.  They, they programmed him to come out as a, as a very aggressive personality, if he don't want somebody pushing him around.  And, and then it started to play itself out.  I'm saying, I started to pay attention to how, how different the white officers that worked in the black community were from the black officers, unless they were a certain kind of guy.  You know, the guy who was a stand-up guy anyway, seemed to adapt faster.  And he could, he could make more rational decisions when there was no need for force.  There was no need for conversation, etc.  Well, in the Training Academy, you don't know all this.  You only get exposed to it at the, at the recruit level in the station on probation.  So if you've gotten past that litmus test, then your next experience is gonna be, how does he look when he's on the street with the uniform on, actually doing the job as a, as a rookie.  And that's where my first few years of, of policing started making some very distinct impressions on what I was dealing with.
Story_ID: 12765
Speaker 1: Now, would you that the, in general, that the white recruits were more afraid of the black community?
Speaker 2: I, I--let me say, I think they were much more intimidated by the total environment than they should have been.  It's almost like they come out the door seeing themselves as a cohesive group of, of soldiers, that are out to protect themselves in a hostile environment.  I mean that was just a basic orientation that, that you could begin to watch and see right away.  I worked in predominantly white districts as a rookie.  So I got a chance to see what happens to a rookie when the, when the table is reversed, when the whole community white, the majority of the people that you're working with are white.  You're the black guy.  How do you adjust to, to a community that nobody told you to be hostile?  They didn't, they didn't tell me that, that white people had a certain attitude towards black police officers.  I mean I didn't, I didn't expect that, you know.  I didn't expect every time I make a traffic stop that I had to have some kind of gruff conversation with somebody that had committed a traffic violation cause I, I was being trained to stop them with a professional approach, etc.  But it wasn't true in the black community.  It was like we were being--it was, it was witnessing a, a cultural lag in its embryonic stage development.  Like I said, I spent my first two years in a predominantly white district.  And the racial issue was quite different for me in terms of my attitude towards the community; the community's attitude towards me; my attitude towards white police officers; white police officers' attitude towards me.  Criminal element, dealing with the criminal element, normal criminal element and my attitude towards that, and that's, that attitude towards me.  It was almost like my biggest resentment came from white officers, not the white community.  My biggest resentment was from what I would consider coward kind of white guys, who would say things over the air, without identifying themselves and doing thing to your mailbox or your locker without identifying themselves.  I mean that was the kind of introduction I was getting as a rookie, in a predominantly white district.  And I'm saying, these white guys were coming into an environment where there was no such hostility towards them from black officers.  And then really, basically, the average citizen was used to dealing with, with, with police who act like professional police (laughter).  I mean it was almost like the '60s [1960s] introduced a whole new wave of police.  Now, I'm not saying that there wasn't some racial problems with, with the black community and white police earlier than that, but it didn't get pronounced until the '60s, for me.  I mean I'm saying, okay, now, I'm inside this place of employment, and all of a sudden, it's like from, from, from my point--my vantage point, these people are manufacturing attitudes towards the black community in the minds of young white officers.  And they have not bothered to examine the stability of this guy (laughter).  I mean it's almost like, you know, I, I--now, I want to wonder, do you know who you just gave a gun to?  That was my first question.  And the second was, do you know where you just sent him?  And then my third question was, do you know how to monitor how he's conducting himself?  So my first three years was, was a very perplexing experience in terms of that, that, that profession.
Story_ID: 12766
Speaker 1: And you come in, in 1965--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and this is a time when Voting Rights Act has been passed, a lot of Civil Rights, the Civil Rights Movement was in full swing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was like, in fact, it was kind of on the down-swing in '65, and it had reached a peak in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: And it kind of up picked up again.  It, I mean if you--and especially in Chicago [Illinois].  We had a near--what they called a Puerto Rican riot in '66 [1966].  We had several things leading up to the Democratic [National] Convention in '68 [1968], you know, in terms of the, the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] and those kind of things were going on.  You had the [Black] Panthers, you know, just on the horizon in the, in the late '60s [1960s], you know.  So it was like--and then you had some gang activity.  You had, you had gangs getting involved in, in shutting down construction sites and stuff like that as a result of the Civil Rights Movement.  So I mean it was a lot going on in Chicago between '65 and '68 that was no--by no stretch of the imagination the end of the Civil Rights era.  It was almost like, you know, maybe it was the, the last big chapter or leading into the last big chapter, but from '66 on, my, my career was peppered with, with Civil Rights issues.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were right in the thick of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I mean I was in a district where they eventually discovered that five of my co-workers ended up being card-carrying Ku Klux Klan members that only got discovered after they got transferred out of that district into a predominantly black district.  And this was like in '67 [1967], '68.
Speaker 1: What district was that?
Speaker 2: Well, it started out Shakespeare [District].  That's where I, that's where I went from the Training Academy.  I went to Shakespeare.
Speaker 1: Where is that located?
Speaker 2: That's the 14th District.  At that time it was on Shakespeare and California, you know, 2800 North, you know.  And, and it, it was, it was like--there was a small cluster of blacks and a medium-sized cluster of Latinos in that district at that time.  And that's where I saw the first serious physical brutality, beating of a, of a kid.  It was there as a rookie.
Speaker 1: Was it a black kid or a Puerto Rican kid?
Speaker 2: Puerto Rican.  And, you know, we were involved in a chase.  And this kid was driving a stolen car.  And he--my partner was driving.  I was the rookie.  This kid was 16 years old, drove around the four-square blocks for about (laughter) 20 minutes until they finally boxed him in.  He wrecked the car, and fell out of the car.  He wrecked the car and fell out of the front door.  And they pounced on this little kid, and I mean you talking about a serious whipping.  And their, their explanation was that you have to get them at that point because you don't know how it's gonna turn out in court (laughter).  So you make your impression on them.  You beat them while you can.  I mean this was, this was just an explanation, I mean--
Speaker 1: They're talking about administering justice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, they, they were the judge, jury and the executioner on the street, yeah.  And I'm saying that that mentality was reflective on just--again, that, that, that element that were, in my opinion, they needed a gang to do it.  I mean, you know, when you start talking about police brutality, something that I watched early, early on.  I never saw these kind of guys take their belt, you know, you know how a policeman--you know, we had some black police officers that would take their belt off and say let's, let's see can you do what you say you can do, and whip your behind physically and then put you in jail (laughter), after you decide you want to fight them.  But these guys would always do it with five or six of them.  And that was always my, my measuring stick.  I said, now, you know, why does it take five or six of you guys, generally, to beat somebody down, you know?  Is that your, is that, is that the way it's done?  Or is that just the way y'all do it because I, I, you know, I wasn't used to that.  I had never seen anything like that before.  And, and it then began to make me have another kind of barometer that I measured by in terms of--like I had a white partner as a rookie policeman that came out of the Academy with me who, who was an ex-Marine.  But I was, I was thoroughly convinced that he wasn't a coward, and he wasn't a, a gangbanging, lynching kind of guy.  He'd fight (laughter), he'd fight individually, whether you, you know, whether you was ready to fight or not  (Laughter) This cat was just, you know, but he would take you on physically as an individual.  And that said to me that was a sign of a guy that might be reliable in a pinch, in a pinch, in a tight.  But if he had to have a crowd, I was always wondering was he gonna be able to make the right kind of decisions under the right circumstances.  And then when you factor that race thing in, and I'm still talking--we're working in a predominantly white community when this guy impressed me as being different from these guys that I saw that I didn't know at the time, just literally wup a kid half to death, they were, they were Ku Klux--card-carrying Ku Klux Klan members then.  But I just didn't know it.  And I--then I got the, then I got the message, that I said, okay, this is how these guys operate.  So that made me now take another kind of attitude about how do I judge my white counterpart because I had never saw a black officer--I never in my whole career saw a gang of black police officers beat anybody up.  I've never seen it, never seen it.  Now, as of late we see where one might be on the scene, and he feel like he'd better act like he's with the boys and go up there and get him 15 or 20 licks in.  But I see that one as a coward.  I see that as a guy that, that's just like the other guy to me, you know.  But, but I, I'm saying all this to say that the Training Academy was the first real introduction to what police departments in America reflect when it comes down to how officers get prepared to work in ethnic--or I should say non-white communities.  And I specifically paid particular attention to how we worked in Latino and black communities.  As a, as a career, I got a chance to experience that, those two things, along with my limited experience in the white community.  And so, you know, I think as we moved through this, through this era that we're discussing, the first part of my police career, from 1965 to 1968, I saw a lot of things.
Story_ID: 12767
Speaker 1: And I mean we had, we had an instance in '68 [1968] during the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr. assassination] riots that stays with me.  I had a partner killed during that era, that also stays with me because of the kinds of things that I knew police officers were being put in positions to do that they weren't well trained for.  And I, I was more than convinced--for example, I was on the Task Force.  When I left the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], I moved to the West Side in terms of my assignment.  Now, I'm in a predominantly white community.  The white guy that had worked with me on the North Side wanted to come with me.  You know, he said, you know, well, we've been working together these many years.  We might as well stay together.  And I said, I think--I don't think so.  And, and I was actually the one that discouraged him.  You know, I said, your temper is bad, and I know you're not a racist kind of guy, but your actions would be perceived differently in my community than they are here, you know, because that kind of combativeness is commonplace.  And it's misguided and I--you know, cause by now I've started to socialize with other black police officers after work.  So it ain't like I'm just isolated on the North Side by myself.  I ran to the South Side (laughter), ran to the West Side when I got off from work because now I was learning--these are all pre-Afro-American Patrolman's League days.  I'm learning now that there is a double standard.  There's a difference in the way the police carry out their duties in these specialized units called Task Force and, you know, Gang Intelligence and that kind of stuff.  I didn't know what that was all about.  I was still a rookie just learning how you go to a domestic disturbance, how you make a traffic stop, how do you arrest a burglar?  How do you arrest a stick-up man without trying to be the judge, jury and executioner?  I was being trained to do it properly in the community that I first worked in.  The, the most bizarre incident that I saw in the black community was pre-Afro American Patrolmen's League, we were, we were, we were into the second night of April 5th, 1968, the second night of Dr. King's assassination, second night--
Speaker 2: And there were riots on the West Side?
Speaker 1: Riot all over the West Side and some parts of Englewood and Woodlawn, like that.  The West Side, though, has already been experiencing that burn down on West Madison and burn down on Pulaski Road, burn down, that kind of thing.  It was the second or third night, the first week.
Speaker 2: April.
Speaker 1: April 4th, 1968 was the, was the trigger.  Anyway, I'm working in a Task Force car, but they tried not to integrate the cars if they didn't have to because actually the white officers preferred working with each other.  And the black officers didn't mind working with each other.  And we were always lesser in numbers.  So it wasn't like a big argument if I ended up with a, with a black partner.  And then they said, we're gonna have a three-man car tonight.  And they give me a third guy, and he's black.  We didn't get upset because there were three-man white cars.  But this particular night, we're on the radio, and we hear one of our cars--you know, you had all different call signs.  We were in the Task Force.  We were on a different band than the local district police, but we could hear both.  And they say, we've got a guy behind Rothschild's Liquors on Roosevelt and Central Park that was shooting at the police.  This is coming over the air.  So we're in the area.  So we just said, let's go by there and see what's going because people were out on their porches.  All kind of things were going on.  And these officers, these white officers had a black guy in back of a liquor store, and they had shot him in the butt first of all.  They had whipped his--he had, he had--there was not one dry spot on his body for blood cover.  I mean he was just covered with blood.  He was shot in the butt.  And now one of the guys was trying to shoot the light out that was putting a spotlight on what they were doing, and people were yelling off the porch, "Let that man go, stop it, you're killing him," blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, by the time we pulled up there.  So being the conscientious guys we were, we took the guy from the officers that had him.  He was in the handcuffs.  We said, whoever has, whoever owns these handcuffs, come and get your guy from the county hospital cause that's where we're taking him.
Story_ID: 12768
Speaker 1: When we left off, you and your partner came and rescued a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We took, we took this black man from, from some white cops that were in our unit, the Task Force, and took him to the County Hospital.  Well, then the, the downside of it, as soon as we got to the Emergency Room in the hospital.  Now, here we are with this guy and the first thing out of one of the black nurse's mouth was, yawl are the worst Uncle Toms in the, you know.  I mean they just knew we had to do this, you know.  And there was no way the, you know, cause the--actually, the Emergency Room at the County Hospital was chaotic anyway because there was a lot going on.  There was people coming in there.  I heard from all kinds of things that was going on.
Speaker 1: That's a normal day at County Hospital.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, and so now we're on a, we're on a riotous day.  And so, you know, I'm saying that that was the first embarrassment.  The second embarrassment was when we got back to the unit.  First of all, the supervisors were not interested in anything we had to say in terms of what we had witnessed, what we thought was, was way beyond the pale in terms of a unit that, that we were a part of, and, you know, actually, you know, the Task Force was, was, wan an Elite unit.  I mean they did some strange things as it got older and more entrenched in its, in its work.  But initially, it was just to go after bad guys, bad guys.  I mean that was, that's why you were there.  So the people that were answering routine calls could, could continue to do that.  And you go after a specific target.  That's what it was supposed to be designed.  That's why I was begin a unit a like that--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) it was part of tactical (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, no, the Task Force was a unit in and of itself.  All the districts had Tactical officers that would be part of that, that district that might work in plain clothes.  But the Task Force was a specific specialized unit, a special operations unit that took special events, took special crime patterns that they worked, went into districts--like we were in Area 4.  We could go into any of the four districts that made up that area, that kind of latitude.  So it was a specialized unit.
Speaker 1: In uniforms or--
Speaker 2: Well, you, you, you worked in uniform when it was time to work uniform.  During that kind of assessment--season, you, you know, uniform was important, you know, a show of force.  Everybody wanted to make sure that they knew the police were there and, etc.  The plain clothes assignments that we would work were very, also very focused.  I mean when I worked what we called the Tactical Undercover Force, the Tough Squad, you work in plain clothes, but you dress up like a bum and go down on Skid Row and try to get the guys who would were jack rolling the poor guy who just got his monthly pension check cause that's what they do for a living.  They just take money from drunks who just got their check, you know.  We'd ride the "L's" and, and get the pick pockets, and get the, the jack rollers and the stick-up men and the rapists in there.  We worked Public Housing as a part of a special unit that would dress a certain and we would, knew what we were looking for in terms of crime patterns of rapists and stuff like that.  I mean that, that was a specialized unit that had a purpose.  So these guys as far as I was concerned had gone against the grain.  I mean they were, they were a mockery of what I thought a specialized unit like that should be.  So I'm, I'm insulted that they would be doing this to a citizen.  And now, I'm equally insulted now that the supervisor don't think anything is wrong with it.  And we still hadn't factored face into it.  I'm still dealing with this (chuckle).  I mean I'm (unclear) now, I'm dealing with this like a professional policeman.  I'm saying, okay, I swore to a Code of Ethics like everybody else, you know.  And, and we are, we are out here to, to stop looters and, and stop violence being perpetrated against people driving through communities, trying to get back home, you know, where they had cordoned off--there were some light-skinned black people that was, was being bricked and stuff. You know, I mean a lot of stuff was going on cause it was some crazy cats out there doing what they wanted to do.
Story_ID: 12769
Speaker 1: So you had to be out there with that, but not to have the police--now, this again, this is my first real exposure to how systemic it was and how protected it was with these specialized units because during this same era--I'll move forward from this guy that we took from that, from that diabolical group of policemen, and move into the [Black] Panther era, which was '69 [1969].  I mean we, we went through the Democratic [National] Convention.  Let me stop there for a second cause that was a little bit after Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination, same year.  We was still in the [Chicago Police] Task Force.  This was the first time I ever saw--and I think a lot of white America for the first time saw how brutal the police could be towards white kids.  I mean these young, white college students with long hair and sandals and stuff like that, who were demonstrating against the [Vietnam] War, didn't have any idea what was gonna happen to them after the sun went down during that Democratic Convention here [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: You're actually saying they had less of an idea (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They, they had--I mean they--there was no way they could even imagine what the police were getting ready to do to them.  I mean because you could, you could tell they were like a, in my opinion, a very non-threatening, but serious demonstration.  You know, it wasn't like they were, they were committing all kind of violent acts.  Now, I know that people don't remember, but the Task Force, they had us clean out our lockers and give them weapons that we had took off the street.  You know, sometimes you, you chase a guy and he drops a weapon and you don't catch him, and you don't shoot him in the back.  You just take the weapon, and you put it in your locker.  And you'll inventory it at some point.  Well, there were a lot of officers that had knives and, and some of them had some pistols that they had never inventoried.  But this particular night, our supervisor said, we've got to show the, the dangerous aspects of these demonstrators.  Clean out your lockers.  Anything you got that might be of use, just put it up so we can, can use it, saying that they took them from the demonstrators.  I mean that's how strong these people were.  My partner and I had some balls of zinc that had fallen off of a dump truck--I should say a jump truck, over on Pulaski and, and Ogden maybe a month and a half before this convention.  It was just in the locker.  We picked them out of the street cause cars was driving around them and they were a hazard.  It was like 40 of them, and they had fallen off some metal place.  And it was near that metal foundry on, you know, that little strip, Cicero, all that, those little metal foundries and stuff that they got.  So we just kind of took them off the street, put them in the locker.  And when they said, give us all the--they, they used facetiously, give us all the contraband you got in your locker (chuckle).  We put these balls up there, and wouldn't you know, the very next morning on the front page of the [Chicago] Tribune, there's a picture of these zinc balls as part of confiscated weapons from the demonstrators.  So that was my first clue.  I said, these boys are not legit, right.  But here's what I saw.  We're on, we're on the corner of Madison and State.  And we're, we're in squad cars lined up along the street because we got the word that when the, when the demonstration gets put out of Grant Park, they're gonna take certain routes to get back to Lincoln Park.  And we want, we want arrests made.  This is what we were talking about.  We parked, three squad cars, bumper-to-bumper almost, in front of whatever that was, either Carson Pirie [Scott] or Marshall Fields, one of those big department stores.  And all of a sudden here comes this big crowd of young students, running north from where they had got tear gassed at, at, in Grant Park.  They're getting away now.  Now, now, these are fleeing people.  They are not threatening people.  They (laughter) are trying to get away from tear gas--
Speaker 2: They're running away from--
Speaker 1: They're running away from tear gas.  They're running away from arrests.  They're running away from everything because they're being told they can't sleep in the park.  I know you remember that they their--they, they just absolutely put a curfew on the park.  These kids had set up camp.  I mean they weren't bother--it was a public park, you know. They were gonna spend the night, but they had, some of them had come from other cities.  And I'm not saying that, that there was not a need for police presence, and obviously, there were probably some instances where there needed to be some arrests.
Speaker 2: And this is national news (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, I'm, I'm sitting here.  This, this--the radio said, they're coming, they're coming, they're coming, they're coming.  We get out the car.  Right in front of this window where all these mannequins are stuff are sitting, mannequins are sitting, this policeman in, in my unit, big, robust guy, steps in front of this little girl.  She looked like she weighed about 100 pounds.  And she just ran flat into him, right?  Well, he's got on all of this stuff, you know.  And she hit him about chest high.  And she hit him and bounced off him and her contact lens fell out.  She now gets on the ground.  This guy starts scraping his big combat boots (chuckle) in the area where she's looking for the contact lens.  One of them is kicking her in the butt, telling her get up.  She's says, I'm looking for my contact lens.  And this guy is dragging his feet, you want me to help you look for it, honey?  And I'm saying, now, these are, these are the police (laughter).  I'm, I'm still a little naïve.  I'm saying, I ain't never seen nothing like this.  I saw one guy--we're talking Task Force again, I saw a guy pick a little man up, a little--he was, looked like he had a beard, you know, he, he was grown.  He looked like he might be 21, 22 years old, by the neck, and lift him off the ground and talk to him.  I mean he (laughter) he said, do you know what city you're in?  I mean these kind of things.  You know, this little guy's face is turning blue and orange.  And he's holding him, face like this, talking to him.  And he, I mean this is idea of fun--everybody's laughing.  And when he let him go, this guy's gagging for air, and then he kicks him in the butt, and he's now running towards Lincoln Park.  These are the kind of things that were actually going on.  And I'm saying, on one side of it you say, I hope the world is really seeing this.  I mean, because you know, you're out there in the middle of it.  You don't know what they see.  And the T.V. cameras are not standing right there, you know.  They're in different spots, but they're not right there.  And you're saying, does anybody understand what this is about here?  Well, it was to me an indication that, early indication that these were the same guys that were classified as the elites.  They always did better on exams, proficiency ratings, efficiency ratings.  You know, I mean these were the guys that, that got, got credit because they made a lot of arrests, but nobody talked about the, the quality of the arrests as much as the quantitative aspects of the arrests.  And therein lies the beginning of what we saw as patterns of how a community can begin to just lose any level of respect or expectations of a, of an entity called police.  I mean, I mean we're watching it happen.
Story_ID: 12770
Speaker 1: And so shortly after that [the 1968 Democratic National Convention], and I think you probably recall that a guy by the name of [Edward] Buzz Palmer and another little group of individuals came into the public view announcing that they had then formed something called the Afro-American Patrolmen's League, and that they were no longer gonna be brutal pawns to a, a employment entity that had the responsibility for protecting the public, so to speak.  Well, I wasn't one of the original guys.  I saw them on television talking about that, which would have been a couple of weeks after they had decided to publicly announce.  And I sought them out.  I went looking for them because at that point, I was about to quit the Chicago Police Department.  I was totally disgruntled between Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr. assassination riots] and, and, and the Democratic Convention.  I was kind of convinced that I was in the wrong profession.  By the time these guys--and I went to their first meeting.  I immediately became a Vice President of Recruiting cause I had something to say.  I was talking about the kind of things that made me think that they were a necessary entity that I thought--you know, we were getting up explaining why we thought we needed to be a part of something like this and etc.  It was just the very embryonic stages of it.
Story_ID: 12771
Speaker 1: And at the time, I was a [Chicago Police] Task Force officer who eventually got transitioned into what they called, the Gang Intelligence Unit.  And they were taking guys from the Task Force, putting them in the Gang Intelligence Unit and, and I thought that, that, you know, well, you know, there's a new organization, just coming on the scene.  I'm gonna get into a unit that's gonna focus on what I considered to be a real high-level threat to my community, called gangs.  I mean I was serious.  I said, yeah, the gangs are here.  They're on us.  They're now getting into--learning more about the narcotic trade.  They're doing a lot of things.  I didn't know they were gonna create what they called the Panther Squad within the Gang Intelligence Unit.  And now because of the guy who was my supervisor, I'm in the Panther Squad.  I didn't know very much about [Black] Panthers.  You know, you're just hearing things about--and then all of a sudden you see a few people, and then you start watching, you know, they, they're having soapbox speeches being made and, etc.  And I'm just, you know, just the police, and I'm trying to make a distinction between the Panthers and the [Blackstone] Rangers now, and the Panthers and [Conservative] Vice Lords.  And I'm saying it ain't the same thing.  I'm listening to them.  I'm saying it ain't the same thing.  Let me see what they're talking about.  Well, this Panther Squad, little did I know, they said, all they wanted you to do is--they knew you couldn't infiltrate them, you know.  I mean they had some--I didn't know it, but they had some police operatives that were already in there and stuff.  But we're observing, you know.  We're saying, what are--they said, well, these guys, we think they're getting ready to turn the heads of the gangs into some, "shoot the pig" kind of guys, and we don't want to see that happen.  I mean it's like they had a rationale.  They had a mock December 4th, 1969 about two months before that.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: I called it a "mock" because it was set the same way as the December 4th raid was set up.  It just didn't come off like that.
Speaker 2: The December 4th raid was when--
Speaker 1: That's when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were literally murdered on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And I said it then, and I'm saying it now.  It was a, a political assassination as far as I was concerned.  I mean there was, there was too many different ways that that could have been handled without jeopardizing the safety of police officers.  And then the rest is history.  I mean that, that 1970 Grand Jury report revealed a lot of things.  I mean there was a lot to come out much later about what actually happened that night and who planned it and how it got planned and how the--the role the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] played, all of that.  But we didn't know that at the time.  And so when this first mock raid--I call it again a mock raid, this first raid took place, it was set up to raid the headquarters on Western and Madison.  And I'll speak freely about it now because I spoke freely about it when it was current event.  They had set up a raid, and this--at that time, the Panthers had a, they were like in the, in the stretches of their Breakfast Program.  They actually had people supplying food and stuff that they were giving away.  So it was, it was stored there in this headquarters on Madison and Western.  And these guys had issued amongst the police officers warrants for certain people that they wanted arrested.  And they had John Doe warrants for the people they didn't know.  (Laughter) so they would just go get somebody, you know, you come back with somebody.  But it just so happened, they went into that headquarters and the people that they thought were gonna be there, were not there.  They only had some like second and third string people that were actually legitimately there getting, preparing to take the Breakfast Program, and open it for that day.  And these guys went in there, they were so disappointed that they didn't have who they wanted to be there, they, they destroyed every bit of food that was in that place.  I mean they literally just threw pancake flour, cornflakes, I mean just tore it up.  That was, that was the frustration of the raiders.
Speaker 2: Just for the record, what crime had the Panthers committed at this point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: At this point, nobody in that place had done anything but showed up as a volunteer to serve breakfast in a program that they had going out of that building.  That's what, that was--the kids in that community were, were able to come and get breakfast.  Now, I didn't even know that much about that building.  You, you understand what I'm saying.  I found out it was a headquarters and what they had done after the debriefing, when they came back and everybody was all disappointed about they didn't catch this one; they didn't catch that one, etc.  And then it just became discussion about what went on in the place.  There wasn't, you know, it wasn't part of anybody's written assignment.  It's just these guys decided to do it.  So shortly after that, the December 4th raid took place.  We were some of the people that--we [the Afro-American Patrolmen's League] had one of our members [Renault Robinson] that was a part of that raid.  We didn't know it until that morning.  We had people like Jesse Jackson and others in those days would call us first, when they got ready to do something.  So when Bobby Rush got ready to turn himself in, Father [George] Clements who was our chaplain, made contact with, with us, and we, in turn, made contact with one of our respected black bosses, George Simms at that time, and made sure that Bobby Rush could turn himself in without running, you know, being afraid of being killed in the process of going to jail.
Speaker 2: By us, you mean the Afro-American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The Afro-American Patrolmen's League.  We all were at PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] that morning when he, when he surrendered himself.
Story_ID: 12772
Speaker 1: So my point is we were, we were, as young police officers, who had all been hired around the same time--just about everybody in the league had come on about '65 [1965] or '66 [1966] or '67 [1967].  I mean it was, that was the era.  And we were in pretty much the general age group, you know, mid, late 20s, naïve about how deeply entrenched this, this cancer was in the Chicago Police Department.  And we hadn't even gotten to organizing nationally yet.  We didn't do that until '72 [1972].  So there was a lot of education going on just by the mere fact that this little group had formed and began to challenge injustices--we hadn't even talked about discrimination on the job yet.  We were just talking about brutality and unnecessary use of deadly force.  I mean we were in an era where I got a 30-day suspension for going on a T.V. show talking about drop guns because I had seen officers with a black tam and a pistol in their squad car saying that if we accidentally kill one, this is what he gonna have.
Speaker 2: And the black tam represented?
Speaker 1: The Black Panthers at that time.  I mean this was, this was--we, we had to go on television.  And they said, well, at least--Russ Ewing, Russ Ewing said, well, maybe y'all ought to hide your face or something.  We--it was a couple of us that got interviewed.  I was the first one that the Police Department discovered who it was, you know.  Some--they told me that--I don't know this to be the truth, but I can believe this can happen, they brought some black bosses in the room and said, we want y'all to watch this T.V. video and tell us who this is, you know, cause they couldn't do that much of a job with the voice.  But he talked to the back of our heads in the interview.  And we were talking about what we had seen.  I wasn't talking about something I thought I saw.  You know, I knew what was going on.  And so, it was like--after that 30-day suspension, lawyers began to surface in such a way that they were protecting our First Amendment rights.  You know, I eventually had that whole suspension reversed in the federal lawsuit that we, we had adjudicated in Judge [Prentice H.] Marshall's courtroom back in 1976.  But all of this I'm saying to you now was coming out in testimony when we started to demonstrate the double standard towards the Afro-American Patrolman's League.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any opposition amongst the black officers?
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting the kind of resistance that we, we ran into.  First of all, the vast majority of them tried to act as if we didn't exist.  I mean they really would walk the other way when they saw us coming.  I mean this is early on.  I mean the table stakes were pretty high.  You know, it wasn't unusual for a call to come to your home while you're working saying that you're dead, you know, I mean it was--suspensions.  I mean I got transferred about 10 times in less than a year because of my role as a recruiter for the, for the organization, you know.  So, and that came out in the court records also.  I mean I'm not talking about something that, that is not public record now, you know.  But the older blacks were intimidated because of just, our, what they considered to be abrasive nature.  You know, it wasn't unusual for one of us to talk back to a supervisor who addressed you improperly.  I mean that was just standard operating procedure, you know.  It wasn't unusual for us to speak out openly in roll call when the sensitivity of the discussion is about the difference in how you treat black people.  I mean we talked about--what we talked in public, we talked in roll call.  I mean it was just part of the turf.  So they were intimidated in that regard.  When you really cut through the rhetoric though, I think they were--it was a lot of relief that we had come because we talked about issues that most of them knew needed to be talked about, but they weren't prepared, especially when we got around to the discrimination in the hiring and the promotions and the assignments and the discipline.  You know, it was a double standard.  So they didn't jump up and run towards us immediately.  But by the time we got into payroll deductions, which was just before we got a union in Chicago.  We're now talking late 1970s.  We, we got a union under the Jane Byrne administration in 1979 or just thereabout.  And that was the first time that the union was able to wipe out everybody's payroll deduction.  But as an organization with about 2,400 blacks on the job at the time, we had about 1,800 police officers that were willing to sign their names on the line for us to get payroll deductions from them.  That was a big percentage of black officers.
Speaker 2: So what you're saying--now, this is significant in a number of different ways.  And I hadn't thought of it before, but you're saying that the African American Patrolman's League was possibly the first union of police officers, period, in Chicago?
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: Or came before the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, we were the first, what you would have to say, black union, because every ethnic group had an organization already.  We had the Irish American Police.  We had the Polish American Police.  We had the Italian American Police.  We had the Jewish American police.  We even had a remnant of a--I mean to say of the beginning of a Hispanic organization of police.
Speaker 2: These are organizations that existed already.
Speaker 1: And they had payroll deduction for their members.  Yeah, I mean look, we were the only ones that were controversial.  We were the only ones that were raising issues with the employer about police misconduct.  I mean make no mistake about that.  And then, of course, we became the, the voice of the black officer in terms of the treatment of black officers.  But our initial voice was about the treatment of black people.  And that was a no-no.  You just did not speak out against police, period.  But in terms of our entitlement for payroll deductions, they couldn't deny us because everybody else had it, you know.  And, and we had no idea what the, what the administration would do once we started recruiting.  We actually had supervisors, white supervisors, that were intimidating black officers, forcing them to make a decision.  They said, well, you can't have two payroll deductions.  And we're getting ready to have a union.  At that time, the Confederation of Police was the predominant group, not the Fraternal Order of Police, who is now the union.  The Fraternal Order of Police had almost no Chicago Police Officers in their union at all.  They had primarily detectives only.  And the rest was suburban police.
Story_ID: 12773
Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about the eve of the police union here in Chicago [Illinois] and how that impacted the Afro-American Patrolman's League's ability to collect dues from the payroll deduction, and how that--
Speaker 2: Every, every ethnic group in the department had its own association at that time.  Irish American, Polish American, Jewish American, Italian American police associations.  Basically, they were social groups, fraternal groups, and they dealt with ethnic concerns.  Their--none of them were protest advocates or anything like that.  We were the first group that challenged the misconduct and, you know, we happened to be black.  And we happened to be talking about the black community being subjected to a double standard of police services.  And that's what put us in the bad light.  Nobody really objected to the Guardians who had been around for a long time.  And they were an exclusively black group.  But they were friends, and then most of the guys getting promoted in the rank of blacks, belonged to the Guardians.
Speaker 1: The Guardians Police Association.
Speaker 2: The Guardians Police Association.  It was, it was, it was the oldest black group.  So for us to say, for me to say that we were the first protest group of black officers, because we weren't the first group of black officers.
Speaker 1: And what about NOBLE [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives]?
Speaker 2: NOBLE was not around.  NOBLE--as a matter of fact, NOBLE was born out of our conferences under the guise of the National Black Police Association.  In 1975, our conference in Los Angeles, California had focused on the rift between black bosses and black officers.  And it was happening in so many cities around the country that we invited black bosses from select cities to come and begin discussion and dialogue with us about how we could be more respectful towards one another in the workplace.  That was the whole idea.  The conference was set up for that.  Ironically enough, the Community Relations Service of the Justice Department was beginning to attend our conferences because that was like our third one.  And they were monitoring us very closely in terms of what we were doing, in terms of affirmative action, our impact on that; discrimination lawsuits, our impact on those kinds of things.  I mean they were paying very close attention to us.  And there was a, a special invitation extended to the black bosses to come to a paid-for conference that they wanted to discuss the need for them to become an exclusive executive entity because they had the rank.  And it was almost like you don't fraternize with the rank and file, if you've got rank.  So they brought that, that bitter pill to the equation.  And, and out of that NOBLE was born.  Now, any of them that would like to could take issue with me on that, but if they don't know the history of NOBLE, they should know that the initial intent was for us to solidify the relationship between the rank and the rank and file, as well as black female officers because we knew that it wasn't gonna be long before our ranks was gonna be divided by the very same opposition that we were receiving when we first formed the national group.
Speaker 1: Now, what does NOBLE stand for again?
Speaker 2: NOBLE stands for the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement executives.
Speaker 1: And, now--
Speaker 2: And the National Black Police Association, of which we had--in the initial beginning of it, it took us like almost three days of meeting in St. Louis [Missouri] to come up with some bylaws and a, and a mission statement and etc.  But we started out with 13 organizations.  In about 2 months we had 32 organ--I'm sorry, we were in 22 states, 35 major metropolitan areas, we had chapters.  All under the guise of the National Black Police Association.  And again, when we started to take inventory in Detroit [Michigan], New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Los Angeles [California], Chicago, we found that there were many, many problems that exists between us and the black bosses, that we didn't think needed to exist because we were really talking about changing policy from the top down in all the police departments.  And so we saw NOBLE in the first instance as a, as a vehicle that, that should have been and could have been--and still might eventually be, a very integral part of changing police paradigms across this country.  But so far, you know, they haven't arose to that occasion.  And they, they are 501(c)(3).  And they do a lot of educational stuff.  And I know they consult a lot with the federal government and other entities.  But they've never been advocates for change at this level.
Story_ID: 12774
Speaker 1: Now, I just wanted to recap for a second, some of these divisions.  Now, we've got the police and the community.  Then we've got in the police departments black officers--well, you've got officers that do their duty and those that go over and above duty, okay, first of all.  Then you've got black officers and white officers.  Then you've got like rank and file versus the executives on some level.  Now, here comes the women and men being an issue as well.  I think there's a women's police organization too, a black women's police organization as well a white women's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so now you're speaking specifically in the area of black officers.  That's one of our biggest downfalls.  That's, that, that has been a major contributing factor to our ineffectiveness.  Now, now, just think about it for a second.  When we first started the National Black Police Association, our ability to meet with the U.S. Attorney on issues that were germane to public safety in urban America, starting with the U.S. Attorney leaving, that was from here, very conservative white man from, from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] area.  But they could not ignore what we were raising as legitimate issues in terms of what was contributing to the, the gap between police and community from our perspective.  I mean this is back in the early '70s [1970s].  All of the successors from that point on had to at least consult what we were talking about because we were filing lawsuits across the country.  And, and where lawsuits were being entered into consent decrees, it was because they were being guided by what we had established here in Chicago in terms of case law.  We had to the sue the City of Chicago.  We had to beat them.  We had to hold up revenue sharing money to make the late Mayor [Richard J.] Daley comply with federal orders as it related to that lawsuit.  So it wasn't like we were, we were walking around the country stumbling through this thing.  We were talking about a very systemic problem internally with respect to hiring and promotions and assignments and discipline.  But we were also talking about the much broader picture of, how do we as people coming from a community keep that entity that we work for honest, when it comes to serving and protecting us?  So the divisions among the black officers, we, we could see it early on.  I mean when we first started, for example, the NBPA, we had several chapters in, in the national that had had women police officers much longer than Chicago.  Remember, Chicago was a late bloomer when it came to police women; that absent our lawsuit, where the women eventually joined, they had a separate, an entirely separate exam for women.  They could only be a Youth Officer and Matron.  They weren't on the street, period as, as equals to men prior to our lawsuit.  But we could see the rift early on in terms of what was gonna happen as we became more and more community oriented and less and less military oriented about the job.  That was the challenge.  That was the essence of our whole reason for existence.  Well, the women that were in police department s in New York [New York], in Detroit [Michigan], in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in Cleveland [Ohio], that had been around for a long time, we started asking them to do workshops about the relationship between male and female officers because they had crossed that bridge years ago.  Many of them were in unions already, and they were, they were equal pay, equal everything.  I mean it wasn't like a big issue for them.  Women in Chicago, we realized that there was gonna be some camaraderie between white and black females.  But we knew that there was a double issue for black female officers.  So we started as an organization having a separate meeting with the women on the job to talk about how many ways we can be split apart.  You know the strategy for the, for the racist white power structure was to keep us divided by showing that the black officer didn't have any power anyway.  So you'd better try to hook up with some white supervisor or some white partner or somebody.  And they played that race card to a bust.  And the gender part just fell right into it.  It became extremely difficult for us to start talking about, what happens when the black female becomes a supervisor.  We had to take black males back to school about how much respect they deserved over and above the respect that you might not want to afford a, a supervisor previous to the female because she had to cut the mustard twice to do it.  And if she was black, three times, you see.  So we, we were cognizant of that fact.  So what happened after they literally destroyed the economic base of the Afro-American Patrolman's League by way of payroll deduction, they had already been very successful in demonstrating how their double standard of discipline could work.  I mean they, they, they took a leader--and I, I was arrested so many times.  I was, I was on trial for committing battery against a white police officer on the day that Mayor Daley died.  Most people didn't know that.  I mean I was actually going through a jury trial for a confrontation between a white officer and I where we signed complaints against one another.  And his complaint never got to the courtroom.  And every time my lawyer raised it, they changed jur--judges.  (Laughter) The judge would recuse himself and move it on to another one.  But that's another story.  But my point is the, the division of leadership for blacks, one of the reasons we have rifts nationally and locally is because by design, every four or five years some new leadership emerges and says, we need our own group.  It's happened across the country in patterns that are trackable, traceable.  And so what you have now in Chicago, specifically, is about five organizations.  And all of them collectively don't represent more than 15 or 20 percent of the black officers because most black officers have done what they were used to doing in the first place, and that's just back away from it and not be bothered with it.  It took a while for us to convince officers to even join our movement because it was so compelling for them to do it based on their own circumstances, their own self interest.  But that's not the case anymore.  You don't get promoted or demoted because you are or are not in a black group anymore.  If you belong to the union, that's all they're asking you to do.  And, and our own personal self interests about how our community gets treated or how the children get criminalized by the police apparatus, etc., as a person.  I mean it, it's the kind of thing that if you say, do black officers realize at this juncture how they could play a role in, in setting the standard for police performance in their own community?  Would white officers be more respectful of black people, in general, if more black officers demonstrated that same level of respect for black people?  I think so.  I think so.  It's easy for the white officer to be apathetic just like it is for the black one.  So the one who's out there getting a reputation or taking drug money cause it's lucrative or locking up a bunch of youngsters cause they're members of gangs or look like gang members, there's no opposition to that right now.  So when you've got that much fragmentation in organizations, it's no wonder that, that the discussion is not at the, at the base of what kind of people are being recruited?  What kind of training are they receiving?  How they're being held accountable for the performance?  You know, the truth of the matter is, we were the social conscience of the Chicago police department .  Ultimately, we became the social conscience of America.  We are now revisiting in the year 2002, the issue of racial profiling, which was an issue that we called "double standards" back in the '60s [1960s].  There's nothing new there, you know.  The, the sick part about it is that we have allowed several generations of officers, black and white, to come into an environment to provide a service that they have not been trained to do.  The social responsibility of policing in America today is a little bit beyond what it was when I came on the job.  The, the social consciousness of, of young people in terms of respecting government, its operatives called police, courts, corrections, etc.  I mean they've seen a lot of things that we haven't seen in terms of open and notorious misconduct and corruption and brutality, tolerated by the system, protected by the system, paid for by the system, by way of out-of-court settlements over and over again in every city in the country, especially the larger cities.  So we're not talking about so much, you know, the black officers having, and experienced the racism of America because they were black.  That was, that was an aggravate.  That was exacerbation to the real issue and that was the consciousness of how do you police in communities that you don't have respect for based on the color of it or the economic status of it or the gender of it?  I mean the police can be just as brutal with a gay as they can with a black when there's no black around, you see.  They can be just as brutal with a white drunk in a domestic situation, if they choose to, and they will be when they get ready to.  But the open and wanton way that they treat legitimate citizens in our community is what's unacceptable.  And until black officers get back into the forefront of protesting that, they are conceived as just--as much a part of the problem as anybody else, and rightfully so because you can't really complain that much about the race of a policeman who kills a black citizen.  You have to talk about the race of the victim and the system tolerating it, you see.
Story_ID: 12775
Speaker 1: And so we're down to, how do we being to measure police performance, and who's gonna be responsible for the standard bearer of the ethic?  And I'm saying that we don't have a choice, black officers don't have a choice.  I don't think Latino officers have a choice.  I don't think decent, well-meaning white officers have a choice, but they've been able to skirt for a long, long time because the onus is not on them to blow the whistle.  And everyone of them that has, you check it out.  Every white officer that has ever blown the whistle felt the wrath of the white community in such a way that blacks don't even know how it go.  Can I tell you one story to make my point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I had young, white officer who came on the job with a Sociology degree.  And he attended some of the Afro-American Patrolman's League's workshops where we were talking about the sensitivity of the race issue and the relationship between our community and the white community.  We're talking in the '70s [1970s] now, and it's just as prominent today as it was then.  This--we separated the sessions because we wanted black officers and white officers to first feel comfortable speaking without each other getting offended.  So we conducted these workshops separately with the intent to bring them two together when they sensitized enough--because we already saw how it happened in roll call when you brought it up like that, in the Training Academy when you brought up race.  It was always a no-no, and it was always fraught with danger cause everybody was armed and everybody was capable of going off--or anybody, I should say, was capable of going off.  This young kid came to session.  He sat through the first session.  And we did it at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in that center over there, that, that center where you have a lot of community meetings.  I've forgotten the name of it over there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Sociology building.
Speaker 1: It's attached to the Sociology Department.  This kid was so open and frank with his participation and discussion.  He was asking us things about, why do black people seem to hate him before he opened his mouth?  And why do they look at you with such contempt when you pass by them on the corner?  And sometimes they don't speak back.  I mean this is a young, college student that just got hired.  This is his concern.  We were in the process of sensitizing him to the extent that historically, you know, so many guys that look just like you have had such a horrible experience in this arena doing the wrong thing and causing it to happen, that we're now in the process of trying to heal that.  And that's why these workshops are necessary.  That kind of stuff.  He got back to work.  He worked in Fillmore, predominantly black district.  The first pressure he got was from the commander who called him in, who recognized that he was a young, naïve kind of guy, and he just sort of told him.  He said, we got word back--we didn't know that half the white guys in the first session we had was IAD [Internal Affairs Department] people.  I mean, they were, (laughter) they were all from Internal Affairs.  And all they were doing is taking notes on who came.  I mean just--it was, it was so pathetic when we really found out what was going on.  Anyway, here's the three pressure levels this kid got.  The first pressure level was the people that supervise him and, and evaluate his performance.  The second pressure level was from the guys that work with him, that were on the street with him saying, who you gonna call in the middle of the night behind one of them jungle bunny's homes?  Us or them?  I mean, in other words, you know, he, he was told in no uncertain terms, you'd better choose your friends more carefully if you intend to get along.  They didn't realize he wasn't choosing friends.  He was trying to figure out what he was supposed to be doing as a professional, who had been trained in Sociology to have some concept of human behavior and maybe acknowledge that there are different cultures we might have to interact with.  But the third pressure was the most devastating level of pressure.  When he came back to explain and what he's saying--what I'm saying to you, he said to me because he would not come in the room the second session.  He came back to tell us he couldn't come in the room and why.  So these first two explanations I just gave you.  And the third one was the one that I think we have to acknowledge--it's not an excuse for the white officer, but at least an explanation.  Most police officers are very clannish.  They spend time with other officers.  I mean that's their world, you know, us, us police, you know.  And now, more and more, they're filtering the women in too cause she's the daughter or the wife or the sister or something or one of the family.  But the guys were the ones back in the days I'm talking about, you know.  And they said that this guy was gonna suffer a social rejection in terms of, you know--when they tell you can't have a drink with them after work cause you ain't one of the boys, I mean you're working in a predominantly black community.  Y'all get off from work, go to y'all's favorite water hole and you ain't welcome because you don't know who your friends are.  At Christmas time when your wife and the other guys' wives and stuff, y'all have a good Christmas party and bring all your kids over and all that stuff, you're not welcome.  That's what this cat was confronted with immediately.  So when people say, why don't the white officers object more, they're not all doing the wrong stuff.  Why don't they object more?  And then when you think about a white detective that blew the whistle many years later on the keeping of a street file.  When they arrested a black police sergeant's son for a murder of a girl--I don't know if you remember this.  It was the Jones case.  This police officer's son's name was Jones.  The detectives that was investigating that murder of a, of a, of a 12-year old girl whose brother had been beat into a coma at the same time of the incident, who was 10 years old, they arrested this black man's son.  They kept him in the county jail with such a high bond that the father came to Afro-American Patrolman's League for some assistance because he just didn't--he was flabbergasted.  His son was an A student at, at the high school that he was attending, was either the editor or the assistant editor of the newsletter, had never been in trouble before.  In his almost comatose state, the kid gave the name George, which was the same as this kid's first name.  Instead of the detectives that were on the case, through the process of elimination, putting the Georges that they wanted to investigate into the loop, they arrested this guy's son.  And by the time the Defense Attorney found out that they had been keeping a separate file, a white detective had blown the whistle on them, inadvertently, just saying that I'm the relief guy on this investigation.  And they've got some files that I haven't seen.  And the Defense Attorneys found out that they had evidence in their file already that would have eliminated this kid.  Now, they settled the case, but they drove the boy crazy.  Can you imagine?  Seventeen year old kid, sitting in the county jail as an accused murderer and is being treated as a murderer and the detectives know better?  That's kind of cold, isn't it?  But they castigated this detective.  He is now a lawyer someplace, somebody told me.  They ruined his career.  His name was Laverty, if I recall correctly.  But my point is this, that was the kind of guy you look for in the white ranks.  You say, just be fair.  You ain't got to be no hero.  But, you know, the irony of it, when we were in the really thick of--we had a newsletter called 'The Grapevine' that we would put officer's names in there that needed to be investigated.  I mean we would flow--just say go look at them.  You could come back and say well, is that slander?  Is that--you know, what is that, you know?  Well, to us, it was the only weapon we had.  We said, the complaint has come to us.  We don't have the capacity to investigate its veracity.  You do it.  But we had so many white guys that would send us information and call us and just telling on one another (laughter), but not, not to be exposed.  So I'm saying the police department  has never bought into a legitimate hotline cause they say if it's anonymous complaint, we're not gonna investigate it.  And they circumvented the possibility of getting that kind of support.  But I say, as professionals, I don't think we can afford the luxury, going into these next seasons with the, with the kind of things that we're experiencing from the, from the unknown, unidentifiable sector of criminals, I don't think white officers can afford to be quiet while working in the black community about misconduct.  I think they're gonna have to speak out.  I think the union, of all places, should be the place that they start to talk about what is our responsibility to public safety from an ethical perspective.  And I think that's a fundamental question that they're gonna have to answer and come to grips with.  I think every family that has a white officer, working in the black community, as every family that has a black officer, needs to be fearful for the lives of the people that have to serve in certain--under certain conditions, but there are some things that we could neutralize our community on by being honest and forthright about what's wrong.  And I just think that's, that's one of the challenges for the future.
Story_ID: 12776
Speaker 1: Sir, I'd like to ask you about your, the chronology of your career and your involvement in the Afro-American Patrolman's League, and we can just recap the development a little bit and how you got involved and what you role you played?
Speaker 2: Again, there was a group of individuals that came on television in 1968 saying that they were gonna become the voice of the community in terms of police conduct, etc.  And I joined that group.  I was there approximately 2 months, a month or two after they had formed and two days after they came on television.  I don't know, the time frame we're talking is probably somewhere between April and June of 1968.  Immediately, there was a lot of openings for, for officers (laughter).  It was in formation.  I mean it was brand new.  The Board of Directors wasn't structured yet.  Officers had been selected for incorporation purposes.  They had a president, they had an executive director.  And I think they had a secretary of record.  So I immediately became a vice president in charge of recruiting.  And, you know, we did some surveys.  We went to different stations, had people signing pledges to say that they would join if they got an opportunity to.  So, you know, we've got a document that shows the first 250 people that actually signed a pledge saying that they would like to be a part of whatever this forms into.  That's a very sacred document for me because that was only followed up by something more structured, was our roster of payroll deduction, which came many years later--several years later, I should say.  But my career, was on a pretty good path.  I mean I had--my efficiency ratings were very high when I met these guys.  That came out in federal court.  I mean I had--you know, my evaluations was high.  I had put some people in jail.  I had locked up rapists.  I had locked up robbers.  I had locked up burglars.  I had wrote a lot of tickets, but most of my work had been in the white community prior to--you know, I, I must say I think I locked up a whole lot more white people than most black police in their whole career.  It wasn't cause I harassed them.  It was just, that was community I was working in.  I left the Uniform Division and went into the Task Force.  We talked--I talked a little bit about what that, that part of my career was about.  But that was an upward step.  I mean when you got into an elite unit such as Gang Crimes or, or Task Force, you, your efficiency ratings were gonna be high, and you were gonna do all right.  So this organization sort of interrupted my career.  And it became necessary, because of the kind of work we was doing, for me to take a leave of absence from the Chicago police department .  I became the president of the association.  I was the vice president from, like 1969 to 1971.  I was the--there was two vice presidents, one executive vice president and a vice president in charge of recruiting.  I was the guy that had to go to the stations.  I was the guy that had to pull the guys and say let me sign you up.  I was the guy that--I literally had to meet just about every black police officer in Chicago [Illinois] because my job required me to go to stations and do recruiting.  And so when I had a cadre of individuals that were a part of my cluster, then we were the recruitment tool.  That's what we began to do.  And that's when we began to get in trouble.  My first leave of absence, I took in 1975.  I actually ran for alderman as a candidate for the Afro-American Patrolman's League in the 7th Ward.  That's when we were beginning to get exposed to the political realities of what we were trying to do.  That's when we started to find out what aldermen were supporting what we were trying to do.  We had one black congressman at the time, Ralph Metcalfe, who had found himself, you know, just tied to us at the hip after one of his constituents, Dr. Herbert Odom, got brutalized.  And he spoke out against it.  And, and the late Mayor [Richard J.] Daley took issue with that, and took exception with that and ran a candidate against him, tried to take his office from him.  Well, we then find ourselves in the middle of the political arena.  So we were running candidates.  In '75 [1975], we were working very hard.  That's how I met Harold Washington, shortly after he had introduced a bill on stop and frisk for us as a state representative, back in the mid-'70s [1970s].  After Mayor Daley died in 1976, my career had, had taken another turn.  I had taken--I had gone back to work, got in some more trouble with the Afro-American Patrolman's League and took another leave of absence.  I was actually working as security for Mayor Washington when he ran for mayor in 1977, which was right after the first, the late mayor died.  My career took another turn.  I went back to active duty again.  Each one of these times that I would go back to active duty, I was leading the Afro-American Patrolman's League in terms of its recruitment of membership.  That was my role, that was my job, to deal with the membership issues.  Renault [Robinson], at that time, became the executive director.  He was the second executive director, which he became in 1981.
Speaker 1: The first being--
Speaker 2: Buzz Palmer, Buzz Palmer, Edward "Buzz" Palmer was the first executive director.  Renault was the first president.  Renault was the second executive director, and I was the second president--I mean the first--strike that.  Second president.  I became the third executive director and [Edgar L.] Ed Gosa  became the third president.  And our succession was, was structured like that.  I mean everybody that had been a part of the basic core of this thing, became directors, recruiters, counselors, etc. in our program, that some of us had to take leave of absence to do.
Story_ID: 12777
Speaker 1: When, when--I can fast forward a little bit and say my career got interrupted in the, in the--when I became the president of the organization [Afro-American Patrolman's League], part of our Board of Directors' responsibility and by-laws said that we couldn't even take promotional exams, as members of the Board of Directors because the, the compromise of being a supervisor and them being able to turn that against us was becoming more and more obvious to us.  I mean it was, there were very few free individuals above the rank of sergeant in the police department .  So we didn't--we kind of circumvented taking the exams for many years.  Some of our members started to take exams in the late, late '70s [1970s], '78 [1978], '79, but personally, my career had been interrupted.  My disciplinary record had been established.  I had been suspended many, many times by the time we got to 1979.  In 1979, I don't know if you recall, there was the first female mayor of the city of Chicago [Illinois], Jane Byrne.  Well, Harold Washington had run in 1977.  I think Richard [H.] Newhouse had run.  Several individuals had tried to, to run for mayor in the city of Chicago, but we were--
Speaker 2: They were running for the unfilled term of the old Mayor [Richard J.] Daley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, but I think Harold, Harold was the, the high percentage candidate.  In '77, he got about 11 percent of the vote (laughter).  He was the high man in terms of black votes.  The election of Jane Byrne changed a lot of things for my career in that--for the organization overall, really, because she brought the union in which was the beginning of our economic demise.  That's when our, our first real hit came in terms of about 80 percent, 75 percent of our annual budget was our membership dues.  And the first union contract agreed that there would be no payroll deduction for anybody except the bargaining agent.  And so they wiped out everybody that had payroll deductions.  We took the hit.  Everybody else had to take the hit, so we couldn't just, you know, cry over that only.  But that also changed another specific area.  It started the, the, the unionization of police services in such a way that collective bargaining eliminated the public input.  In other words, there was no more aldermanic pressure to be applied to police services because the, the collective bargaining was an agreement between the city administration and, and a group of police officers.  And when they started talking about things that were relating to police misconduct and brutality and stuff like that, they started making rules and, and started enacting basic ground rules for how the police were gonna be conducting their business and what the disciplinary process was gonna be limited to in terms of how you redressed that as a citizen.  But it forced us into a position of starting our own police brutality complaint program.  We started to document police misconduct back in 1974, '73 [1973].  But that era from 1979 where the union showed us how really bizarre things had gotten cause we had never really tried to compile that documentation and tell a story with that documentation as it related to unions until much later.  But it also changed something else.  Jane Byrne did something that had never been done before.  She took her security and made them exempt police personnel and gave them the rank of commanders.  With that rank, they were, they were equal to commanders of police, as coordinators of her security detail.  And, well, as history played it out, we ended up running a black mayor in 1982.  He was successful and won in 1983.  I had to come off of leave of absence to take over his security.  I was asked to do that.  It impacted the leadership of the organization because Renault [Robinson] had already been used by Jane Byrne--I should say, I shouldn't say used, but appointed by Jane Byrne to the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] Board, if you recall.  I, in turn, became the executive director at that time.  [Edgar L.] Ed Gosa became the president.  The leadership of the organization was pretty much in, in my court.
Story_ID: 12778
Speaker 1: The taking over of Mayor [Harold] Washington's security detail required me to abdicate my responsibilities with the organization [the Afro-American Patrolman's League] and take over a full-time job of protecting probably a high-risk individual, more high-risk than anybody in the country at that time, was that black man.  And it's a whole 'nother story about how those years went, and we won't go into that on this tape.  But, needless to say that my responsibilities entailed recruiting his detail, having his detail trained and then dealing with the various political entities that were of a threatening nature to him, which included several of the city council members back in those days.  Now, we're talking 1983, '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: During the Council Wars?
Speaker 1: Well, they called them Council Wars.  And you have to think about this though from the standpoint of what did that do to a police department  that had that level of resentment for the first black mayor that already had a reputation for being less than professional with a community of people that he came from, very interesting stuff; another conversation.  But it, it affected my career in, in a negative way and a positive way.  The negative way was that I had already served as the chairman of the National Black Police Association, one full term, but my responsibility as a regional organizer for the National Black Police Association was also impacted when I took that job.  So much of what we had put in place across the country began to break down because my age group were going into other things, and me specifically, had gone into something else.  We had a negative impact nationally in terms of black police organizations, in terms of having to come to the forefront because black mayors were being elected across the country.  And many of those organizations had to get more focused on the politics of the city than keeping the employment place honest.  We didn't automatically replace all the white police chiefs with black chiefs.  In fact, some cities had big fights over who the chief was gonna be, even with black mayors.  And I think you could probably look in the history book and see some examples of where that took place in cities like Cleveland [Ohio] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and other places.  But my point is, the upside was that I immediately, after having had my whole career crushed as a result of being a representative of an organization that was bringing about social change, I catapulted to the rank of a commander, which gave me an opportunity to see a whole 'nother side of what we were up against from the inside because now, I was an exempt person.  I went to exempt meetings.  I could see the kind of pressure that was being placed on black exempt personnel.  I could see why a black District Commander who had several white lieutenants and captains under him was limited in terms of the kind of decisions he could make, the kind of power he could wield because, in spit of all of what we're talking about, the union was one cadre of, of power for, for white racism, as far as I'm concerned.  But so was the captains and the lieutenants and the sergeants' associations.  They were very racist also.  Blacks became automatically eligible to be members of it, but they wasn't holding no offices and they wasn't making no decisions.  So that rank of managers were a direct opposition to us as an organization and to the first black mayor.  So, you know, we, we're now talking about how fragmentation takes place.  Well, you know, there were a lot, a lot of political decisions being made by black officers there.  Well, how long we gonna have a black mayor, and can he do anything with the, with the promotions and, you know, and they knew that there was a certain amount of continuity going on in terms of entrenched control of upward mobility in the Chicago [Illinois] police department .
Speaker 2: It's said the Chicago police department  is linear and familial with jobs being passed from one generation to the next in the same families.
Speaker 1: And you know the irony of that, when we filed our lawsuit, the white ethnic organizations were all saying the same thing, the Irish got all the jobs.  Italians ain't got nothing; the Polish ain't got it.  We ain't no bosses.  I said, why don't you raise hell about your sector and stop acting like I'm doing something wrong.  I mean that was an on-going discussion (laughter).  Won't you get your fair share?  But, you know, rather than confront that, it was easier to just take a position of those guys over there are making it bad for all of us, you know.  So affirmative action was problematic.  So my career got back on course as a commander through the Washington and the [Eugene] Sawyer era, as a commander.  But listen to the irony.  When I got ready to retire, they didn't want to give me the opportunity to count my time as the head of a black police association for pension purposes.  I mean they actually blocked my career service time to the extent that my 25 years, as far as they were concerned, was void, null and void for the years that I was the head of the Afro-American Patrolman's League.  Our lawyers had to go into federal court, make the parable of the police union head taking leave to do what they do, which was the very same thing I was doing, in order for us to be victorious in federal court.  But most people think I just retired outright.  I had to sue for my pension.
Story_ID: 12779
Speaker 1: So my point is the creation of the black police entity and it's impact on social America, in terms of the election of black mayors and its capacity to change the social atmosphere in terms of how police treat black people, that role is very key.  And I don't think we, we--we've been so fragmented in the last 10 to 15 years, and we haven't been able--no one has been able to pull that entity back together.  But you know what they did last year--strike that, in the year 2002, they invited the elders back to the table to help them get back on course.  So we might get another bite at the apple as we speak, but the point of the matter is, there's, there's a very distinct difference in a career when you go along to get along and a career that challenges injustice in police department s throughout America, but specifically, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: And (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, it, it comes with the territory, that's exactly right.
Speaker 2: What do you see happening today?  Where do you see, where is the future of the African American policemen league today?
Speaker 1: Well, I think the future of the Afro- Amer--African American police are the same today as it was when we started.  There real strength is how attached are they to the community, how integrally woven into the community fabric are they?  I'm talking church.  I'm talking school.  I'm talking business.  I'm talking every aspect of our community is where we have to be in the center of it.  And we need to be in the center as the people that have the knowledge about the Criminal Justice System and how it works and how we as a people can make that system work in our behalf.  That's the role I see.  As long as we're trying to be anything other than that--for example, if we're trying to be a black Fraternal Order of police or we're trying to be anything other than a public servant that happens to be in the Criminal Justice arena as a professional, we're gonna find ourselves victimized by an entity that we don't have control over.  See, we can empower.  We can help to empower our community to get control of the police department  in our community.  The white officers don't have that problem.  They never have had that problem.  When an Irish officer comes from an Irish community and goes back to that community to police, nobody forgets that.  I mean the church is the first one to acknowledge, this is our guardian.  This is to be respected.  Well, we don't get that respect, and part of it is because we haven't commanded it.  And the second part of it is we haven't demanded it.  And those are two different work ethics.  But, my, my, my fright is we can't get to that point until we hit the ground and, and just splatter on the ground completely for people to realize that you can't have a safe society--now, they can measure it by the blacks if they like, but they want to keep saying the black community is a crime citadel of America.  You can't have a free society that has the kind of disdain for law enforcement that America has right now in the, in the non-white communities and more and more white communities.  It's no, just no way.  And so the, the onus is not on black officers, but we certainly can be an example of what we're talking about.  And I think that's the, that's the responsibility, that's the future that I see, the role of me.
Story_ID: 12780
Speaker 1: You've been involved since the [Afro-American Patrolman's] League, since your police career, you've been involved with a program that's called Positive Anti-Crime Thrust [PACT].  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, the Positive Anti-Crime Thrust was the educational arm of the Afro-American Patrolman's League.  Initially, we had two 501(c)(3)s, the League to improve the community, which took the brunt of our early start-up.  You know, we were the ones that--that was the organization that I was taking leave to work for, trying to deal with the police issues as the head of a black police organization.  But the Positive Anti-Crime Thrust was like the one on the shelf, you know.  It, it got incorporated in 1979.  But once I retired I just kind of went back to some of the original Board of Directors that just lay dormant and asked them would they be willing to, to come back alive, to work for the organization.  And this time, our focus was not just police, but it was police, courts and corrections because there's a direct correlation between what we do as police officers, how the court system impacts or reacts to that action, and ultimately, what the, the prison system looks like, based on what we've done at the intake level called the police.  So it's a vicious cycle for us to be involved in.  So the organization that I'm a part of right now is basically a nucleus of organization networks.  And, you know, it, it has tentacles in community organizations whose focus is criminal justice.  My--I sit on several advisory boards for community organizations and visa versa.  We've been very successful in doing things in the public school system on the prevention side of it with programs that had, had began to impact safety in schools in Chicago [Illinois].  Unfortunately, politi--as politics would have it, I'm not a favorite son of the powers that be these days.  And they interrupted it as soon as the Paul Vallas guy, who was working with me, and he may publicly say it and may not, but he saw a lot of merit in what we were doing and began to get a lot of mileage in things we were able to do with 18 high schools that were classified remediation high schools when we started trying to do the effort.  But part of that work was taking high school students that were at a high-threat level, and taking them to prisons on visits, talking to inmates, who were not much older than them, talking about negative lifestyles and bringing it back to school as an organizing tool.  It was being very effective.  We had started to take organizations like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League, etc., and give some fresh spin on their voter registration by talking about the value of the vote as it related to court systems.  I mean we still didn't get as far along as, as we could have, had I been looked upon as a worthwhile venture (laughter).  But, you know, when you're in a town like Chicago, you can't, you can't be negative in 1968 and '69 [1969], and not feel the wrath of it in 2002 if it's still lineage and linear kind of leadership.  It's just a fact of life.  So the Positive Anti-Crime Thrust has linked up with several community organizations in other cities, you know, encouraging black police officers to create an educational arm with their police association that can effect police, courts and corrections from a prevention, an intervention and a successful reintegration strategy.  I go into prisons.  I started out going in there as some kind of motivation speaker.  But before I knew it, you know, we had various entities within the institution trying to be self-help in preparation of coming back, not that the inmates weren't already trying it.  But they hadn't heard the police talking about let us be part of this process because I'm tired of arresting your son and now your grandson, since you've been in here, you see.  So as an organization, I don't think I've ever been real successful at promoting what we do so that it would be attractive to the black dollar cause I get a lot of regret letters from foundations who don't really see the merit of what we're doing because it's so centered on African American issues.  But I haven't had an opportunity to make that kind of appeal to the, to the, to the black money.  And maybe, just maybe, before I pass away, my replacement, which is in the, in the hopper now.  I've got a young, black officer that--he's a Youth Officer in the Chicago police department .  He's done a couple of T.V. shows, but he's already had to file his own personal lawsuit against the police department  discriminating against him, only because he raised the issue of a double standard in the way they deal with youth officers.  But I'm hoping that because he's actually a business entrepreneur also and college trained, which I was not when this started, he'll be a little more astute on how to create the economic development side of this work because social work has to have an economic base.  It took me all these years (laughter) to realize that, you know, of all the social good that you think you're doing, if you don't have the capacity to be self perpetuating, and you don't have guardian angels that think your work is important--you have a lot of good ideas and you do a lot of good, but it doesn't come anywhere close to what you could do if you were structured with an economic strategy also.
Story_ID: 12781
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Saffold, how would you--I know this has been, given your story, it's really tough trying to reform the police department , how would--what do you think your legacy will be when this is all said and done?
Speaker 2: It depends on whose reading it or who's quoting or speaking on it.  To some, it may be looked as, you know, a guy that could have had a good career if he had of just did what he was told and been with the people he should be with, etc., but I kind of look at, you know, I'm making a minor contribution to a major concern.  You know, I grew up in Chicago [Illinois].  And a lot of people have done a lot of things to make me be able to sit, talking about 25 years of police as opposed to 25 years in the penitentiary.  And the same opportunities, the same dangerous temptations have been here.  So I owe some time.  And this has not been all blood and guts for me, you know.  Every now and then, a little bitty victory will carry you for 10 or 12 years, you know.  I think it's, it's fair to say that, that I took a code of ethics, and I took it serious.  And I always thought that the table stakes for black officers and white officers were the same.  You didn't have but one life to give.  And if people were doing things that could put that in jeopardy, then you need to be against that, no matter who it is.  And so, you know, I just kind of took my time and, and tried to apply myself in such a way that nobody would think of me as a damn fool for the doing the things and actually, maybe even consider making a contribution themselves at some point, if they get an opportunity to.
Story_ID: 12782
Speaker 1: Is there a joy to standing up against, what you think is wrong?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say a joy.  There's, there's a, there's a comfort to it.  There's a, there's a psychological, spiritual fulfillment to it because, you know, you don't do that every day, all day anyway.  You know what I mean.  You--I found myself being a coward a few times too.  I mean don't let nobody think you're a hero 24 hours a day, every day for the rest of your life.  Nah, but sometimes this will jolt you into reality and make you say, do I want to--is this the full bet?  Do I want to put it all down on the line right here, right now?  Nah, but I, I would say the joy comes if you can live through it because I can look back at some of the guys that made much, much early, early sacrifices and it broke them.  It broke them in ways that they didn't even predict.  So my, my joy is, is laced with, with ambivalence.
Speaker 1: What do you think has given you the strength to survive this struggle and be able to look back and look at your victories, and you know--
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's multi-faceted, you know.  I'm, basically, I believe in God.  Basically, I believe in right.  And basically, I believe that there are more righteous people than there are diabolical people on this earth.  And fortunately, sometimes when I got to my lowest ebb, I'd run into somebody that was stronger than I was, more determined than I was, had paid more dues than I had and were, you know, very emphatically saying, I ain't through yet.  You know, I've been, I mean I'm--and sometimes in the form of young people that hadn't made much.  I've, I've run into people in prison that gave me encouragement.  I've run into recovering addicts.  I've run into permanently injured police officers.  I lost a very, very close personal friend because some white officers was scared to go in a black tavern to get the guy that they were about to arrest.  And they asked him to go, and his partner accidentally killed him.  And the irony of it is we ended up saving this guy's life a second time, who caused my partner to get killed--there's just so many things that you don't put them in context until you start asking that same question of yourself.  Why am I doing this?  I've always had a very supportive wife [Carol Randall Saffold].  I mean cats like Renault [Robinson] had four young kids when we started.  I didn't have no young kids.  My kid was dead already.  You know, when, when you start thinking about your needs and compare that to people that have got so much less than you, all you got to do is pay attention for a second.  And you say, I ain't that bad off.  So my, my God keeps me focused.  My friends keep me encouraged, and the examples keep me believing that it makes sense to do (laughter) rightly.  And if you get a chance, contribute.  And if it's too much for you, be graceful enough, well, that's all I can give.  I can't give no more, and people will respect that.
Story_ID: 12783
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Just another guy that thought he had something to offer, based on where he had been and where he thinks he's going.  You know, I'm already in heaven here, man.  I'm, I'm paid fifty ways, you know, really, honest and truly.  I don't miss no meals, I ain't out in the cold.  I ain't addicted to drugs.  I even stopped drinking after I got in the real thick of this thing (laughter).  It took a while (laughter), but I'm saying, I'd like to be remembered just, just another guy that ran into some more people that felt like he felt, and got busy.
Story_ID: 12784
Speaker 1: Do you think you have a lot more to do?
Speaker 2: God willing.  You know, my last, my last is to do a little teaching.  I'd like to train some trainers.  I'd like to, I'd like to get access to some young people that, that are in the, in the crossroads of their lives about making good decisions and about material value as opposed to spiritual value and, and good health as opposed to big, thick, full pockets, you know what I mean, just little simple things.  I want to do a little teaching.  So I go, I go, and I study, I study Scripture, you know.  I read.  I ain't hung up on religion, but I'm hung up on spirituality and I'd like to just be a messenger for, for the spirituality, without calling myself a preacher or without calling myself a minister cause I don't have the discipline or the calling for that, as I said.  But, you know, I got, I got a little energy left.  I'm not, I'm not tired of what I'm doing.  I'm tired of losing (laughter).  You know what I mean, I'm tired of losing generations of police officers and losing generations of young black children on account of that, but in terms of the fire that, that brought me to the table, nah, man.  I get stronger every year.
Story_ID: 12785
Speaker 1: And did your parents get a chance to see your career develop?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Dewitt Saffold] died early.  He died in, he died in the thick of, of our struggle, before Harold Washington.  He died in '81 [1981].  But my mom [Eva Saffold] didn't die until 2001.  So she saw quite a bit.  And she, she had nicknames for all of my partners.  You know, Renault [Robinson], all of them had nicknames to her.  She just adopted a bunch of sons.  So, I think they saw a little something.
Story_ID: 12786
Speaker 1: All right, well, one final question, what do you think about this project, this oral history project that you're participating in?
Speaker 2: I think it's very, very, very important.  I think part of our problem in today is we keep repeating history that we, we, we get in fragments.  And if, if the project, as it was explained to me by the, the founding personality and people like the person that's interviewing me and the person that's doing the camera, it's a passion work for, for people.  And it's very important.  It's--it'll save us some hardship.  In other words, you know, like you say, you can't live long enough to make all the mistakes so benefit by a few made by other people.  I think you're documenting some, some things that, that our children, most of all, should see.  And our students, our future leaders, the people that'll be making decisions about race, about economics, about politics, about social justice, I mean they need to see the kind of work that you're doing.  So I think this is a very, very important project.  I just hate that I took up so much of your time.  And there's so many other people you need to talk to (laughter).
