Story_ID: 486882
Speaker 1: Okay, our HistoryMaker guest today is [HistoryMaker] Robert Louis Stevenson.  Mr. Stevenson, welcome to The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Okay. Glad to be here.
Speaker 1: First of all, I want to ask you if you would please say your name and then spell your name at birth.
Speaker 2: Robert Louis Stevenson, R-O-B-E-R-T, L-O-U-I-S, S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, sir.
Speaker 2: Same as the poet, the, the writer (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Poet.  And what is today's date, sir?
Speaker 2: Today is the 7th, July [July 7, 2007] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  What is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Four, twenty, forty-four [April 20, 1944].
Speaker 1: Four, twenty, forty-four [April 20, 1944].  That's April 20th?
Speaker 2: April 20th, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1944.  Okay, and you were born in what city, sir?
Speaker 2: Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Louisville, Kentucky, as they call it, okay.  King Tuck, okay.
Speaker 2: Old King Tuck.
Speaker 1: And where are we today?
Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles [California] right now, today (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Where in Los Angeles are we?
Speaker 2: In Ladera Heights [Los Angeles, California] (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, Ladera.
Speaker 2: Ladera Heights, California (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, spell Ladera Heights, please.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Ladera Heights?
Speaker 2: It's, oh.
Speaker 1: L-A-D (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) D--
Speaker 1: --E-R-A--
Speaker 2: --A-D-A.
Speaker 1: --and then Heights.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: H-E-I-G-H-T--
Speaker 2: I-G-H-T--
Speaker 1: --S.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ladera Heights, okay.  Where did you grow up at?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles, California] for elementarys- in my elementary years 'til I was about six, and then we moved to Watts [Los Angeles, California].  And I grew--and I graduated from high school [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California] from there, and so, east L.A. mainly (laughter), east L.A.
Speaker 1: So you are originally born right here in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: No.  I was raised here in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Born in Kentucky (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kentucky.
Speaker 2: --raised in, in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: And raised here?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486883
Speaker 1: We have what we call People magazine questions.  This is--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this is kind--I got little funny questions we have.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I guess I would have to say chicken like everybody else (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I said chitterlings myself.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I say chicken like everybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the reason why black versus green or red?
Speaker 2: I just think that black is just a clean color, just smooth, no curves, just straight (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me.  What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say summer.
Speaker 1: Summer.
Speaker 2: Summer; yeah, I would say summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Oh, we've been so many places, so I guess I could say Hawaii is one.
Speaker 1: Which island in Hawaii?
Speaker 2: Oahu [Hawaii], is cool.
Speaker 1: Oahu, Oahu, okay, Hawaii.  How about Maui [Hawaii]?
Speaker 2: Maui--
Speaker 1: Maui's good, okay.
Speaker 2: --could go--yeah, Maui's good.
Speaker 1: Like me some Maui.
Speaker 2: I also say, I could say South Africa too.
Speaker 1: Ooh--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what part of South Africa?
Speaker 2: Cape Town.
Speaker 1: Cape Town, South Africa; okay, South Africa.  All right, sir, what is your favorite phrase or saying that you, that you like to use?
Speaker 2: That's kind of hard.  I always use matter of fact (laughter).  Yeah, I kind of like, matter of fact.
Story_ID: 486884
Speaker 1: Let's stop and talk about your background.  Let's start out with your mother.  Okay, what is your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother is Christine Stevenson [Christine Whitaker Stevenson].
Speaker 1: Christine Steven- would you please spell that, sir?
Speaker 2: C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N, S-T-E-V-E-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Christine--
Speaker 1: --no E at the end?
Speaker 2: --Christine, E, E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got some--
Speaker 1: Christine Stevenson.
Speaker 2: Stevenson, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is she still alive today, sir?
Speaker 2: No, she's not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She was born, where was she born at?
Speaker 2: She was born in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Louisville, Kentucky, okay.  And she, she spend most of her life in Louisville?
Speaker 2: She spent until she's--I say I think she came to California she was like, like nineteen or something like that.
Speaker 1: Came to California when she was nineteen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was born when, when she was fifteen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where--okay, she was born in Louisville, Kentucky, came to Los Angeles [California] when she was nineteen.  When she came here to L.A., was, was she going to school here?  Was she working?
Speaker 2: No, my father [Willis Stevenson] was actually in the [U.S.] Navy. And, and we were transferring from Kentucky to here to live with my grandmother [Eddie Butler] while he--until he got out, so when--we ended up living in California.  That's how we ended up in California.  'Cause when he got discharged, he got discharged from Long Beach [Long Beach Naval Shipyard, California], so we ended up in California.
Speaker 1: So she was, she was married when, when, by--
Speaker 2: She was married.
Speaker 1: --an early age.
Speaker 2: She was married, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was married at how old?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I guess a little--at about age of fifteen or sixteen, somewhere around in there, 'cause I was born when she was like fifteen (laughter), so.  And they were married when we came here, so yeah, somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: Married at fifteen or sixteen, interesting, yeah.  I think that back in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was--
Speaker 1: --folks did that--
Speaker 2: --normal
Speaker 1: --a lot then.  They got--
Speaker 2: It was kind of normal, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it was normal for people to get married--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at a young age.  And they left--and lived longer too, didn't they?
Speaker 2: Some of them, yeah.  My mother didn't live too long, 'cause she, she died at thirty-three, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, died at thirty-three.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 486885
Speaker 1: Now, how many kids did you--did she [Stevenson's mother, Christine Whitaker Stevenson] have?
Speaker 2: Twelve at thirty-three.
Speaker 1: From the same husband [Willis Stevenson]?
Speaker 2: Same husband (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ouch.  Mother had twelve children (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That she did, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's a baseball team and then some.
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, football team too (laughter), if the girls can play (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you break it down?  How many boys?  How many girls?
Speaker 2: We have actually seven girls, and it was five boys, yeah.
Speaker 1: Seven, seven girls, five boys.
Speaker 2: Five boys.
Speaker 1: Now, the girls, their ages go from what to what?
Speaker 2: From--now, now they're probably gonna kill me for saying.  The, the oldest sister behind me is like sixty, and they go all the way down to like fifty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my youngest sister is fifty.
Speaker 1: And how about the boys?
Speaker 2: The boys, my brothers (unclear) see, he's about fifty--somewhere around fifty-eight, my brother that's next one, close to me.  And the youngest one is like forty-seven I think, so around there.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's quite a range.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: So she had them maybe just about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost a year.
Speaker 1: --every, every year.
Speaker 2: Every year, right.
Speaker 1: Had a baby every year.
Speaker 2: Almost every year.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I think the only space is between myself and my sister, and I think that's like, what, three years, four years, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Like three years.
Speaker 1: So she--the one thing's for sure, she didn't have to worry about buying clothes (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  We just passed down.  It was a lot of passing down, you know, hand-me-down, pass-me-down (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I mean she was pregnant all the time, so therefore she--her wardrobe, she didn't have to worry about it.
Speaker 2: It was simple.
Speaker 1: Simple wardrobe.
Speaker 2: Maternity. (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --smart; that was it.  You know, it's what women wore in those days, you know.
Story_ID: 486886
Speaker 1: Now how did your mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] and father [Willis Stevenson] meet?
Speaker 2: That I really can't even say.  You know, I really don't know.  But I imagine in school or somewhere around in there, you know, 'cause he was kind of like a little hustler, player, you know, whatever.  But my mother never really even said how they ever met, how they met.  But, but I know they were friends, you know, 'cause I know that my father--they knew each other, so I, so I figured it was from school, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna say it's in high school, somewhere in there.
Story_ID: 486887
Speaker 1: Now your father, what is his name?
Speaker 2: Willis Rodie Stevenson [Willis Stevenson].
Speaker 1: William?
Speaker 2: Willis.
Speaker 1: Willis?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I-S on the end of that.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his middle name?
Speaker 2: Rodie.
Speaker 1: R--
Speaker 2: R-O-D-I-E, yeah, Rodie.
Speaker 1: R-O-D-I-E, Stevenson, okay.  And he was born where?
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Also Louisville, okay.  And, let's see, he, born in Louisville, Kentucky; joined the [U.S.] Navy when he was?
Speaker 2: I'd say he's like seventeen.
Speaker 1: Wow, joined the Navy when he was seventeen years old.  And what did he do in the Navy?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I think he was just--he said he was just a seaman.  I guess, you know, the basic seaman, so.
Speaker 1: Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he's, he passed--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Was a deck seaman, okay.  Now your father, he moved--how long did he stay in the Navy for?
Speaker 2: I think he only stayed in three years, yeah three years, and then he discharged out--like I said, he discharged in Long Beach [California], and that was it for him in the service (laughter).
Speaker 1: Stayed three years in the Navy, discharged in Long Beach.  I, I was in the Navy for twenty, but I was discharged--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --me at Long Beach also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Stayed in Navy three years, okay; discharged at Long Beach Naval Station [Long Beach Naval Shipyard, California].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486888
Speaker 1: What were some of the earliest memories you had of your mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson]?
Speaker 2: She was like a great cook--I remember that (laughter)--and she was, was really like a, really a sweet person, very nice, easy with the kids, with, with, you know, especially with us, and also real--she was like a drill sergeant as far as, you know, taking care, make sure the house stayed in order.  She demanded order all the time, all the time.  There was no unruly kids, none.  And that's, I mean that's--matter of fact, one of the, the biggest things about her was order, more so than my father [Willis Stevenson].  We, we actually feared her more than my father.  My father didn't mean nothing.  My mother, everybody (laughter)--oh, she said go, everybody took off, you know, you know.  And she was a like a small lady, but she, she just demanded--when she (unclear) you know, so many kids, she just demanded that, you know, when she said something and she didn't want to say it twice, and she didn't want to say it four or five times.  She'd just go like, this is it, and that was it.  We moved or die (laughter); we moved or died.
Speaker 1: A little different than it is today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, a lot different than it is today.  I told my kids they'd be dead already (laughter).
Speaker 1: In fact, my mother [Mosetta Smalls], if I remember correct, my mother used to have a stick, and she called it the persuader.  Did your mother--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother, anything at hand, you know, shoes, broom, mop, you know.  If she had to get you, you know, what was ever close.  I mean she didn't go for a belt, you know, or go get a switch, none of that.  You know, she'd take off her shoe and start pounding you with it, you know.  She was just that way.
Story_ID: 486889
Speaker 1: What were some of your earliest memories of years of you--when you first came--how far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: My mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson]?
Speaker 1: Yourself. (Unclear) when you first started thinking and, and, and, and existing in this earth, what was your earl- earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I think around three, really.  When we lived Kentucky, I remember we used to live in this, used to live in this house that was kind of like--it remind me of a barn like, sort of, but it was an apartment building.  But it had a water pump, you know, one of the pumps, I mean, you know.  And I remember we used to walk on the boards, and they would be slippery.  And I used to be always afraid to, to walk on it because I thought I was gonna fall (laughter) down in it, you know, so.  That all--I always remember that, you know.  And I also remember the, the weather, cold, being cold and snow, you know, and, and my, my mom, yeah, walking us.  And we lived across the street from Central High School [Central High School Magnet Career Academy] in, in Kentucky [Louisville, Kentucky], and she used to walk us all the time, you know.  And it was my sister [Peggy Stevenson Harris] and I at that time.  And we remember we had to go up these stairs of this old building.  I just remember this old building.  That was like the earliest thing I remember about living in Kentucky and my life starting.  You know what I mean?  That, you know, that was about it; that's about it (laughter), you know.  Then--
Speaker 1: That's enough.
Speaker 2: --then, the rest of it took place here in California, so, yeah.
Story_ID: 486890
Speaker 1: I remember more of that than I remember in Kentucky.  'Cause I remember when we came here, I saw my [maternal] grandmother's [Eddie Butler] house, and I was like tripped out, you know, big old house, all the cars and you know.  You didn't see that in Kentucky at the time, you know, and all the different people.  And that kind of tripped me out, you know, you know, Asians and you know, and Mexican people, and Russian people.  It was, you know--and Jewish people--it was like a whole 'nother world when I got here, and I'd remember that.  You know, I was like looking around, and, and then when we got--we went upstairs to my grandmother's house, and my grandmother, you know, house seemed so large, you know, huge bathtubs.  'Cause my mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] used to wash us in the number ten tub, you know, those little tubs.  I mean we gotta--here's a bathtub, you know.  So it, it was--those, I remember all those, those things, you know.  And, and I remember starting the school on the Eastside, Utah Street Elementary School [Los Angeles, California].  I remember it just as well and walking home for lunch, 'cause we lived right across the street.  So it, it was all those little things that were really fun.  And my grandmother always cooked.  She always had on an apron, you know, in those days, you know.  And she was friends with the people that owned the store, and I remember we used--my fun thing was going--she would give me the book, you know.  People took tabs.  You got credit.  She'd give you a little book, and you'd take it to the store, and they would write what you got and tab it up, and then you take it--and I'll take it back to her.  I used to go and get candy and stuff like that.  That was like fun, you know.  And that was what I remember (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, good memories.
Speaker 1: When L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was young, you know, it was different, you know.  And then we used to walk downtown.  I remember I used to go--she used to take us to the barber college [Los Angeles Barber College, Los Angeles, California] downtown, and which was huge then, you know, in Grand Central Market [Los Angeles, California].  I remember going to Grand Central Market, and I thought that was another world.  We would see huge, you know, huge apples and oranges.  Things were like big.  You know, I had them all over; and fish, you know, they had like whole fish, you know.  I had never seen that before, you know, and that was like--it, it was like people crowded, and Angel Flight [sic. Angels Flight, Los Angeles, California], used to see the, the cars going up Angel Flight.  I thought that was like, you know.  All of that I remember, you know, and when downtown was like that.  I remember on Christmas we used to go to walk downtown across the 1st Street, get off the 1st Street Bridge [Los Angeles, California], go downtown.  And they had all of the stores decorated with Christmas (unclear) like they do in New York City [New York, New York].  I mean, that's when downtown was like the, the center.  It was no malls, you know.  It was the center of everything.  And the people were there, and then all the window decorations, and all the little things moving and trains.  And man, I thought that was--I was in heaven (laughter).  That was like every Christmas we couldn't wait to go down there, you know.  I mean and they don't have that now.  You know, you go to the mall; they decorate it up, but you know, it ain't nothing like the windows like in New York City.  You know how they do it in Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] and all of them.  That's, L.A. was like that, you know, and I, I remember that.  Streetcars, I remember we used to catch the streetcars, get anywhere you wanted to get L.A.  Now, you, you wait on the bus for two years before, before they get you where you want to go.  Freeways, they only had like one or two freeways, the old Pasadena Freeway [Arroyo Seco Parkway], which is the, the 110 [Interstate 110], you know; I mean like 45 [California State Route 45] wasn't there, you know, none of that stuff.  So I remember all of that, you know, driving the old--my father--grandfather [Stevenson's maternal step-grandfather, Clarence Butler (ph.)] having them old T-Model Fords [Ford Model T] and, and the old Dodges, you know.  Those were, you know, the great cars, you know, big old backseats and stuff like that.  And, and that's what we used to do.  Griffith Park [Los Angeles, California] was like--when you went to Griffith Park it was like going to the wilderness, you know.  It was like going to Yosemite [Yosemite National Park, California] or something, for us, in the city, you know.  And like 4th of July, I mean you almost had to get a reservation to, to get in Griffith Park.  And, and, and they have Griffith Park and Echo Park [Los Angeles, California] and Elysian Park [Los Angeles, California] and all of--I remember going to all those parks, and I thought it was, it was something.  And we used to fish.  They used to have lakes out there at Hollenbeck [Hollenbeck Park, Los Angeles, California].  We'd go to Hollenbeck and fish, drop lines.  You know what I mean?  I mean I remember (laughter) that was it.
Story_ID: 486891
Speaker 1: You know, it was, it was, it was good times, you know, until we moved to Watts [Los Angeles, California], you know, and then, then I--then it changed.  Then another part of my life changed a little bit there.  It was a whole different story, yeah.  But I was a little older and, and going to, you know, finishing elementary school [102nd Street School; Florence Griffith Joyner Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], going into junior high school [Edwin Markham Junior High School; Edwin Markham Middle School, Los Angeles, California].  It was a little tough.  Then I could see the struggle on my family, you know, more.  Because when I was a kid, you know, little, I mean what my grandmother [Eddie Butler] was doing; we were living with them, so it was kind of easy.  But when we got--left them, my mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson], when my mother and father [Willis Stevenson] just finally got their own place and moved into, and we moved to Watts, it changed, you know.  Then we lived in the projects then, you know.  Although we had a lot of room, but you know, there were families that were larger than our family, you know.  We had families with seventeen in there, you know, stuff like that.  But it was another world though.  It was now I had all these different kind of friends and you know, running around.  But it was different as far as the fun.  It wasn't that much fun, because now you have to see how to survive, you know.  Now, now you're competing with other kids like, you know, for everything, you know, just to play, you know.  And you gotta be with so and so or with so and so, so you can, you know, stay alive (laughter).  But it wasn't gangs.  It's just that that's the way kids played.  You know, you, you had the group here and a group there.  And that part was, you know, was a new experience for me and then, you know, specially, specially dealing with families because everybody tried to help.  You know, some families were even po- were poorer than ours.  We were poor, but there was families poorer than--couldn't, you know, had to borrow sugar, but people did lend it to one another, flour, sugar, whatever we could do.  You know, guys would go fishing and bring back fish and give it to everybody in the thing.  Now, you know, guy go fishing, but he don't bring back nothing, sell it before (laughter)--to make it a profit.  So those are the things I really remember, you know, from, from, say from five to about twelve, thirteen, somewhere in there.
Story_ID: 486892
Speaker 1: Do you remember any pra- when you were down in Louisville [Kentucky], do you remember what the climate was?
Speaker 2: I remember it was being cold, and I'd be going to the Ohio River once with my uncle.  I remember him taking me fishing once, and I was scared to death because, you know, I'd never seen the river so--I mean, and you know, especially when you're a little kid.  And then you look and it's across the wild.  I mean that's like, you know, looking at the ocean out here.  I just remember that, certain things like fishing with my uncle, that one thing, and like I said about the water pumps, and you know.  And I really didn't remember that much about it, you know, because my grandmother [Eddie Butler] wasn't there.  She was in California, and we were there, just my mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] waiting for my father [Willis Stevenson].  And then when he decided to--you know, they were gonna let him out in Long Beach [California], then we all picked, we picked up and we left.  But my mother did have--my father had some brothers and a sister there.  But we really didn't--you know, we'd talk or played with them a little bit, but I can't even remember them, you know, now, since it's been so long ago 'cause my father never went back.  Once he got here, he, he never went back.  He was the youngest of his, of his family, and he had a brother.  I think his oldest brother is still alive, and everybody else is gone.  It was just the youngest and the oldest left, 'cause my father was a twin, and his brother got, actually got killed in a, in a trucking accident, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Do you know how old his brother was when he, when he got killed?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was very young, 'cause my father was young, so and they were twins, so they had to be close to sev- you know, around nineteen or something like that.  I think, you know, what eight- seventeen or something like that when my--it had to be around that age--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I remember my father being there.  I don't know if he was on a leave or whatever, but he's being there.  And I remember when he, when he--when the accident happened my father was there, so.  And so they're twins, they're close to the same age.  So I, I imagine it's around seven- eighteen or something like seventeen or eighteen, somewhere around there.
Story_ID: 486893
Speaker 1: Back to your mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] for a moment.  Can you talk about her family, her family?
Speaker 2: Who's family did you say?
Speaker 1: Your mother's, your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother's family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My mother's family consists of--my, my mother was actually, she had another father than her sisters and brothers.  She was--her father was Theodore Whitaker, who was half Indian [Native American] or full.  I never, I never saw him.  I never--but, I just heard about him, you know, but I never, I have never seen him.  But Clarence Butler [ph.], her stepfather, actually raised her.  And she had--
Speaker 1: Clarence Butler?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Butler.  And my aunt, her sister is Evelyn [ph.] and her brother, Tony [ph.], and which we call Uncle Tony and Auntie Evelyn (laughter).  Those are her two siblings.  And my grandmother [Eddie Butler], she has her sister, Ruth, that I've only saw a few times, that still is in Kentucky.  I--well, she might be passed now, 'cause my grandmother's gone.
Speaker 1: Her name is Ruth, you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ruth McGuire [ph.], I think.
Speaker 1: Ruth McGuire?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.  My grandmother really--'cause my relationship with my grandmother and, and my grandfather is basically here in California, so I really never met much of their family.  I met my, my grandfather's daughters and my cousins, you know, which was my, my mother's stepfather.  But some of his people were out here, and he had two brothers.  And--
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: And his name was?
Speaker 2: Clarence Butler.
Speaker 1: Clarence Butler.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then he had a brother.  I met the one brother that was here, and he was Ray Butler [ph.], you know.  We just called him Uncle Ray (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uncle Ray.
Speaker 1: Now Clarence Butler, you said he was your, he was your--
Speaker 2: Mother's stepfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) mother's stepfather?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and raised her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he raised her, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But on your mother's side his grandfather was?
Speaker 2: Was Theodore Whitaker.
Speaker 1: Theodore Whitaker?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to go over that again 'cause I, I think I'm, I'm missing a point here.  And your mother's side, Theodore Whitaker was her actual father?
Speaker 2: Her actual father, yeah.
Speaker 1: But that wasn't actually your--he was your grandfather?
Speaker 2: He was my grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was your grandfather, okay.  But then Clarence Butler became your grandfather--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because--
Speaker 1: --later?
Speaker 2: --he's the only one we ever met--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --was--yeah, and we, we only--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where I was--
Speaker 2: --knew him, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. Interesting. Grandfathers, they are nice people. Do you remember--what do you remember about grandma and, and coming to her house on Christmas and the holidays and things like that?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, since we, we lived with her most of the time.  Well, I did.  My sisters and brothers didn't, but I did.  For, for my first few years when we came to California, everything was like, like I said, a lot of fun, 'cause my--I remember, you know, we lived in her house, and it was always a lot of excitement, lot of food, lot of traffic (laughter).  It was a lot of traffic in there in our house.  She was--she knew just about everyone.  My grandfather actually worked at this fish market owned by these Jewish people that was down the street from our house.  And my grandfather also spoke Hebrew and never been to school.  My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Self-taught.
Story_ID: 486894
Speaker 1: My father [Willis Stevenson] also spoke Spanish very well.  He was a foreman, you know, at a plant where basically all the, there was Hispanics mainly worked, and he actually end up teaching them English; they end up teaching him Spanish, so.  And, and a lot of his friends were all Spanish 'cause he used to play softball like on the weekends with them all the time.  And he was, he was a pretty well, he was a real liked man.  He was, he, he was really a friendly man, very friendly man, my father, liked to joke, you know.  But he, but he was a heavy drinker, so, you know, so (laughter) he was a, he was a--he could be a little, little wild, you know.
Story_ID: 486895
Speaker 1: And he [Stevenson's father, Willis Stevenson] passed away when?
Speaker 2: He passed away about five years ago, somewhere around in there.  Yeah, he's--
Speaker 1: At what?
Speaker 2: At seventy-five year, seventy-five.
Speaker 1: Seventy-five?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's twenty-five.  Now your [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler], is she still--
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother passed away, ooh--I don't know--like years ago or something like that, close in there.  And she also--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --passed at seventy-five--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --around seventy-five.
Speaker 1: I just got this list of all your, all your siblings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I see some of them are still, some of your siblings are still living.  And your father is still living in--well, he died (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my father died--
Speaker 1: Your--I'm, I'm sorry.  Your sister is still living, okay.  Everybody's--
Speaker 2: All--
Speaker 1: --everybody--
Speaker 2: --all the girls are still living except two, two of my brothers are deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother Theodore [Theodore Stevenson], my brother Darnell [Darnell Stevenson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--
Speaker 1: But I see everybody is all living here in California.
Speaker 2: They all live in--all born here.  Everybody was--most of us were born here except myself; my oldest sister [Peggy Stevenson Harris] was born in Kentucky; and my bro- one of my brother, my brother Jackie [Jackie Stevenson].  But everybody, every, everyone else is here.
Speaker 1: Bet when you guys get together for a family reunion, y'all have some fun, don't you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you can ask my wife [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson].  She's always giving something.  You know, we load up out.  She said all we'll do is invite your family, and it's filled.  We don't (laughter) have to invite anybody else.
Story_ID: 486896
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk, talk for a minute about your father's [Willis Stevenson] side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --his, his, his pe- his people.
Speaker 2: My--you know, I never met my father's mother or his father, only his brother, you know, and now it's the one brother.  The other, the oldest brother, I, I, I saw him, but I really can't even remember him 'cause I was too young.  My father was, actually, his parents died when he was young.  He was actually raised by his sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, I (unclear) just hustled around I think.  He was, he really kind of had a hard life.  But you know, he was--and until, like I said, he eventually went into the [U.S. military] service.  But from I think of during his, his, his, his childhood he basically was raised, like I said, lived with his sister.  And I think he worked whatever she did.  I guess he just worked around with, with her, you know.  And, and he was a truck driver, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a truck driver, and so--
Speaker 1: This--
Speaker 2: --he was truck driver.
Speaker 1: --this is your father?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Your father.
Speaker 2: He was a truck driver there.  When he was here [Los Angeles, California] he was a, he's a spray painter.  He was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --actually a master spray painter.
Story_ID: 486897
Speaker 1: Now you said your father [Willis Stevenson] on his side, his mother and father, you never met them.
Speaker 2: No, I never did.
Speaker 1: And you only saw a picture of your, of your grandfather on that side.
Speaker 2: No, I've never even seen a picture of, of, of my father's father or my mother's father.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  And your reason why they never had any pictures of them--
Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't know.  My father was not a man of order, you know, at all.  I mean he just kind of just went with the wind.  You know what I mean?  And, and, and he never really talked that much about his mother or, you know, he'd talk more about his sister--kind of mentioned because he lived with her, so and you know. But I, I can't even remember even seeing her in, nowhere.  I, I mean, I remember seeing her when I was little, but I couldn't tell you what she was like, you know.  Basically, his family was kind of like hidden from us really.
Speaker 1: What was his mother's name, your grandmother?  Did you know?
Speaker 2: I can't, boy, I can't think of what she said her name was.  (Unclear) how, how far away from them we were, you know.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Really, I, I can't even remember her name.
Speaker 1: And the mother, or the mother (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The mother or the father.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember them him saying that I just--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --blanked, just like blanked it out I guess, you know.  I just, 'cause I never dealt with it, and I just--he never talked about it, fine with me (laughter), you know.  I mean I just didn't know what to say, you know, 'cause we just all dealt with my [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler], you know, 'cause she was like the lifesaver really.  And I really can't--I mean as much as I (unclear) trying to remember my father even saying her--and he's--I know he said her name.  I just, right now it's, it just evades me, you know, and maybe one of my sisters or brothers might know, but I doubt it (laughter), you know, 'cause he, like I said, he was kind of an elusive man.  He didn't really--like he just came.  We knew who he was, but--
Story_ID: 486898
Speaker 1: So now the, the oldest kid is your sister, Peggy [Peggy Stevenson Harris].
Speaker 2: She's behind me--
Speaker 1: She, oh, she--
Speaker 2: --three years behind me.
Speaker 1: She's three years behind you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who's the oldest child?
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You were the first one.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: The oldest child.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: RLS [HistoryMaker Robert Louis Stevenson] was the oldest child.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remem- well, okay so that meant that the next sibling came about when you were about a year old.
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: I was three years old--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when she came out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you don't, you don't remember her, do you?
Speaker 2: Peggy?
Speaker 1: When you were a kid, you, you don't remember--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember holding her, yeah, when, when my--we used to--a matter fact, it's some couple of pictures over there with us standing with my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] and just she and I.  Then there's a picture with she, my mom and, and her.  I remember when she came, when she was a new baby, you know.  And my mother let me hold her, and I sitting on the porch holding, you know.  So it's, it's--I remember her, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then another--about two--how, how, how aft- how long after--
Speaker 2: Then a year--then I think 'cause we left.  Then a year after that I think, yeah, two years.  Take that two years.  I think Peggy--no, a year, year.  Then, my sister Shirley [Shirley Stevenson Harris] showed up.
Speaker 1: Then Jackie [Jackie Stevenson].
Speaker 2: Then my brother Jackie (laughter).
Speaker 1: Then Loretta [Loretta Stevenson Sams].
Speaker 2: And Loretta, and then they kept coming, boy, they--
Speaker 1: And who, who came after that?
Speaker 2: It was, what, what, it was Loretta; then I think it was Ernestine [Ernestine Stevenson Payne], Pee Wee.  We'll call her Ernestine, but her nickname is Pee Wee, call her Ernestine.  I don't know if my, if it's my brother Theodore [Theodore Stevenson], I think my brother Theodore, and then came--who's after Theodore?  I wanna say Linda [Linda Stevenson Khan].  I'm not sure.  It might have been Linda, yeah--Linda and then, oh, then Bubbles, and--well, Joanetta [Joanetta Stevenson Stowers], and then, then, then my, my brother, Bernard [Bernard Stevenson].  He was the last one.  You know, but you got Connie [Connie Stevenson White] was just be, just before them though.  It's Connie and then, then Joanetta, and then, then it goes down, 'cause--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --those are the youngest ones.  So I mean, it's just--
Speaker 1: A lot of names in memory.
Speaker 2: A lot of time to remember (laughter), you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You remember birthdays? Every one of them.
Speaker 2: Nope.  And you know what?  I could not--my sister--I think one, I have one sister there.  I think she remembers everybody's birthday, my sister, Linda.  She can just tell you everybody's birthday.  Me, nope.  You know, I was too busy going.  You know, I really never dealt with birthdays.  And then my memory, I don't remember them anyway.  I get, get, get crazy, and I say no, I don't--I say when they call me and go: "Oh, it's your birthday?  Happy birthday" (laughter).  They, 'cause they all call me, you know, 'cause they all know my birthday (laughter), 'cause I was at the top, you know, so.  And so that was it.
Speaker 1: I noticed out of all these siblings, only one is in the same field you're in.
Speaker 2: No, actually two.
Speaker 1: Linda and?
Speaker 2: Linda and Joanetta.  Yeah, Joanetta is a makeup artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my sister, Linda, is a hair stylist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother is also in the business.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: My brother, Jackie.  He, but he does communications and, and phone systems.  And so, so--then I have a niece that's in it, who's a makeup artist.  So it's a few of us there, you know.
Speaker 1: Stevenson name is well known (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it's pretty--we're there.  Yeah, they know who we are, you know.  But the only ones left--my niece, she got married, and she, she got out of it.  My, one of my daughter-in-laws was in it for a while and is a makeup artist.  And she decided just a little too much for her.  So the only ones that really stuck was my--Joanetta, my, myself, Joanetta, and, and Linda.  We're the only ones who really stayed, and my brother, but he's not working studios now.  He's--they--he went into a private business with some friends of his that worked at the studio.  Now they do outside.  They do outside vending and stuff now, so.
Story_ID: 486899
Speaker 1: You went to 102nd Street elementary [102nd Street School; Florence Griffith Joyner Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elementary school, yes, Watts, California [Watts, Los Angeles, California], 103rd [Street] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What do you remember about being in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I re- the, you know, the one thing I remember about, about that elementary school is--because I started at Utah Street Elementary School [Los Angeles, California], which I don't really remember that much because right after that we moved to Watts.  And then I, I remember starting 102nd Street 'cause I started in kindergarten.  And I remember playing.  They, they had all the blocks with the, you know, planes and things, and I thought that was so cool, you know, 'cause you know, we're playing with the blocks.  And, and then I remember like recess, you know, getting milk and cookies and stuff like that.  That was always like something to look forward to, you know, as a kid.  I re- I just remember that.  That was a lot of fun.  And I remember playing the games, you know, especially when we're at the first grade and the second grade.  But my, my, my fondest memory is like the sixth grade, you know, 'cause one of the teachers who, Mr. Goddard [ph.], who's actually real one of the strong teachers that believed in making sure that, you know, you know, you're black, you gotta do it.  You know, you can't be messing around.  And, and he, he, he was really--matter of fact, he was a friend of my wife's [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] too, 'cause they're--his kids actually grew up with my wife.  And he was really a good teacher, and I remember him really showing us how, how do, to do business, you know, how to, you know, how you could pay your rent.  You know, he was in, this was sixth grade, you know.  Nobody did that, you know.  And he, he was really good at that.  He would bring things from his home, and you know, and let his daughters come to our classes 'cause they went to private schools.  But whatever the other school was better than where we were at the time.  But he was really a man that really believed in education, and he was really caring about his students.  And I remember him, and I'll never forget him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: His name again is?
Speaker 2: Mr. Goddard.
Speaker 1: Mr. Goddard?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  He was really a nice man, really a very nice man.  You know, he believed in swatting and you know, I mean he used to tear us up, you know, we'd we'd get out of hand and girls too.  He'd pop 'em, but he wouldn't hit hard, but he'd kill the boys, you know.  But he was fun teacher, he was, you know.  He brought little special activities to the classes when he could, you know.
Speaker 1: You don't remember his first name by any chance, do you--
Speaker 2: I can't (unclear).
Speaker 1: --beside mister.
Speaker 2: No, I just called him Mr. Goddard.  I don't know his first name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we called the teacher by his first name you get killed in those days.  You called them by their last name.
Story_ID: 486900
Speaker 1: And then you went to high school here in town, known as--
Speaker 2: Jordan, L.A. Jordan [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], Bulldogs (laughter), L.A. Jordan, you know.  And that was a good experience because I was a like, became a track star there.  And, but before that, we actually opened up Markham High--Junior High School [Edwin Markham Junior High School; Edwin Markham Middle School, Los Angeles, California], because it had just opened.  We were like the first seventh graders to go to that school when they opened it up.  And that's actually when I started getting into sports, you know, 'cause you know, they had all of the activities and running and stuff on them, on the, on the--and matter of fact, The Whispers, we were all classmates, you know.  We were all classmates.  Yeah, so, they used to run, and we used to run 'cause we, we used to call them the twins, you know, 'cause they lived in the projects too.  It was myself--matter of fact, half the group lived in the projects, Marcus [Marcus Hutson], and, and, and, and Scotty [Wallace Scott], and Walter [Walter Scott], you know, Wallace and Scotty.  So they were--it was--we had a ba- we had a ball, you know.  Also, I liked Jordan because they had all--we had so much talent in that school, you know.  We had not only The Whispers, we had, we had, we had Brenda Holloway.  She was--we all, you know, we used to have assemblies, it was like going to a concert (laughter).  (Unclear) couldn't wait, you know.  We had this group called The Kinfolks.  It was Buz Cooper [Garnell "Buz" Cooper] and The Kinfolks, Barrett Strong in there.
Speaker 1: 'I Need Money' [sic. 'Money (That's What I Want)']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to Jordan.  I said Brenda Holloway, Barrett Strong.  We had a couple of jazz, but I can't remember this one girl.  She was a jazz--and oh, David T. Walker, the guitarist went there, started playing in the playground Jordan, at Jordan Downs projects [Los Angeles, California].  I'll never forget it.  I remember they used--his first guitar.  He got it from Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  See, so we, we had a, we had it made.  There was so much talent at that school.  Hubie Watson was like the, one of the fast sprinters on the planet, you know, him and Johnny Ray Peters [ph.].  They all went to Jordan.  I was like in tenth grade, you know, tried to be like them (laughter).  Jimmy Sherrod [ph.], who also--Jay--and Aaron Youngblood, who, who actually coached Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], was all--they all went to Jordan, you know.
Speaker 1: All rough- about the same time?
Speaker 2: All in the same time.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were like a few classes ahead.  Like, Youngblood and, and, and, and Jimmy Sherrod, they were like a class of me, a few classes ahead of me really, 'cause I was in, just in the tenth grade then.  I was just getting there.  And, but Hubie Watson, Johnny Ray Peters, all those guys are like setting records and everything when I got there, you know.  And Aaron Youngblood is the one that started me running hurdles, you know, 'cause he ran them.  And I used to watch them run, and so I started doing it and became pretty much--still hold, I think I still a record there at Jordan.  And, and, and, and the highest is 14.3 or something around in there.
Speaker 1: One hundred and twenty yards?
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) so--
Speaker 1: Didn't have meters back in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, yeah, it wasn't no meters (laughter); yards, it was all yards, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and the record you say is--
Speaker 2: I think it was 14.3 I think that.
Speaker 1: Fourteen three.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 120--highs (unclear)--110 was (unclear) high.
Speaker 1: The Whispers, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all went there.  They were Jordan.  I've been knowing them for, fence [sic. since] junior high [Edwin Markham Junior High School; Edwin Markham Middle School, Los Angeles, California].  But we all lived in the projects.  We all knew each other, you know.  We all knew each other.
Speaker 1: You guys have a same, similar mustache too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, yeah, you know.  Matter of fact, George Youngblood that played with the Rams [Los Angeles Rams], that's Aaron's brother.  He also--they was, they're right across from us (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of talent in that school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was; that school was loaded.  And for a small school--I mean, it was a very small school--it was like loaded up with talent.
Story_ID: 486901
Speaker 1: So is this the one down on Rodeo [Rodeo Drive]?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Jordan [David Starr Jordan High School].
Speaker 2: Jordan, no, that's the one in Watts [Los Angeles, California] on 103rd [Street], off of Alameda [Street].
Speaker 1: Oh, that Jordan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that Jordan.  But now there's two Jordans.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There's a Long Beach Jordan [David Starr Jordan High School, Long Beach, California] and L.A. Jordan.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we're L.A. Jordan.
Speaker 1: L.A. Jordan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not Long Beach, but they had the same name and the same mascot, the Bulldogs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Bulldogs, yeah.  So now here you are in high school.  You're around the age of seventeen.  You were working with your father [Willis Stevenson] doing some work, specialized work?
Speaker 2: Well, my (laughter), my father was kind of like this: well, during the summer, I mean my--you know, well, since we had so many kids and you know, my mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] said you're gonna have to earn your own--make--get money to earn your--to make--get your clothes and do your own thing, you know, so my father had me to come and work with him.  And we worked at Myers Drum Company.  It's, or was on Soto [Street] and over by--in East L.A. [East Los Angeles, California], and where they made paint buckets and they manufactured oil drums and different drums for carrying different foods and stuff.  And my fathers had me working there, you know, stacking drums and working on the paint line, paint bucket lines.  I mean it was hard, terrible work.  And I did it one summer, got my first car, and, and then I--but actually, my first job, the real first job was at--my mother got me.  I worked at Ace Hot Buttonhole Company [ph.] downtown on Main Street.  That was my first. All I had to do was, you know, take the button holes and take them to different companies would do--put on the fronts and do it, and I was walking.  You know how they do in New York [New York] and they're carrying the racks.  I used to do that.  That was my first job.  And I used to buy all my clothes.  For every semester I would buy my clothes.  You know, that was, that was my thing.  But then I started working with my father, and I bought my first car, because we made a, we made a little more, you know.  So that was a good thing.  So I worked with him about two summers, and I couldn't take no more (laughter).  It was a little hard, you know.  And I remember my father--the guy that--actually, he's my--Ted Levine, who worked at Myers Drum Company, started his own company and took my father with him, 'cause he started a company called Ted Levine's [sic. Ted Levine Drum Company].  Really, that was what it was called, drum company in El Monte [California], and father went with him.  That's how he learned how to speak Spanish, because that's where he had all of--the guys that worked there were mostly Hispanic.  And I remember working there with my father once, 'cause I worked at, at, on Soto Street one summer and then worked at, for Ted the next summer.  And I remember Ted telling, he said "Junior--," he used to call me junior.  He said, "Junior, you know, I know you don't want to do this kind of work."  He said, he said, "You don't want to work hard like your father."  He said, "So you get your education."  You know, he's saying that.  He said, "Matter of fact, I want you to come and go with me.  I'm gonna show you how business is done."  And I remember I got in his truck with him, and he was delivering these drums.  When you re- recondition oil drums, you know, you--it's--you make sure there's no leaks.  They clean the insides, and it's just like milk bottles, cleaning milk bottles and, and, and get them and shake them.  He said, "See these drums?  They're, they're not, they're not that good."  He said, "But, but I'm gonna show you how you do business."  So we got in and went to the place.  He goes in.  We go to this place out in Long Beach [California] someplace, and we go in the gate.  And the guy said, "Well, take those drums over here."  And so the guy goes over and inspects them.  He said, "Ted, I can't use these."  He said, "Well, look, wait, I got something for you," pulled out a case of liquor and gave it to him.  Cat said, "Take them all back," (laughter).  He turned around said, "Junior, that's how business is done (laughter).  You, you, you have something for somebody, somebody have something for you," (laughter).  And I never forgot that, you know.  He said, "You have something for somebody, somebody have something for you."  And, and that, you know, that meant--
Story_ID: 486902
Speaker 1: And actually I--he [Ted Levine] knew I didn't want to work there, you know.  I mean I couldn't do what my father [Willis Stevenson] did.  My father worked so hard it was stupid.  But, in the projects with all the people, my father made probably more money than most people, in that day.  My father was a good hustler, and, and he knew how, he knew how to get things.  He'd sell paint.  He'd do everything, you know, because he could get it, you know.  And, and, and, and that's one reason we had to leave the projects, and we ended up buying our first house, because my father made too much money.  I mean, a man with twelve kids making too much money, can you believe it?  But that was one of the things.  You only could make a certain amount of money to stay in the projects.  And a lot of people just use it, use that for, to get started, and then they would leave anyway.  Eventually, everybody left the projects.  You know, they were leaving family by family as they, you know, move into Compton [California] where it was, you know, big news.  You know, that was, 'cause that was built for the military guys getting out of the [U.S. military] service anyway, so a lot of the families went, you know, there.  But we just moved just across 103rd [Street] on Hickory Street, so we bought an old shotgun house, brand new.  And I don't know how much my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] and dad paid for it.  I didn't even know they could even afford to pay--buy a house.  You know, I was liked shocked.  And right after that is my mom passed; you know, right after that, so.  But that's, you know, that's what I remembered about my j-(laughter)--
Story_ID: 486903
Speaker 1: Now you were seventeen years old.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had a car.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Running around L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in a car.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Bet that was fun, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was fun.  You know, my father [Willis Stevenson], you know, he, you know, he, he still didn't let me stay out really late, you know, and although I would stay out late, as you know as a--and then try to coast home or you know, turn your, turn your motor off and coast down the street, you know.  But my father was always--he would wake up.  My father usually slept hard, but when he knew we was out, he'd--we'd come to the door, he meet you, you know, and give me the keys or stay out.  That's the way he did it.  You give him the keys.  You know, I tried not to give him the keys one time.  He said, "Well, then you sleep in your car."  And I slept in my car for about half a night, and my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] had to come out there and get me 'cause I was freezing to death, you know, so.
Story_ID: 486904
Speaker 1: It was just good times.  All I can say it was pretty good times then.  And I, I was getting around.  And then when my mother [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] passed, it kind of threw a wrench in the, in the, in the whole works.  That's when I was still in--I was, I was a senior, and my mom passed in '63 [1963].  I was a senior in high school [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], and at that time, you know, the state, or, or the city, or the county, I mean, you know, to take the kids would be like, you know, that mean they had to be split up.  But my--I remember my mom was sick.  When she was getting ready to pass, she was--I was at the hospital, and she told my--her mom, which is my grandmother [Eddie Butler], that she didn't want the kids split up.  And my grandmother made her that promise, and that's one thing I really remember about my grandmother that it actually kind of made me who I am really, 'cause just looking at her.  And she told, she promised her daughter that she wouldn't let the kids be split up.  And that's taking on, you know, twelve kids (laughter), you know, except me.  It was taking eleven because, at that time, the city, if you were seventeen, you were considered an adult, you know.  So what happened, before they, they made that transition for my grandmother could take the kids, and my father [Willis Stevenson], he kind of like, he fell apart.  And he wouldn't keep the kids.  He'd just disappear.  And I was trying to them and go to school, you know.  And, and this is when I really learned a lot about life.  I tried to keep the kids, but I mean I'm a minor.  You know, I can't be keeping them kids.  I'm a minor that I can't keep the kids, but I'm not a minor for them to take care of me (laughter), you know.  So what I--so what happened, they ended up hiring a woman to come in and cook and help clean 'til my grandmother got in position.  Then my grandmother took everyone except me.
Story_ID: 486905
Speaker 1: So my father [Willis Stevenson] and I kind of had a falling out because I kind of blamed him for my mother's [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] death.  You know, I'm, I'm--because, I mean, my mother and I were more like sisters and brothers than, than mother and son.  But I, I--you know, I had to, I gave her the respect because I couldn't--you know, (laughter) I treated her like my mother.  I couldn't treat her like she was my sister, but--and I told my father that I thought it was because of him and his drinking and, and doing things that she had passed.  And we actually fell out and really started to have a, a, a total physical fight.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler] happened to be there, and she pulled a gun on my father, and put it in my father's face, and told my father if he moved, she would kill him where he stands.  And she turned around to me, which I'm feeling pretty good by now because I know my grandmother's taking up for me.  But my, my grandmother turned around to me, in the same breath, and said, "Get your stuff and get out."  And I was in like in shock.  I said, "What do you mean?"  She said, "Get your stuff and get out."  So I went and got my stuff.  And I remember, my sisters and brothers, they were all crying and.  And she said--when I came back by her, she said, "If you're man enough to go against another man in his house, then you're man enough to get out."  I remember that to this day.  She said, "So, go."  She said, "You'll be all right, just go."  I never went back to my father's house from that day on.  But, I must say this: I learned so much, not only from my grandmother and for what I did, what I said, and what, you know, and the respect for my father, and, and, and disrespect I gave him then at that time.  My best friend was coming up the street, coming over my house, and I'm going out the door with my little few bags, and he said, "Where you going, man?"  I said, "They just kicked me out, man.  And she--."  I said, "I don't know where I'm going."  He said, "Man, come on to my house."  So I went down to his house.  His father was watering the lawn outside of his house, Mr. Harris [ph.].  And he said, "So you got something to tell me or something?" 'Cause we kept looking at him.  And he said, "Well, you guys got something to tell me?"  I said, "Well, my daddy kicked me out and dah, dah, dah."  He said--he just looked at me.  He, he was watering the grass.  He never really even turned around and look at me.  He was just listening to me.  And he said, "I'll tell you what: if you continue going to school," he said, "just get on there with the kids."  And he said, "You're over here anyway all the time, so you're just like one of the kids.  So just get in there, and I'll take care of you."  And he did, and then also my, one of my best friends, Thomas Oliver [ph.], his family did the same.  Actually, I lived with them most of the time.  They lived in Compton [California] at the time on 138th [Street], and his father said the same thing.  So I had like three families that really supported me, as long as--their only thing was that I finish school, and I did.  So, Mrs. Brown and Mr. Brown [ph.] also let me--she fed me all the time.  She said, "Any time you coming from school just come by."  Food, everything, don't worry about.  She said, "I liked your mom," and she said--and I used to go with her daughter, but you know, I didn't then.  And her son was not there, and she had this room.  She said, "Any time you want to stay, you can stay.  But if you need, you'll always have a place at the table."  These people--that's when I learned a lesson about men, real men, men that really--and these--we're talking about men with eight and nine kids, not counting bringing somebody else in, you know, and doing what they--what we normally--you know, people nowadays won't, wouldn't care if you was dying in the streets, you know.  And I learned a lot from those men, from Mr. Brown, Mr. Harris, and, and, and Mr. Oliver, you know.  Those were the guys that actually kept--got me on the right road.
Story_ID: 486906
Speaker 1: You know, and then I finished school [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California] and did what I had to do.  And I was--then I actually ended up--after I finished school I checked in a--enrolled into Compton College [Compton Community College; El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California] (laughter), tried, tried to do right (laughter).  And I, I went on it to run track.  You know, I, so I started--I, I stayed there about a year and a half, and then what happened, I got drafted.  And after I got drafted--and when I got married to my first wife.  And, and I went in the [U.S. military] service and came back, stayed married seven years, had my daughter [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin].  And then, and then, then I went to beauty college on, on Uncle Sam, you know.  Uncle Sam paid for it; I went, but I was also working at Douglas Aircraft [Douglas Aircraft Company] 'cause they--you know, when you get out the service they give you a job and, and a federal government place.  So I ended up working at Douglas Aircraft for two years.
Speaker 2: In Long Beach [California]?
Speaker 1: In Long Beach, yeah.  So I worked for Douglas for two years and enrolled in the beauty college.   After that, Douglas laid off everybody, and I ended up going to a company called Modine Manufact- no, I take that back.  It was, it was a company that made toilets for airplanes.  It was plastic fabrication, and I was a plastic fabricator.  So, Monogram Industries [Monogram Industries, Inc.] is the name of the company, yeah, at that time.  Also, Monogram also made, did movies (laughter), but they had this company where they made toilets for airplanes and also for RVs and stuff like that, you know.  I worked for them for a few years.
Story_ID: 486907
Speaker 1: And my daughter [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin] was born, and then I started--after I got out of the beauty college I started a salon.  And then I heard it--then this is when affirmative action and all this stuff was going--then I heard when I was in my shop, I heard about studios on the radio, that they were looking for hairdressers, makeup people, prop people, and I just took off (laughter).  I went down, and the office was the producer's building, which was in the dark building on La Cienega [Boulevard], right off of La Cienega and 3rd [Street], right there. And I went in there and filled out an application for a props and hair.  I put the hair first, but I put props and anything else I thought, maybe, wardrobe; I think I put a few things, and, and I went away.  I mean I just put it in.  I figured well, they, maybe they might call or whatever.  And a friend of mine, a friend of mine, one of my good friends I was in the [U.S. military] service with, said his sister was trying to get into the studios and that this guy named Charles Hack [ph.] was the head of employee's relations.  And he was looking for blacks that, that were qualified to try to get in to the studio.  So I said, "Give me his number," you know, and I called him.  Then he said, "Well, look, do you have the application in?"  I said, "Yeah, I just put it in down at the dark building."  He said, "Well, come over and see me."  He was at Universal [Universal Studios Inc.].  I went over and seen him, told him what I did.  He said, "Well, we want you to go in as a hairdresser."  And I said yeah, that's what, you know, that's what I do.  So, and the rest is history, man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went down.  They gave me an interview.  I--in '69 [1969], I went over to Universal, got interviewed.  They said that you know, it wasn't any work then.  I think it was everybody was on hiatus, but he said--
Story_ID: 486908
Speaker 1: Let's go back a, a minute if I can to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --when you were a child.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, the smells, and the sounds that you remember when you were a child?
Sights: watchtowers.  Yeah, I remember that a lot.  When we lived in Watts [Los Angeles, California] that was the big thing.  We used to go over there as kids and milled around.  The Long Beach Pike [Long Beach, California], going there was like, it was better than (unclear) you know, at that time 'cause that was the only thing that was big.  It was like L.A.'s [Los Angeles, California] Coney Island. That's when it was like that--actually going to the beach, I mean, you know, to see how large the ocean [Pacific Ocean] was, you know.  That, that was like exciting as a kid, you know.  As far as food, my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] cooking and my [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler] cooking.  I mean those two ladies could burn it up, you know.  And, and it just, you know, you come in the house, smell all the good food cooking, hot water cornbread and all that stuff.  Man, I was like--and the biscuits, my mother used to make the best biscuits in the planet, you know.  And I remember one of my friends, Jerry Estrada [ph.].  It was my real good friend, and we used to call him the biscuit eater 'cause his family would make tortillas.  I loved tortillas, and so I'd eat tortillas, and he'd--and my mother made biscuits for him. And he would put, put them in his pocket and be walking around all day eating them.  I mean that's how he, he did, so that's why we started calling him the biscuit eater--but my grandmother's cooking and, and actually, some of the women in the--women in the projects period.  You know, you go to your friend's house and mom be cooking, oh, my goodness.  You know, you know, you're little kids.  Your just stomach just be, just be growling 'cause the food smell so good, you know.
Story_ID: 486909
Speaker 1: Now what projects were you living in?
Speaker 2: Jordan Downs [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jordan Downs project.
Speaker 2: Jordan Downs projects--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's--
Speaker 2: --yeah.  And I know them all, Jordan Downs, Nickerson Gardens [Los Angeles, California], you know, you know, that, you know, that, and Imperial Courts [Los Angeles, California]--(unclear) all, you know, those all projects, you know.  But Jordan Downs was where I lived.  But we actually lived--when we first moved to Watts [Los Angeles, California], we lived in the old Jordan Downs.  They had, they had the old ones before they tore down those and put, get, put us in the new ones.  So you had to, you know, wait for yours to be built, and then--'cause I know we were one of the families that actually got in fairly late because, you know, we were way down the list.  I guess they went by names, Stevenson, so we went in the back, so.  I remember when we got our new unit, you know, and that was like, that was like, now it smells, talking about the new wooden floors and all that stuff.  That was like really cool, all shiny.  So we were like really excited as, you know, as kids to live in them, 'cause the old ones were really bad, you know.  Well, they had been there since the war [World War II, WWII].  You know, they were actually built for soldiers during the war.  That, those are some of the things I really remember, you know, is, is, is, is--and, and playing, you know, playing games (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's a little severe.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you've living in Jordan Downs project.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You're about how old now?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I'm about fifteen, you know, somewhere around in--you know, but I mean, when we first got there, I think I was like--you know, I'd started elementary--I mean I was in like, you know--when we moved, first moved to the old Jordan Downs I was in kindergarten and then to the first grade.  And then when we moved to the new ones I was actually about the fifth grade.  So I was about fifth grade.  And--
Speaker 2: We're talking timeframe about what, 1960, '59 [1959], '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: We're in the '50s [1950s] to fifty--'cause I graduated from--in that elementary in 102nd [102nd Street School; Florence Griffith Joyner Elementary School, Los Angeles, California] like '58 [1958], '59 [1959], somewhere around in there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: Did you want to stop?
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, so now we got you around 1959-ish.  You're about fifteen years old, and like, and later then you went to work with your dad [Willis Stevenson] in, on a onie- oil, manufacturing oil drums.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --paint--
Speaker 1: And paint (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) paint buckets, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486910
Speaker 1: Let's go back, if you will, to the--you said that time--that day where you and your father had came to blows.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well, what happened, I--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)--hold it.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, now, your father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father, Willis [Willis Stevenson].  Well, you know, my father was like really a nice man, but he was an alcoholic.  So he, at times, he would, you know, he was more worrisome to my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson] than the kids.  And that used to play on me a lot 'cause I used to, you know, feel sorry for her because he--yeah, that's, he's going again, so--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, your father.
Speaker 1: Okay, Willis (laughter).  Yeah, my father, like I said, he was, he was pretty much an alcoholic, but then he was, but he was a functioning alcoholic.  He didn't--like, he worked every day and he provided well for, as, you know, as, as best a man could with, you know, twelve kids.  I mean, come on, like I said, he probably made more money than most people in the projects.  He, he did all right, and we, we lived okay for a family that large.  But my father had a, a tendency to be--when he got drunk, to be really worrisome--not violent, you know, you know, mess with the kids, make them cry, and get on my mom's nerves and you know.  And, and, and he was just kind of hard to handle.  It was like having another kid for her.  And I used to, as I got older, I started really disliking him for that, you know.  And, and my father, I know he felt it, you know, as I started getting older, that, you know, I, that I kind of like really didn't want to be bothered with him, you know, not because I didn't like him.  I was because he would--he's just a pain, you know.  And so, and so, you know, it's--and when my mom got sick, and, and then when she did pass, he just totally just, you know, kind of almost walked away, walked away.  My [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler] had him, had to have him put, had him put in jail just to pay her the child support, and the only way they could get it was to actually garnish his check.  And they did that for a while, but they only could do it for so long.  And then they--you know, when he got out, he, he went back to the same thing.  That I, I, I really didn't like in him, and, and, and kind of put a strain between us.  I really didn't talk to him for a few years, you know, and my sisters and them, they, and some of them didn't, really, really didn't.  My younger sisters, they couldn't stand him, you know.
Story_ID: 486911
Speaker 1: But as I started going on in my life, and my life started to take shape, you know, when my married Roz [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson], and I got the kids, and, and then I started realizing, when I said he [Stevenson's father, Willis Stevenson] was the cause of my--of, of his wife dying, I was only thinking it was my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson], not his wife, and she was his wife before she was my mom.  So he was hurt way more than I was hurt.  You know, I'm hurt, but I mean I'm talking about a man that's been with a woman for a long time, and, and now he's lost her.  And she was actually that part of his life, and, and I didn't realize that until I actually go old enough to understand what it meant to him.  You know, and then we--then I start talking to him, and we start, and then we started getting it together.  Then, you know, and then we eventually ended up talking, and, and I got him to, you know, try to make peace with all my sisters.  And, and we actually--he, he was married again [to Mary Stevenson], so we went to his house.  And everybody sat down, and he told them he was sorry.  And you know, he tried to make amends for what he knew he couldn't make up for lost time.  He even said it himself.  He said, "I can't--."  One thing he was, he was a very smart man.  He wasn't, he wasn't a dummy by no means.  And, and he said, you know, he know that he, what he did was wrong, but he said, "I, I can't bring it back," you know.  And he was telling my sisters, and my sisters, and they like: well, you left us for dead and all of this.  You know, my sisters going like wow.  They were hurt and crying.  And he said, "Well, you know, I, I, I can't take it back, you know, but I just want you to forgive me."  And, and you know, I set that up for, you know, not too much for the boys.  I don't think the boys really cared that much, but the girls were really kind of hurt because he was around.  They knew who he was, but yet he didn't, he didn't, didn't acknowledge them.  You know what I mean?  They had made some good--I mean my sisters and brothers have all done well.  And, and my one sister, she was so mad.   And my youngest sister [Joanetta Stevenson Stowers], she was so my mad at him that she just, just (unclear) she just couldn't forgive him.  And I had to pull aside, and I said, and I told her the--I said, "Now look outside."  I told her to look outside.  I said, "Look at your car.  You're driving this big Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] that's larger than this house, and you're mad at him.  I mean undoubtedly you've been blessed.  You've been blessed.  That's all I can say.  You've been blessed, so you can't be mad at him.  He did what he had to do.  You have done what you had to.  You have survived and done well, so why are you mad at him?"  And then she kind of like dropped it, looking at it that way, you know, because we all have done, oh, way better than my father probably even imagined, you know, so, so we were--everybody made peace with him.  But he was a good man.  I mean he, he had his faults, but I mean, no worse than the rest of us (laughter).  You know what I mean?  But it just took me awhile to understand that, you know, as I was growing in my life, so I finally figured it out.
Speaker 2: You, you mentioned that he had a drinking problem.  Did he develop--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that in the [U.S.] Navy by any chance?
Speaker 1: You know, I think my father always drank.  I think--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --from the South I think they're some drinkers, you know, and I think their whole family--matter of fact, his brother, his oldest brother told me once--I talked to him on the phone--said that that was the Stevenson curse, was alcoholism.  I made sure it wasn't mine, you know, so, but, 'cause I don't really drink, you know, or smoke, really.  My father asked us if we wanted to smoke.  We had smoke in the house, but nobody really smoked around, so.  So, I mean that's, you know, that's my dad (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: And he was--how old were you when he passed?
Speaker 1: Seventy-five.
Speaker 2: Okay, he was seventy-five when he passed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what year was that again?
Speaker 1: It was about five years ago.
Speaker 2: Five years ago you said.
Speaker 1: What is that?
Speaker 2: Two-o-two, 2002 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand two [2002] I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Father died 2002, okay.
Story_ID: 486912
Speaker 1: So now you're, when you were nineteen years old you went into Compton College [Compton Community College; El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California], as you said, on a track--was, was it a track (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --scholarship?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a scholarship.  I just went over there because the coach had heard about me and you know.  Because I had a scholarship to Fresno State [Fresno State College; California State University, Fresno, Fresno, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I already had, had a scholarship.  I went down to meet the coach.  But what happened, I'd never been away-  I mean I was on my own since--I mean I had an apartment when I was in high school [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], and I was still going to school and working.  But what happened was, I had never been away from home, and didn't know--you know, I didn't have the support the way, you know, parents' [Christine Whitaker Stevenson and Willis Stevenson] support, or whatever, so I was a little afraid.  So when all my friends went to Compton College.  I figured I know everybody here, and I'm in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I know how to get around (laughter), and then plus I didn't want to be in Fresno [California] (laughter), 'cause this was like the real farmland, you know.  But Fresno was a, it was a great track school.  You know, it was one of the best track schools on the planet.  So eventually, it's (unclear) went there.  And you know, then, 'course, being in the city where you, you know, where you're raised, and you know everybody.  You don't, you ain't do, you ain't trying to be school.  You're trying to do everything else but.  So, then that's when I got drafted, you know.
Speaker 1: Now what was your major when you're in this college?
Speaker 2: Graphic arts.
Speaker 1: Graphic Arts?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, graphic arts, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thought I was gonna be a printer, yeah, although I did work at a printing company in Watts [Los Angeles, California], a little small company.  But, you know, at that--they wasn't hiring blacks too much in printing.  Those companies were really--it was hard to get into those companies, you know.  So I ended up--that's when I ended up working for International Host [ph.], which is, used to do all the food concessions inside the airports.  And I ended up working for their commissary there and then ended up being a cook.  I got, you know, I had the training program to be a cook for them, so that's how I ended up there.
Story_ID: 486913
Speaker 1: So now you're about, what, nineteen going on twenty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Going on twenty, yeah.
Speaker 1: --somewhere around there.  And you, you had to leave college [Compton Community College; El Camino College Compton Center, Compton, California] because of the draft.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were drafted into what branch of the service?
Speaker 2: Army.
Speaker 1: U.S. Army.
Speaker 2: U.S. Army (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did--what was that like for you, being in the Army?
Speaker 2: A total shock.  I was like totally shocked.  I had never been on a plane in my life.  I had never left--I had never been out of, out of California that I could remember, you know, as a teenager or anything, besides, you know, going to San Francisco [California] or something like that.  But as far as going to another state, I had never been out of the state.  So, when I did get drafted, and when, and then when we had to go to the airport, that's when they had the old airport, still, the, the old airport.  They were building a new one, still had the old one, was still in, still operational.  I remember we flew on Flying Tiger [Flying Tiger Line], four props, two double tails, you know.  It looked, it looked like it was flying all night long, and I stayed awake the whole night, looking at the blue flame coming out the thing.  I--that the plane was on fire, you know.  That's a--I was like, a total wreck.  And when I landed in Fort Polk, Louisiana.  I'll never forget it.  It was the hottest, seemed like the hottest day in my life.  If it was hell, that should have been it right there.  It was so hot and humid.  I had never seen (laughter)--you know, I can be in California.  I never seen with no breeze--and they, you know, right then, you know, how they rush you off the trucks, and then people hollering at you.  I was, you know, I was, I was like, I was in total shock; I didn't know what was going on, you know.  I was--it was, it was, it was just wild.  And that whole ordeal, you know, the, the basic training and you know, all of the people hollering, telling you what to do, and then you know, and, and the PT tests [Army Physical Fitness Test] and you know, all of this, and then the training, the gunning training, and then the crawling, and you know, that, that was all like come on, you know.  And I was kind of rebellious, you know, people telling me what to do, and when to get up, and when to pee, when to this, when to that.  Yeah, I mean, it was, it was hard, and it was hard.
Story_ID: 486914
Speaker 1: So, but I, you know, I became a squad leader and you know, because I was always a good athlete, so I mean I'll do the PT test [Army Physical Fitness Test].  That wasn't nothing.  I'll run through that like I was crazy.  But it was this one sergeant, black sergeant, Sergeant--what was his name--Odom [ph.], who, you know, at that time, they were trying to get black lieutenants in the--officers, trying to make guys go OCS [Officer Candidate School], candidate school.  And, and we took to the test.  They asked me did I want to go to OCS candidate school, this, this captain.  Well, Sergeant Odom came and got me, and then he took me to this captain who was a black captain.  And he said, "Look, you have a chance to go to OCS, candidate school.  And we need officers, and you could really be, you know--," and I turned him down.  I said, "I don't wanna go to no OCS, candidate school.  Man, I don't even want to be in the [U.S.] Army."  And man, that's what we--you know, you're young; you say what you, what's on your mind.  And he was like, he was so mad at me.  I mean I couldn't, I mean I really couldn't understand why he was so mad at me.  Look, I'm in California, and they're protesting in Georgia and all these other places, but California, we never had that.  So I really don't understand.  You know, we--California is that covert racism; you know, it's hidden; it's, you know redlining.  You know, we just--you just can't come in.  Or no, you can, you can come in, but we just gonna treat you bad so you don't wanna come back.  You get--you--that's not that bad.  But there, the first true racism I ever ran into was in Louisiana, 'cause we were going--we, we had finished basic training.  We were--they, you know, they give you that day of the base.  You can go down in the town and go crazy and do whatever do you wanna do.  And it was one of our Jewish friends was with us, and he wanted to go to this club.  So, it was myself, David [ph.], and him, and we went in and the lady stopped us, didn't stop him, stopped us and said, "We can't serve you in here."  And we standing there looking at each, talking about what?  (Laughter) I mean we looking at each other like, what, what?  See, then my friend said, "What did she say?"  You know, we were like--it was a total, then that was a shock.  You know, I said, "What you mean?"  She said, "We can't serve you in here."  Not--we can't, you know.  And so now, our Jewish friend is getting a table, and he said, "Come on.  I got the table," and he comes back.  I said, I said, "She said we can't come in here."  Then he goes off.  I mean he goes ballistic.  And we, we're trying to cool him down now.  We the ones should be going ballistic.  Now we trying to calm him down.  You know what I mean?  And then this sheriff comes and in, and you know, and says, "You know, I don't wanna have to arrest you guys.  You know, you should go to the other side of town.  I think that side of town is better anyway."  You know, that's the way he was talking.  I said, "Yeah, I guess you're right."  So we get, we get in the cab, and he's still hot.  He's, he's cursing and, "I can't believe we're in the same service, and we can't--," and you know, he's going off and on.  But we get to the other side of town, the other side of is better 'cause everybody's there, you know, white, black, green, purple.  Everybody's there having fun.  But that was my first time, you know.  And, and I asked the cab driver as he was taking us to the other side of town, I said, "How do you take that?"  His answer was, "You don't bother them; they don't bother you."  I said, "Well, hell" (laughter).  What he do is in the world (laughter).  We were welcome to the world (laughter).  So that was kind of funny.  So that was, that was my experience, was my first experience with racism.  And then it came a little more as we got in the service, you know, and as, as far as career.  The nightclubs, you now, they're all separate.  You know they had the Texas Club [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And Joe Mama Sas [ph.], all the brothers over there; all the whites over there in Texas Club.  And, and the soldiers are not really, you know, intermingling, except for on the, on the field.
Story_ID: 486915
Speaker 1: You know.  And so, that, it was, it was kind of an experience.  And then you have Korean people.  We were in Korea, and they're asking us questions about why we can't get along.  And then that's the strangest thing, some Korean person asking me why come blacks and whites can't get along and we're in the same country.  I mean, so you know, you give them an answer, and the best you can, you know.  I said, "I don't know, you know."  I said it's just, I, I mean, I, I done forgot what I even told the guy.  It was one of, matter of fact, one of the KATUSA [Korean Augmentation to the United States Army] soldiers, which are Korean soldiers that you serve with American soldiers, and he was asking me that.  I mean I said, now that's a strange, you know, talking about, you know, he's serving in our [U.S.] Armed Forces, so I imagine what he thinks, 'cause he's Korean.  You know, so what, how, what they gonna treat me, you know?  Which they didn't treat him very good either, you know.  They called him all kind of names because he, 'cause they like sugar.  So they would take all the sugar out of the coffee, you know, from the, in the tables.  And those guys be calling him soap heads and things like that which were wrong, you know.  Black soldiers, we're going like, it's wrong, you know.  But there you go, in the world now.  It's, it's, you know, so you have to learn, so.
Story_ID: 486916
Speaker 1: That was an experi- you know, the armed services [U.S. Armed Forces] was an experience, but I actually did learn a lot.  And, and, and then that was how to live, you know and how to, how to survive.  I mean you just can't just go and give up.  You just gotta really just push on, and they make sure that you push on, you know, you know, and how, and, and, and also when people, other people depend on you.  You know, 'cause I mean the sergeants that de- you know, the DIs [drill instructor] that are training us, you know, say he might be black; you might be white.  Now they're doing their job.  You know, you might be black or white, but if he gets shot, and you're standing in the middle of the field and bullets all around you, and he happens to be black, just standing there can get you, are you gonna tell him to leave you there?  Right, so he said well, now you gotta learn how to help each other.  So, it had its good things, and, and, and it had its bad things.  But I mean I learned a lot from it.  So I mean I, I wouldn't want to do it again, but I'm glad that I did, you know.  I, I mean I don't have any bad feelings against the [U.S.] military, you know, because I think it, it, it, it helped me.  Because when I did come, when I came back, I had changed.  I did change a lot.  I mean a lot of boyish stuff I kind of dropped, you know, although I was still pretty young, you know.  But I did drop a lot of things because I saw a different--I saw the world different.  I saw people different, you know.  And, and, and you know that everybody's basically the same regardless to where you go, you know.  We all get up to sa- try to survive the next day.  That's all it is.  You know, people say a whole lot of things, you know, about, well, you know, you're this, you're that.  A rich man gets up to try to stay rich.  A poor man gets up to try to do better, but they all have a goal.  You know what I mean?  And we all have goals.  We get up and do what we gotta do to survive, and, and, and, and it's nothing different.  It's nothing different, the human race, you know, just cultures.  That's all it is.  The skin is just a coloring, but it's all cultures.  You know, if it's your culture can mingle with mine.  And is has been doing it for hundreds of years, but we have that thing about it, disliking each other.  So, that's what I found out; just thought it was strange that, you know, we still in America still get a little crazy every now and then.  And we still a little crazy, but I think we're beginning to see it a little different, you know, that we do need each other, you know, we really do.  I mean we need--everybody need--I mean to make--specially the United States.  And to make this country stay where it is, you need everybody, because that's what makes United States great, is everybody.  I mean you just go to a restaurant, you have your choice.  You go to other countries, how many choices do you have.  If you go to Italy, Italian restaurants, you know.  You come to America you got Italian, you got Greek (laughter), you got soul food restaurant, you got Chinese, Japanese; you know, it's everything.  I mean and, and, and everybody embraces other people's food.  Why can't you embrace them?  It's, it's, it's, it's that simple, but we don't seem to see that.  That's, that's one of the things I learned, being in the service, you know, so.  That's how I feel about it (laughter).
Story_ID: 486917
Speaker 1: Would you like to see them bring the draft back again?
Speaker 2: In a way, yes.  I, I think it would--some of these young guys that have nothing to do besides getting killed on the street and wondering he gonna make something worthy of a life, you know.  No, I, I mean there's not that many wars.  There are wars, and people are dying, and true enough.  I mean I, you know, I don't want to see nobody die.  But the point is, we're, we're, we're letting men hang on the street.  I'm talking all men.  I ain't talking about black or Hispanics.  I'm talking about white black and everybody else that's hanging out doing nothing but running around talking about they can't find a job and, and not contributing anything but wanna raise havoc.  You know what I mean, see?  Yeah, draft could, could probably help (laughter), could probably help.  I mean if, if they did it and did it fairly.  You know, the only thing I, I fear about the draft is the poor are gonna suffer--you know what I mean--like it did when I got drafted.  I mean, I mean how in the hell do you draft a whole town?  I'm, I'm, you know, I mean I see everybody I know.  I mean what happened to Beverly Hills [California] and, and, and all them other places that kids are doing nothing?  But see, if, if the draft could be fair, it would be a good thing.  But if it can be fair, in which it probably would never be, forget it.  You know, I, I don't think it, it's, it's worth bring back.  But if it, if it could be fair, and it was a good way to do it where it was fair to the lottery or if ever, ever how they're gonna do it, would be a good thing to do, I think.  So, I mean, since you got women and you know, women now, so now then that would be women can volunteer, men be drafted.  So, fine, I can go with that.  You know, I don't think women should be drafted.  I don't mean--you know, I think women play a, a good role in it, being in the [U.S.] military.  I mean I think she should be able to--(unclear) we've shot a movie on a ship, and 50 percent of the ship were women and running things, I mean from the flight deck on down.  I mean they wasn't joking.  I mean so women they, they can do their job (laughter).  You know what I mean?  But if it--I say draft should be if it's fair, if, if they could find a way to make it fair, you know, where you don't draft from the east side of town and don't draft from the west side of town.  You gonna draft the, from the east side, it should be equal.  Draft as many--if you draft 50 from the east side, you draft 50 from the west side, or the north side, or the south side.  Then it, okay.  But don't get 75 percent of them from the east side and nobody from the west side, or maybe the ones that you give--the judge say or if you go to jail or go to the [U.S.] Army, although they did a lot of that when I was (laughter)--they did a lot of, lot of guys were, you know, on their way to jail, and they took the service and stayed.  A lot of them turned in their au- you know, non-commissioned officers, officers.  A quite a few of my friends, you know, went into OCS [Officer Candidate School] candidate and end up being lieutenants and captains and stayed, you know.  So, yes, we should bring it back (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 486918
Speaker 1: You spent how long, how much time did you spend in the [U.S.] military, in, in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two years draft.
Speaker 1: Got it.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was your job in the Army?
Speaker 2: I first went in as, you know, infantryman.  Then after ATI training [sic. Advanced Individual Training], after, after basic, I went to Oklahoma to be a cannoneer, which I ended up being a gunner on 105s and 155 houses and then went overseas as a, as a gunner.  I, I think I stayed on the guns there for about, actually about five, five months.  And then I told you I was--they needed a cook, a rotation, you know, one, a cook was rotating, and they needed one in, in the battery.  So they didn't have anybody, so I volunteered, which, 'cause I was a cook.  So, so I ended--that's where I spent most of my time in Korea.  I ended up being a cook the whole time.  And then when I came back to the states I rotated back to being a gunner, 'cause I was getting out.  I had like about six months.  So, so it was good for me, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You liked cooking in the service?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was good.  I mean I actually made a lot of friends.  And since I could cook, you know, they actually moved me to a headquarters battery, which was, it was only the 38th parallel.  It was Pullmuja- in Panmunjom.  But it was just officers, and they had--it was like a radio communications battery.  And they had like maybe about ten or fifteen officers, and the rest like 115, 125 men.  You can do that on your hand, you know, on your feet. And, and the lieutenants wanted me to cook for them, but I sent one of the other guys, and I stayed with the troops 'cause I liked the troops better.  They were more fun.  So I, I really had a good time.  I mean I was blessed all the way around.  I, I have no problems (laughter).  You know, and then I mean I made eighty-five, so, you know, within two years.  That's, that's, that's a big jump, you know.
Story_ID: 486919
Speaker 1: And you've had tremendous career changes here.  You started out as a pipe--working in, in the oil wells, or was oil--
Speaker 2: On the painting--
Speaker 1: Manufacturing oil drums and painting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then you had a desire to be a graphic artist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then you ended up being a cook.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then all of a sudden, you developed this flare and taste of being a hairstylist.
Speaker 2: Actually, that was kind of an accident.  And my, my best friend again, Thomas Oliver [ph.], his brother actually went into it and told us about it.  And then when Tom actually joined the service and went to Germany, he wrote me a letter when I was in Korea and said when we get out, let's go into doing hair.  And we can get a shop together and zah, dah, dah, dah, you know, all the, all the, you know, do this and do that.  So I, of course, I thought that was, you know, cool.  You know, I--we thought it was cool anyway, so this, this would be great.  But when we got home, he went a school, and I went to--we both went to different schools.  And, but we never actually ended up working together.  He actually, eventually ended up getting five salons and started a products, made his own products.  And I, then I went into Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you know.  But I tried to get him to go in it, but he liked what he was doing.  He was doing well at that.  He was doing well.  But, and his father, he and his father went into business--
Story_ID: 486920
Speaker 1: Getting into hairstyling.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We're talking about how you first go into it, what, what gave you the idea of getting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --into hairstyling.
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, my, my friend, Tom [Thomas Oliver (ph.)], his brother was in it.  And then, and actually his father was actually doing process, you know, when they used to process, King [Nat King Cole] conk your hair, you know.  And we used to go down there and clean up.  And then his brother decided he was gonna go be a hairstylist.  And as I said, we--I got drafted.  And Tom went to Germany, and then he wrote me a letter, and, and then we came out.  He went to school; I went to school, and we both started doing hair, but we kind of separated.  We were gonna do it together, but he started doing really well.  And he ended up getting about five salons and, and his own hair products, and he was doing really well.  And I was trying to get into Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], and, and it happened for me.  So I kind of went that route, and he went the other route.  But I actually tried to get him to get in, into, to Hollywood 'cause he was such--he was a good hairstylist, so.  But he didn't--he, and he, but he retired early though.  You know, he sold his salons and, and, and his products, and you know, he retired is mother and his, and his father.  You know, so, you know, they both deceased now, but he's still, you know, he's still doing his thing.  I think he's into real estate now.  He got totally out of it, so.  And, but that's how I got started, you know.
Story_ID: 486921
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now you're at this age now when you're into--you're, you're working and--now, I also understand that for a while you were a cook at LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California] also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, I was a cook in the Theme Building [Los Angeles, California] with the legs, as everybody call it.  I actually start working there as a utility man.  And this, this--I used to help this one cook that came in in the evening.  He would ask me to do so some things, and I said you know, "I want to be a cook."  He said, "You wanna be a cook for real?"  I said, "Yeah, I wanna be a cook."  And he said, "But you have to get on the night shift, the swing shift, if, if you're gonna be a cook."  I said, "Well, can you get me on the swing shift?"  I said, "I'll be a cook."  So I end up--he end up getting me on the swing shift.  Then I ended up working with him.  And, and I already knew a lot of stuff from my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson], 'cause I've been coming since I was ten.  And I used to cook for my mother.  When she would get sick or go to the hospital, I did the cooking.  And, and so I started working with them and then start, you know, doing all the stuff.  And, and then, then I started putting the food--you used to, you have the shippers used to--L.A. [Los Angeles, California] used to do all that stuff.  They didn't have outside vendors going, you know, stocking the planes with food and stuff.  You know, it was all done in-house, as they say--and, and that's the way I did it until I got drafted, you know, and they took me away.  But that's where I started, yeah.
Speaker 1: So the cooking was before you went into the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 2: Yeah, before I went in the service, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that was one of the things--
Speaker 1: Then you did two years in the service.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two years in the service and came out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then you came out of the service.
Speaker 2: Right, then went into hair.
Speaker 1: And went into hairstyling.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486922
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean that's how it kind of went, you know.  But I mean I had, like I said, I had a lot of little jobs, you know.  I worked for--I don't know if you remember Blue Chip Stamps? Okay, Blue Chip Stamps, you know they used to have the books, and they had all the lamps.  I used to work for the lamp company that used to supply them lamps.  And I worked for them for a while.  Then I worked for a company called Modine Manufacturers [sic. Modine Manufacturing Company] that made Ford [Ford Motor Company] radiators.  They made radiators for Ford cars.  I did a little of that for a while.  The Urban League got me that job (laughter).  It was one of those kind of jobs, you know.  I've tried it all.  You know, I mean I have just tried it all.  It just happened to, you know, pop up.  And I worked for the school board for a while.  I was a assistant playground director for Avalon, over there in Avalon Elementary School [Avalon Gardens Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  You know, I did that for a while.  And the coach got me that job.  I got that while I was still in high school [David Starr Jordan High School, Los Angeles, California], so.  So I've done a few things, you know.  But hair was--I mean I had no clue.  I'm gonna tell you the truth, I, I'd never done hair.  I never know--knew it.  I didn't know, you know, a comb from a brush really.  And then when I got into it in, in, in the school, and I really, really started enjoying it.  I thought it was, it was interesting, to create something and then watch it, look at it.  When once you create it, and then women walk away, that was, it was kind of amazing for a guy to do it.  You know what I mean?  Like, dang, you know, I did that (laughter)?  You know, and so, and I really go into it.  You know, I really, really got into it, and then I decided Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  I mean that's the next step.  You know, that's what I always thought.  At first I thought Beverly Hills [California], you know, to, to actually go to Beverly Hills and do hair.  But I ended up on Crenshaw [Boulevard], you know.  And so, I ended up running into--when I got out of beauty college, I, I tried to get a job with different people, and you know, it was hard.  Then this one lady, Connie [ph.], who's my best friend now, who I actually ended up going into business with--she let me work for them for a while, you know, she and her boyfriend.  And, and they kind of broke up.  You know, after their relationship kind of went sour, and she said--asked me how much money did I have.  She said, "How much do you have?"  I said, "What you mean?"  She said, "How much money do you have?"  She said, "You want to go into business with me?"  I said, "Well, I don't know--how much money do I need?"  She said--I said, "I got about three or four hundred dollars."  She said, "That's all you need."  Man, next I know, we in the car.  We go down on Avalon [Boulevard] someplace.  She goes into these little place and get some furniture.  We find a place, the Greenleaf Smoke Shop [sic. Greenleaf Smokers Emporium], right there on Crenshaw [Los Angeles, California].  It's called the Green Leaf Smoke Shop, right down from Maverick's Flat [Los Angeles, California].  That was our shop.  They actually got it after we left.  And we got that painted.  We did all the stuff ourselves, got furniture and everything.  We did it, put the shop together in about less than a month.  About three weeks, started business, and with her, with her expertise, 'cause she's been in--she's long--and she's a lot older than I am, but she's, she's good with business.  She knew how to hustle.  And, and that's when I started doing hair and, and really started getting clientele.  And, and after the clientele got really good and, and I was moving along, and then my first wife [Gwendolyn Lett] and I, we were kind of like rocky road, so, but it was, you know, it was, it was, it was doing all right; you know, we were doing all right.  And then when I decided to go down to the Dart Building [Los Angeles, California] and, and put in my application and then did get to (unclear)--actually got there, I mean, then my whole life just spinned around.  Then, then my life changed; it was, it, it was a total change.
Story_ID: 486923
Speaker 1: You said something there too when you said my wife.  You didn't tell us when you got married.
Speaker 2: Oh, I got, actually I got married just--I sure didn't.  I actually got married to Gwen [Gwendolyn Lett].  Her name is Gwen.  I got married to Gwen, my daughter's [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin] mother, in '60 [1960], got in '60 [1960].  I'm trying to say, make sure (unclear) in '64 [1964]; we got married in '64 [1964]--no, '65 [1965], because actually I, I got--after we--you know, I was drafted, we got married.  And then I went to Louisiana, and then came home again, and then went on to Korea, so about '65 [1965] we got married.
Speaker 1: Here in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Here in Los Angeles, yeah.
Speaker 1: And her last name is?
Speaker 2: Lett, or her, her maiden name--
Speaker 1: Maiden name.
Speaker 2: --was Lett.
Speaker 1: L-E-T-T?
Speaker 2: L-E-T-T, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, in L.A. That was wife number one, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it Gwen or Gwendolyn?
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn.
Speaker 1: Oh, Gwendolyn, okay.  G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) L-Y-N, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Gwendolyn Lett.  It's a lot Letts in the town.
Speaker 2: It's a whole lot of Letts.  It's a whole--
Speaker 1: I was gonna--
Speaker 2: It's a whole lot of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I just thought, it's a whole lot of Letts--
Speaker 2: It's a whole gob of them.
Speaker 1: --in this town.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her sister is like a principal of a school, and you know, she's--there's a whole lot of Letts.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jeff Lett [ph.], he was one of--and matter of fact, he's one of the first brothers they win the, the Irish Sweepstakes [Irish Hospitals Sweepstakes].  And that's how they actually got their money.  He won the Irish Sweepstakes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Married into money, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I married, but it wasn't for the money, and it wasn't in--I, I didn't get any of it (laughter) and wasn't looking for any of it (laughter).
Story_ID: 486924
Speaker 1: So now, okay, yo- now, now, so now you got this shop on Crenshaw Boulevard [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, I have the shop.  And I, I find out about there's hiring, because at that--like I said, affirmative action, it was kicking in full bore.  You know, it was--and the studio, the big studios, the majors at that time were really trying to, you know, abide by the rules, you know, and make sure they got enough minorities in to, to, to, you know, to keep it, the government off their back.  And I actually end up, like I said, at, at Universal [Universal Studios Inc.].  And, and that's where my career started and you know, and I, I got to Universal.  Well, they gave me an interview, and they told me maybe three days, said maybe we'll call you in a few weeks.  So about a month really went by.  I went back to my salon.  A month they called me at my salon and said look, I got three days for you.  If you want to do them, come on in.  So, man, you know I dropped everything I had.  I, I went straight on down there, man.  And the guy said, "Look, I, I said I can't promise you much, but go ahead and do--if you want to do the three days, then if other work comes I'll put you in."  Man, I worked so hard for them three days.  And he just came at the end of the week and said, "Look, I like the way you work.  I have a--just why don't you finish out, you know, do next week, just do--you can work next week.  We have enough work; you can work next week."  He said, "Can you work?"  I said, "Yeah, man, I can work."  That, that turned into eight years--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --straight.
Speaker 1: Which show was it, the first show you worked for?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I actually went into the apprenticeship.  They still had an apprenticeship at the, at the studios then when I started.  I went into apprenticeship.  I worked apprenticeship for like three, almost three years before I ever went to a show.  And then the first show I went to was, I think, my first show was 'McMillan and Wife,' with, you know Susan Saint James and Rock Hudson.  I, I worked that for I think two seasons or (unclear) a year or so, and then I went over to 'Ironside,' 'cause Don Mitchell would, you know, request me, could I do his hair, you know, do his natural.  So, that was like my first, I say, personal, to work with somebody, just that one person, and that was Don Mitchell.  And I did that show for four years, 'Ironside,' you know.  But I was at Universal for eight years, you know.  And I worked.  It was, was really good, I mean the, the, the man that--Nick Marcellino [Nicholas Marcellino], who hired me, who gave me all the breaks.  I mean he, he kept me when nobody else was going.  I mean he just liked the way I worked I guess, you know.  And he kept me working even when there was no work.  He just kept me.  Just go in the store room and clean up and you know.  That's--ain't nobody's working.  I was working.  And he just kept me around, you know.  And after that, after I finished the apprenticeship (unclear) saying, and then I--like I said, 'McMillan and Wife' was like my first one--they released me (laughter) out, out of the, the stock room (laughter).  And then from then on, man, I started doing everything, 'Kojak' and you know, then I, I did--matter of fact Lucille Ball show ['The Lucy Show'] was still going.  I mean, you know, I helped a few days over there, you know.  And then, you know, the, all of the, the new series and stuff was, were, were going on then.  Then I started doing the movies of the week, the, the movies they had.  And then that's when I, I met Richard [Richard Pryor].  That's when I met Richard.  But actually before, before I met, met Richard, I did Stewart Granger, I mean the English actor, Stewart Granger.  He was doing a, a TV thing called 'The Hounds of Baskerville' [sic. 'The Hound of the Baskervilles'].  I was walking down the hall, and I just happened to see him.  I mean, I, 'cause I've been seeing him on movies.  You know, I, you know, I was, you know, a movie fan too, you know, whoa, man, look at.  I said, "That's Stewart Granger," and I came and just stuck my head in and said, "How you doing?"  And I walked away.  He came out and said, "Come here."  I went back.  He said, "What's your name?"  I said, "Robert Stevenson [HistoryMaker Robert Louis Stevenson]."  I said--yeah, he said, "What are you doing?  What are--?"  He said, "What do you do?"  I said, "I'm a hairstylist."  He said, "You want to work on my show?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "I'm getting ready to do this show," he said--my boss, he come on over to my boss.  He said, "I want him to work on the show." Never met me before in his life.  He just saw me and asked me where I work.  I did 'The Hounds of Baskerville.'
Story_ID: 486925
Speaker 1: Let me ask you for, just in, interrupt for just a moment.  What does a hairstylist do?
Speaker 2: Well, there's two different type of hairstylists.  Are you talking about the hairstylists that work in, in the public sector hairstylist that work in the, out in the public, they do beauty.  I mean they make you look good.  You pay them, they make you look great.  Now studio hairstylists, they do beauty; they do characters.  There's, it's a lot of difference.  We, we also keep up with continuity to make sure that a person looks the same in the scene if we have to do it four days in a row.  They gotta look the same.  But regular hairstylists, they just do beauty and goodbye.  See, but we have to do a story, so, and we have to do our hairdos according to scripts, so we're studio hairstylists, where it's a little different.  So that's what we do (laughter).
Story_ID: 486926
Speaker 1: So you, you, you work with all different kinds of hair, don't you?
Speaker 2: We work with--yeah.  I mean you, you know, you have to be able to do anyone.  I mean if, you know, regardless to, to--come to that: that's one of the reasons I actually ended up getting that job.  Because when I went to interview for the job, the hairstylist, Mike--Larry Germain, who as one of the only male hairstylists in Local 706 [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild] at the time, was the head of Universal's [Universal Studios Inc.] hair department, and he told me--he wasn't the head of the hair department.  He was the head of the department period.  He was, he was--and he asked me what--he said, "Can you do white hair?"  I said, "Yeah, I can, I can do anybody's hair."  So he went and got a book, Life magazine, matter of fact.  It was a picture of a girl with a git- a woman with a Gibson girl, and that was a big style then at that time.  And he put it in front of me, and he say I'm gon- , "Can you do that?"  I said, "Yeah," and he said--it was an actress, Christine Belford, matter of fact, I remember her name.  And her sister was visiting her.  And she was getting her hair colored, but her sister was just there visiting.  And I think Larry asked, he said, "Could we borrow you so he could do your hair?"  And, and she was like, "Oh yeah."  You know, she jumped up, and I was like, "Okay."  So he said, "Okay, I'll give you a few minutes."  I whipped it up there, and then I went, and went got him.  He said, "You're finished?"  I said, "Yeah."  And he looked at the hairdo, looked at the book, looked at the hairdo.  He said, "Okay," turned around and walked away.  He said when we get something, I'll call you.  And they called me like a month later, you know.  It was the end of '69 [1969].  They actually called me '70 [1970]. When I actually came to work was in '70 [1970].  I mean I went in '69 [1969].  They called me in '70 [1970].  It was the end of, it was the end of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm just trying to get something straight.  Now you have the salon.  You open that in 1960--
Speaker 2: Actually, we opened it in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968], yeah.
Speaker 1: But 1969 was when you got the first call from Hollywood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 486927
Speaker 1: Now the hairstylist is on call at all times, always off the, off the camera.
Speaker 2: I mean it all depends.  I mean the studio hairstylist basically, if you, if you're on a show, then you get a call every day, you know, a call.  But if you're just in the union [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild], and you, you know, it's day work.  It's not a, it's, you know, it's not like going to your salon every day, you know.  Every day is a different day, you know.  But if you're fortunate enough or blessed enough to get, you know, on a show, then you work every day, as long as the show is running.  And then you also--they can, you know, other people hire you to help them out on shows.  So that's how that, that kind of work--it's, it's more of, of a, a union hall thing, you know.  You know, you go to call the union, you know, you get a person, you know.  But if you, you're good and you get shows, then you never work, or producers call you and you ain't got to worry about it, or people hire you because they know who you are or what, what you can do, or if you, you know, or somebody said something about you, and then they, they said okay, well, let's get him or get her, you know.  That's how it works, you know.  But it's not like, it's, it's not a job like, you know, Valentino or Beverly Hills [California].  You know, he goes in every day.  He got his clientele.  He knows what he's gonna do.  He know he's gonna do eight perms a day or you know, color today, and he got five people here, and he gonna do that, and he home, he's going home at lunch.  You know, he said I'm, I'm gonna be working to twelve [o'clock], and then I'm finished.  See, but Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you work sunup to sundown in all kind of conditions.  It's not the same.  It's, it's, it's not glamorous.  Everybody think it's glamorous.  It's not glamorous.  It's a job, and it's hard job.  I mean, of course, there's benefits, you know.  You get paid well, you know.  But you also, you sacrifice a lot of stuff.  I mean, you, you know, your, your, your family and, and, you know, and your health and everything else 'cause working in all kind of conditions, and all kind of hours, and you know, working nights, and working in the heat, you know, working in other countries, and you know, packing and unpacking.  And it's a whole, it's a gypsy life.  It's a gypsy life, and you have to want to do that, you know.  It's not for everybody.  Everybody say oh, I want to work.  No, you don't.  You know, you might, until you get that first twelve-hour day or thirteen-hour, or fourteen-hour day, then you--it ain't the same, you know.  It ain't like you work in a salon, we're gonna do five heads a day, then girl, we're going to the party or guy we're going to the party.  Ain't--forget that (laughter); there ain't no party (laughter).  The only party you're going to is the hotel to get in the bed so you can get up the next morning at five o'clock.  See what I mean?
Story_ID: 486928
Speaker 1: In 1969, when you first came in the industry--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how many black hairstylists were there at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, they--when I came in, there were no black male hairstylists.  They were--there were some black females.  They had a few, I mean.  And one of the well-knowns, Anne Wallington and Elizabeth Searcy, I think, I say Lola Kemp, and Ruby Ford was one.  But see, those ladies were there before I got there, but there were no men.  When I came in '69 [1969], see, the majority--matter of fact, all the makeup people were men; all the hairstylists were women.  See, they were making a change, you know, where they were getting men.  There were only two male hairstylists at that time in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] in, in, in Hollywood.  That was Sydney Guilaroff, who never got in the union [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild] and didn't care because he was, you know, all the stars wanted him anyway, and he, you know, he worked.  And then there was Larry Germain, who was actually in the, in the local as a hairstylist.  He was the only male, and he's white.  When I came, I was the first black male that actually go into the union and was working in Hollywood.  And then a guy, Ron Smith, came after me.
Speaker 1: Came after you.
Speaker 2: They came--we almost came at the same time, but I came in a little before him, but he was there, Ron Smith.  And--
Speaker 1: Ron Smith.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who's deceased now.
Story_ID: 486929
Speaker 1: What was the reaction to you when you first came out there, when people first saw you?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first started, like I said, Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] was, you know, just like everybody else in America, it was, you know, colored mattered.  But my--I could say the people I worked with, that actually accepted me in, Nick Marcellino, and Flo Avery [Florence Avery], they did, they, they, they were pretty cool with me.  I mean they didn't make any bones about it.  They said this is what you got to do.  This is where you're gonna work, you know.  And I, like I said, I didn't go on the set.  But it wasn't because I was black, because I had to be trained, because this, it was totally different.  At that time, the local didn't want me in; 706 [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild] didn't, you know, they didn't want me in.  They didn't say they didn't want me in, but they didn't want me in because they didn't let me join, although I was working on a union lot.  But they couldn't stop me from working on a union lot because they wouldn't let me in.  So they had to either let me in or just leave me alone.  So eventually, they let me in, and then they let everybody else, everybody that was coming in then.  When I first started in my training, the ladies that helped me couldn't say that they helped me.  They would go--they would make jokes about it, but they were all cool.  I mean everybody was fine.  I mean I tell you to truth, I, I didn't run into anybody that was really like outrageous.  There was a few people that were kind of, you know, standoffish, but they weren't outrageous.  They just told me: I'm gonna show you this, but you didn't get it from me.  That's what they would say.  Said, "I didn't--who showed you how to do that?"  I'd say, "Nobody."  They'd say, "Okay."  They'd go on, because they weren't supposed to show me.  Other than that, I couldn't--you see if--'cause the unions had a test then.  You had to take that test.  But I was so well trained from them.  I mean Universal [Universal Studios Inc.] was training me up.  I mean I was like the, like their star pupil (laughter), you know.  Because, I mean when I came in I was doing well, and I mean I did what, what they asked.  You know, I wasn't--I had no attitude.  I wasn't, I wasn't a mad black man.  I was just trying to, you know, make some of that money, you know, and I was trying to hold on, you know.  And you know, I had a family. I had my daughter [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin], my, you know, wife [Stevenson's first wife, Gwendolyn Lett], trying to make a living, you know.
Story_ID: 486930
Speaker 1: So it was this one woman, who was a wigmaker.  Her name was Josephine Turner.  She was the wigmaker at Universal [Universal Studios Inc.] at that time.  She was actually at Max Factor when--then she came to Universal.  After a few weeks she saw me, and she, she knew that they liked me there.  She called me into her office, where she had this, where she made all the wigs.  She called me in the office and made me sit down next to her and said, "I'm gonna tell you this, and I wanna tell you this so you can have longevity in this business, so you won't just come and go."  She said, "First thing--."  I mean it's so funny, this, this Hispanic woman telling me this.  And she said, "First thing, they like you here because you're a good worker."  She said, "And the second thing, leave the women alone."  That's the first thing she said.  She said, "Because if you start messing with them, they're gonna set you up, and you're gonna be out."  She said, "I'm telling you that."  She was like my mother the whole time I was in the business.
Speaker 2: Did that make sense to you?
Speaker 1: It made a lot of sense to me.  I told her she didn't have to worry about that.  I mean, look, but I'd--my first check was four hundred dollars a week clear.  I had never made that much money in my life.  I have my first check I jumped around like I was--look here it is '69 [1969], and I'm making four hundred dollars a week (laughter).  And look, and I was like, I'm living in Inglewood [California], over in a house that I paid seventeen hundred dollars for.  You know what I mean?  And I'm living so good it's, it's, it's, it's stupid.  So you think I'm gonna mess that up?  I don't think so.  So, I mean, and from there it just kept getting better and better.  You know, they trained me, and then I eventually, I started training the other trainees that were coming in because, I mean, they could use me for that 'cause I had been there for a while.  And then the, the training program ended after we took the test in '74 [1974].  The program was over with '73 [1973], whatever; it, it, it was over with, and they haven't had it since.  But Universal was, was okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been reading, I've read, and you know this, that there have been some actors and actresses who have married their hairstylists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are lot of them.  There's have been a lot of that, that have married, you know.  And you know, it's, it's not that common.  It's not that common, although people might think it.  But you know, but hairstylists marry drivers, and you know, and actors have married hairstylists, and makeup people have married actresses.  Yeah, so, it, it happens, I mean, 'cause you, you work so close with people.  And you know, if they like you, and you know, and they have you as a personal, and then you know, you get to know them even better, you know, and so you can get close, and then some of them end up getting married.  But it's not that common, but it's, it happens.
Speaker 2: But she had to tell you that if you mess around with a woman, you might be--have problems?
Speaker 1: Well, she was telling me that because of, you know, for one thing, she was telling me that because I was a black man.  She wasn't telling me, you know, you're black.  No, she was just saying then you're a target.  That's what she was saying.  Then, if you stay under the radar, you're better off; you'll last longer, and especially if they like you, you last even longer.  But don't, other words, don't be getting loud because you got a break.  (Unclear) she's just saying, you know.  And, and you know, she knew people frowned on it, and then they'll say, okay, we get you in--affirmative action gets you in, and then you gonna mess up.  See, that's what she was saying: don't mess up; just continue on doing what you're doing, and you, you work.  She say you work, and, and she was right.  I was working, and I saw that.  I mean, you know, I wasn't, I wasn't trying that, sheesh (laughter).  Look at here, I was (laughter)--I mean it, it was good la- it was a blessed thing.  You know, what, you're gonna throw that away?  I don't think so.  I mean, although some other--okay, it was a couple of black makeup artists that came in, a couple of guys, this guy named Ray Brooks, and you know, they stayed for a while but eventually end up--'cause he was--you know, some people, just attitudes just, they couldn't quite get over it.  And then they treated him certain ways, and they just, you know, just had a hard time, you know.  And they were angry, and, and, and you know, I understand why.  I mean 'cause they were getting treated, you know.  I just happened to be able to just block it out and keep going, and I just happened to be blessed that everybody I worked with were just good people.  I mean Nick Marcellino [Nicholas Marcellino] was a good man, Florence Avery, you know, and, and all the rest of them, you know, Josephine.  I mean, everybody gave me a helping hand, and they weren't black, you know, so I had nothing to do but go straight, you know.  I mean I had a good, a good, a good trail.  You know, they would point me in the right direction.  Now, if I decide not to follow it, then that was on me, but I followed it because, I mean, as my saying goes, you know, my paycheck is bigger than my ego (laughter).  I mean, you know, I like that, you know.  My paycheck is way bigger than my ego (laughter).
Story_ID: 486931
Speaker 1: The word is my paycheck is bigger than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Than my--
Speaker 1: --my ego.
Speaker 2: Than my ego, yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: And that's been a, a mainstay for you for all these years?
Speaker 2: For these years, yeah, thirty-seven years.  I and I (unclear) way to look at it, you know.  Ego don't pay bills, you know, and don't, and don't feed your kids, don't send them to school, don't buy them close, don't do anything.  It's just for, it's just your personal thing, you know, that you're doing, so got to let that go, yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is kind of hard because Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] is all about ego.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but as a worker your ego don't count, you know.  You be- you know, I don't care who you are, you, if you're a worker, and as an actor, they're firing you.  They ain't firing that person.  And I don't care how they act, they'll fire you.  If you act a fool, you gone, you know.  And then they don't want to work with you no more, so that's the whole thing, you know.  Your personality in Hollywood means, it is as, as good as gold.  If your personality can fit, most people can work with you.  Even if you're not that good, they can work with you because they figure they, they can get it done, and you ain't causing them no grief, you know.  So when you start causing grief, you gotta go.  It, it's, it's just, it's just it's the nature of the business.  It's just the way it is.  I mean it's like an actor that's acting up.  You know, for a while they'll let you get away with it.  Then in a while, then all of a sudden you ain't, you're not working, and you wonder why.  I mean 'cause I, I mean I--you know, we, we've all seen them, you know.  They're here today and not--gone tomorrow.  So I, I just think you gotta just kind of keep your ego in check.  And, and I--anybody this--I would say to anyone that's trying to get into Hollywood: leave your ego at home and just come to work and come to work, 'cause that's what it is.  It ain't about don't party, although Hollywood parties, but they, they have a certain time they party.  But when they're working, it's money.  And I, I think a lot of people don't understand that.  They think, you know, especially like when movie companies go to other states and the girls come, and the guys come.  They see and their eyes are big and their gleaming, and they see what you--oh, what you're doing is so glamorous.  No, what we're doing is working.  I mean we up.  You, you know, we up at five o'clock.  You in the bed sleep, you know.  We go home at ten, you've been at home sleep.  And you know, we've been up (laughter) and at work.  And you done went to bed, getting up, and went to bed, and we still up and then going to bed (laughter).  I mean you don't have, you know, you don't have to get out your bed at five in the morning and go work in forty-two [degrees] below weather.  We do.  I have done it.  I mean, and these actors, they think it's so glamorous.  These, these people work hard for their money.  I mean they might get millions, but they, you know--I've seen actors lay down in the snow, you know, get in frozen lakes, and, and that's hard.  I mean that's hard on you, you know, work out in some heat that's for- unforgiving.  I mean just, it's a hard job.  I mean Hollywood is a job, you know, but people think it's Hollywood, 'cause they see the magazines.  But all those people that are in the magazines, they earn to be in those magazines, really most of them.  They work at what they do.  They are who they, who they are because of Hollywood and what they do, you know, and, and, and they work for it.  It's not just somebody said okay, you can be in this magazine, and you, you know, you the, you're the prettiest woman on the planet, or you're the best looking guy on the planet.  I mean nobody just give that to them.  You know, they, they work, they earn that, so I mean and that's what people have to understand.  It's, Hollywood, is not for the faint of heart.  We'll say that, you know.
Story_ID: 486932
Speaker 1: They use a term called below the line.  Does that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --apply to a hairstylist?
Speaker 2: Some (laughter).  I mean sa- some.  I mean it all depends on if you a personal hairstylist, you can be above the line.  If you're just a regular hairstylist, you can be below the line.
Speaker 1: There's a difference in salary, right?
Speaker 2: It's just difference in salary and where they take the money from, you know.  Who's it coming off the actor?  Is it coming off the workers?  I mean, you know, so that's above is actors; below is (unclear) if you work the personal, then you're with that person, you're above the line.
Speaker 1: But you have to be a union member?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Union is, union is key.  Union is key (laughter).  Yeah, I mean it, you know, union is--I mean that's what gives us most of, you know, our hospitalization and all that stuff and least keep some tabs on how we, you know, we, we get dogged or you know, every now and then.  But so, yeah, unions are very important, and you do have to be in the union [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild], yeah.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had an opportunity--a situation where the union clashed with what you were doing or your job in the union had a problem?
Speaker 2: Me personally, no.  I've always tried to, you know, do what, you know, what the union says we should do.  But personally I have never had a clash.  I've only had to walk a picket line once on the job because it, it--they wanted it to go union, and they didn't want to go union.  They were really dogging the people that weren't union.  And since we were union we had to walk.  And that was in Seattle [Washington]; I mean Spokane [Washington], in Spokane, yeah.  And we did.  That was the first time I had to do that.  I mean in my thirty-something years that was the first time I had to do that.  And it was worth it.  I mean 'cause they wouldn't--people were really getting treated bad.  I mean it was not right.  I mean, you know, people driving to other states to work, and then they make them pay their own hotel and stuff.  I mean that's--you can't do that, you know.  So, we need a union (laughter).  We do need a union, regardless to what people might say about them.  You know, we do need them, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Levels the playing field.
Speaker 2: Hey, I'll tell you it at least helps, you know.  It's just like, you know, being a pitcher and you don't have a fast ball.  Huh, mean, you know what I mean?  Every now and then you gotta give them a fast ball, you know, so the unions is the fast ball.  Every now and then we can drop it on them.  You know, not, not that they can help us out of every situation, but they can help.  And I think, you know, we have to support it.  You know, we have to support it, so do the best that we can, because other than that we'd be lost.  I mean 'cause the producers get stronger and stronger every, every year, every year.  I mean, come on, they get richer and stronger, you know, and everybody else is getting weaker.  I mean so, I think it's--we need a union, and the union is there, yes.
Story_ID: 486933
Speaker 1: What are some of the tools that you have to work with as a hairstylist?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, hairstylists' brushes and combs, you know, and clippers, and flat irons, and pressing combs, and you know, perm rods, and hair dryers, and round brushes, and you know, all, you know, the, the tools of the trade, you know, mainly.  But a studio hairstylist have a little more, you know, a little more stuff because, you know, we got hair (unclear) and we have, you know, million dollar hair that, you know, the fill-ins.  And, and now even more so the, the, the, the hairstylists are coming into weaving and, and stuff like that, so you see more added on, so; wigs, you know, we do wigs, you know, lace wigs and regular wigs.  And there's a lot of different things that they--you just--the outside hairdresser just don't have a clue of what we do, you know.  You know, just like, you know, we, we do--we create.  You know we create.  They create on the outside too.  They, they create beauty.  But we create beauty; we create ugliness.  I mean we, we can't go from top to bottom, and, and that's how we work.  It's not beauty with us; beauty when we need it.  You know, you'll be beautiful in one scene and a dog in the next scene.  So that's, that's how we do it, and that's the difference between us.  And, and we need those kind of tools, you know, to make us work, you know.
Story_ID: 486934
Speaker 1: Now back to your private life, sir.  You were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --getting divorced [from Gwendolyn Lett] about this time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).  Around '74 [1974] I was rolling downhill (laughter).
Speaker 1: Seemed you went and got divorced in 1974.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around in there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as out of that marriage you had how many kids?
Speaker 2: I had a daughter.
Speaker 1: And her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My one and only daughter, as she says, Kendra [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin].
Speaker 1: Spell that.
Speaker 2: Kendra, K-E-N-D-R-A.
Speaker 1: Last name is?
Speaker 2: Stevenson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stevenson.  She's not married then, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, she's married now, it'd be now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ruffin is her name.
Speaker 1: Ruffin.
Speaker 2: R-U-F-F-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what does she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She's in marketing.  She, she works in marketing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One and only daughter.
Speaker 2: One and only daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what she says (unclear) she is one and only (laughter) daughter.
Story_ID: 486935
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got divorced [from Gwendolyn Lett] in 1974.  And then you met a young--another young lady came into your life.  Could you talk about that, sir?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Roz [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] (laughter).  Yeah, well, I met Roz at the st-, at Universal [Universal Studios Inc.].  We were doing, we were doing 'Emergency!,' and she was an extra on the show.  And she was wearing this natural wig.  And it, it was--you know, it wasn't, it wasn't as neat as I would like to have seen it, but it wasn't that bad.  But I just started messing with her, saying you know, you need to come over here so I can do your, do your hair.  So I just started doing her hair and started talking to her, you know.  But I mean she just talked to me.  She wasn't, you know, she wasn't trying to be nothing.  She was just, you know, just minding her own business.  Actually, she was mind her own business.  I was the one being a bug.  So at lunchtime, I was out in front of the commissary, and I saw her walking by.  And I just said, "Hey, wait a minute."  I started talking to her, you know, and then we just talked just as friendly.  And eventually I would see her on different shows, and eventually I just, you know, asked for her number.  You know, she said, "Are you gonna call me or what.  You gonna be just taking my number?"  And I mean, you know, I didn't call her right away, but I did call her, and then we started being friends after that.  We started, you know, going to parties and, and you know.  And, and while I was going through my divorce, you know, we--she was like good support.  You know, she was really supportive, you know.
Speaker 1: So you met her in what year?
Speaker 2: I met her around--I actually met her in '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --seventy-four [1974], yeah.
Speaker 1: And her last name at that time was?
Speaker 2: Woodruff.
Speaker 1: Woodruff, W-O-O-D-R-U-F-F (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) F-F, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Rosalind Woodruff.
Speaker 2: Woodruff, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, like I said, we just became friends and started going out.  And then, like I said, with going through the divorce, you know, you how stressed it is, stressful that is.  I mean I wouldn't wish that on, on a soul.  You know, that's, it's a cold job, getting divorced (laughter).  But I mean she, you know, she had been through it.  And then she was, you know, kind of, kind of helping me through it, you know.  And then we made--actually really became friends.  And, and she was, you know, struggling around trying to get her, you know, her life on track, and, and I, you know, I was going, you know, going along pretty decent.  You know, I was doing all right, and, and she was just, just really trying to make it.
Story_ID: 486936
Speaker 1: Was she [Stevenson's wife, Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] married at--or going through divorce at, when you met?
Speaker 2: She was divorced.  Yeah, she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --divorced then.  And so she was, you know, you know, struggling, you know, trying to work and you know, doing, being an extra.  And then, then she, she did some acting too.  She got--she was doing a little everything, you know, and you know, she was always a pretty smart lady, so she, you know, she had worked for a few doctors I think.  And she was always like a good writer and stuff, but she was really trying to pursue the acting thing.  And she did some hand modeling.  I know she was doing a, a few things, you know.  But it wasn't quite, you know, getting her across as far as taking care of, you know, two kids [Jason Woodruff and Damon Woodruff] and, and you know, staying in her house and, and doing all that stuff, 'cause I, I, you know, I don't think she was getting a lot of help from her ex.  But it was putting a strain on her, you know.  So as, you know, we were getting closer, and, and so we just really got tight.  And I just started helping her out a little bit, you know, just little things.  It wasn't nothing big, you know.  And I think I--she was having some troubles with I think, with a place to live, and I just told her, I said, "Why don't you just sell your stuff and then move in with me?"  And I said, "Just buy you a new car with your stuff."  So this guy that lived in the apartment where I was living bought all of her stuff 'cause he was buying a house.  He just moved out of an apartment, and he bought a house.  So he bought her couches, and she had some really nice stuff.  And so she bought a new car and then, and then eventually she found a condo for us out--in the paper.  And then, and then the boys and everything came and--'cause they were staying with, with, with their father sometimes and with Roz sometimes.  And so we found--she found, she found--I didn't find--she found this condo that we eventually ended up buying, you know.  And, and we, you know, we lived together for a little while, and then she couldn't live in sin anymore, so (laughter) she told me I had to (unclear) you, you know, we need to be married (laughter).  So, we got married in '77 [1977], you know.  Yeah, we got married in '77 [1977].  And then, and then she got pregnant around, somewhere in '78 [1978] or something like that, and then we found a house, sold the condo, and moved to Ladera [Ladera Heights, Los Angeles, California].  And when--with my, our youngest son was born, and--
Speaker 1: His name is--
Speaker 2: Teron [Teron Stevenson].
Speaker 1: Spell that.
Speaker 2: T-E-R-O-N.  I'm saying T-E-R-O-N.  I'm sorry, Teron, T-E-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Rosalind gave birth to Teron, all right.
Story_ID: 486937
Speaker 1: Okay, and so your career was just moving right along.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were moving, and she, you know, and she was, you know--so at that time, after she got pregnant, she didn't, she didn't work for, you know, while she was pregnant.  And then after she had Teron [Teron Stevenson], she got a job in MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.].  No, I think--I take that back.  She got a job at, with Norman Lear.  Yeah, and she started working for 'Good Times,' you know.  And, and--
Speaker 1: As a publicist?
Speaker 2: I think she was assistant to the producers.  I think that's what she was doing then.
Speaker 1: This is about 19--
Speaker 2: That was about seventy--that was seventy, seventy, seventy--'79 [1979], somewhere around seven--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --end of '79 [1979], somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Norman Lear.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Working as an assistant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  Take that back.  She actually was wor- she got that job at, with Norman Lear first, and then she got pregnant.  Then she, we moved to Ladera [Ladera Heights, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause she was, yeah, she was working, yeah.  So I just--
Speaker 1: So job--
Speaker 2: --changed that around, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So it's, yeah, around '78 [1978] she was working for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after she got pregnant and Teron was born in '79 [1979], then she went to MGM.  Yeah, 'cause she worked with Norman Lear for a few years.  And then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then she just took a clerk--a regular secretary's job and you know, and then she wanted to get in a, being a publicist.  And you know the history.  The rest is history.
Speaker 1: Rest is history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) She, she--
Speaker 1: And what year did she get the job--
Speaker 2: She went on from there, you know.
Speaker 1: She went on from there.
Speaker 2: Well, she actually went back to school.  She actually went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  You know, the, the studio paid for it, and nobody was taking advantage of it.  And she took advantage of it and, and went.  And you know, she took advantage of it.  Then, and then pe- again, personality and drive.  People like you, they help you, you know.  And, and, and then that's what they're boss told her, said you know, she said, "I will help you if you want to do these class."  She said, "Nobody is taking advantage of them, if you want to do it.  I'm gonna do it."  She did.  So she went on to UCLA, took those extension classes.  And like I said, the rest is history (laughter).  She, she made it work for her, you know.
Speaker 1: She became the first black publicist?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't know, but maybe for a major studio she might have, might have been, you know.  I, I, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I know she's the first in there somewhere doing something, 'cause she was pretty, pretty--she's, she's, she's been a--everybody seemed to know her, so I guess she got (laughter)--
Speaker 1: She is a dean.
Speaker 2: So that's, and then actually that's how--and then from there, then we, we both started doing pretty fairly well, you know.  And, and Roz [Stevenson's wife, Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] got bigger and bigger as far as she was concerning with, with her work.  I mean everybody knew who she was, and she's really good at it, and she's one of the top, you know.  And so, and I, so I had to try to keep up, so I had to be the top too, so, so, so we can stay together (laughter), stay even, you know.
Story_ID: 486938
Speaker 1: That's how, and that's how we, you know, we actually met.  And that's how we've been, you know, running our, our lives ever since, you know, trying to help, 'cause we both know how it is to come up from, you know, from the, through the ranks, as, as being who we are, you know, in the business.  But one thing I think we both remembered, you know, where we started, and who helped us, and who we have to help, you know.  And, and I've always tried to help anybody, anybody that, that needs it or listen, you know, need it, and she's like that, you know.  She will, she will help anybody.  So, and that's what I like about her, you know.
Speaker 2: How do you, how do you give help to someone who might be in need of, of it?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean if, if it's someone in, in my business, that wants to get in my business, I either--first thing I do is give them some advice, tell them what it is, and, and I mean not the glamorous part of it, tell them what it is, you know.  It's a job that you have to be dedicated to do.  You have to give up a whole lot, including part of your life to do it, and that's a fact.  You know, that's why Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] is--you know, you say the marriage rates are--you know, the divorce rates are high.  That's because you have to give up part of your life.  It ain't because people don't love each other.  It's just because people have to give up so much in order to follow it.  You know, it's, it's tough.  You know, it's tough, and so I tell them that, you know.  If it's a young lady, if she's married and you wanna stay married, I say think about it.  I'm not saying you can't do it, I'm saying if you got somebody to understand, okay; you can handle it.  But if you have a person that--a, a man that doesn't understand why his wife left at five that morning and ain't home until eleven that night or to ten that night or nine [o'clock] that night, hey, you know, where now he has to cook and watch the kids, it ain't funny (laughter).  It is not funny, you know, come on.  I mean Roz [Stevenson's wife, Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] and I, we had to be--you know, Roz had to work late, at night I'll pick up the kids, and then I'll cook because I was cook, so I cooked.  And the kids, you know, how I cook, so they, you know, they, they didn't have no problems, you know.  And Roz--so we actually, it worked out for us, and we understood.  And we both had our careers, and we both, we didn't get in each other's way, you know.  She backed me; I backed her.  It, it, it doesn't matter, you know, because it all goes in one house, you know.  You know, it, it, it afforded our kids to go to college or whatever they wanted to do.  You know, it afforded them to live in Ladera [Ladera Heights, Los Angeles, California], wherever it is, you know.  It's better than, you know, living where I came from, you know.  So it's a, it's a whole thing.  I mean it's--if, if you can find a companion, if you have a companion that can understand you, this business could probably work for you.  But if you have a short understandings, you don't want to be here, you know.  And I, and that is what I tell them.  I tell them and, and be prepared, no how to do something.  If you're black, know how to do white hair.  If you're white, you should know how to do black hair.  I mean hair is hair.  You said you're a hairstylist, so you can do hair, you know.  It ain't that I--you know, it's just like a makeup man and he only can do white folks or, or, or one that can only do black folks.  Well, I mean you're not a makeup artist then.  You're a makeup artist for special people (laughter) or you know.  But you got to be all around, and so be prepared.  This is what I say.  I mean it seems to be working.  I mean people are beginning to come in doing everything, you know, you know, everything now.  But when, you know, but when I first came in everybody didn't do everything.  Whites didn't do blacks.  Blacks, you had to do whites, or you wouldn't have no job 'cause it wasn't no blacks (laughter).  You know, so you, you, you had to do that.  So that's, that was my thing.  You know what I mean?
Story_ID: 486939
Speaker 1: What about the black face that was utilized back in Hollywood back in those, the old days?
Speaker 2: You know when people just wearing black face?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What about it?  Do (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Did, did you ever come in contact?  Did you see that?  What, what did you hear about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean I heard about it before I even got to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  You know, I knew about it.  And I actually learned some more things when I got into Hollywood that even blacks that were doing vaudeville, vaudeville at that time had to wear black face.  They, you know, I mean I was like, to me it was like what?  You're black and you gotta put on black face just to work, you know?  It's just America's stupidity.  I mean it's too bad.  I mean 'cause you know, you lost a lot of good talents.  You lost a lot--I mean, I mean segregation hurt America more than a little bit, I mean black and white, and green and purple.  It hurt everybody, because look how many minds that we just threw away, how many great people, black, white, you know, Hispanic, Japanese, Chinese and, and that we just said--dis- discarded because the color of their skin and not what's in their head or not what they are really about.  See, that's the sad thing about America, you know, that just knocks me stupid.
Story_ID: 486940
Speaker 1: And then you know, and, and I really realized that when I went to Africa, you know, how poor people in Africa are poor.  Poor people here are not poor.  Poor people here got a phone and a car and a toilet, and they live in a house, and most of them have two cars, even if one is raggedy.  There, people walk to work, no in- you know, outdoor toilets, and you gotta walk so many miles for water.  Then you realize how blessed we are.  Even with the madness, in this country you're still blessed; you're still blessed.  So, I think people gotta get over this, you know, I'm being dogged because I'm black and you know.  That's human nature.  You know, top dogs try to stay on the top, so you gotta find a way up from under it and do what you gotta do, you know, and, and stop feeling sorry for yourself.  You gotta just do it, you know.  I mean, of course, people gave me chances.  I mean white, black, green, and purple gave me chances, and, and I'm grateful to all of them, you know.  And, and I would try to do the same thing for somebody else.  But the black thing, get over it (laughter).  You gotta get over it.  It, it, it, it's, it's a thing, but you don't have to dwell in it.  You really don't have to dwell in it.  I mean you know what you're not gonna get, so go get it.  Because somebody said you couldn't get it, don't mean you can't get it.  Does it mean--did you, you listened to them and said I can't get that because they said I can't get it?  That, that's where we fail, as far as blacks are concerned.  That's where we fail.  Instead of saying, okay, you said I can't do it, but I'm doing it anyway, and I'm gonna do my best to do it, because a, along the line somebody that sees your talent will help you.  He can be whiter than Santa Claus beard.  If he sees your talent and he likes you, he'll help you, and that's a fact, you know.  I know that.  I mean, and I mean I've experienced it.  I mean that people see what I can do or see what I've done, and say okay (unclear) help you and protect you and make sure, because they see you as a person and not as somebody that's threatening them or, or acting mad because, you know, I don't, you didn't, you know, this should be mine because I'm in this and that, but somebody that wants to do what they want to do.  And so I'll help you to your goal, 'cause I see what you want to do.  And, and, and that's what we gotta learn, you know.  I mean I tell my kids that all the time.  You know, you know, I said you know what the police will do to you if you're in a car.  So the first thing you do is sir him.  Put your hands where you can see them.  It's a shame that I have to tell my son that, because he's black.  But the point of it is, he's in America.  He has to do it.  It will keep you alive, and you can continue to go on and do what you gotta do, instead of acting a fool, calling him this and calling him that, and he got a badge and a gun.  So, let's, let's, let's, let's understand this (laughter).  The power is not on your side.  So, but if, if you probably sir him, he probably, "Okay, son, go on," you know, more than like tell you to go on, if you're not doing nothing wrong.  But if you gonna be jumping, and, and grabbing, and opening things and--come on, man, let's be for real.  This is America.  You've read about.  You know about it, you know, so understand it.  You know, understand what it is.  It's what it is.  We didn't have--we had apartheid, but when they ended apartheid in South Africa, they had reconciliation.  They talked to each other and said we forgive each other.  They've never done it here, and they never will.  So, get over it.  But at least they giving you space.  You have the space to go ahead and make your life, so, you know.  I mean I've lived twenty times better than my father [Willis Stevenson].  You probably lived ten or twenty times better than your father.  You see what I mean?  So, come on, it ain't that you can't make it in America.  All my kids went to college.  You know, I didn't have--I'm the only one in my family didn't go to college--(unclear) come on, get the heck out of here.  Mostly all my sisters and brothers went.  It was twelve of us, and we didn't have no mother and father to guide us in like that, just a [maternal] grandmother [Eddie Butler], but on our own drive to stay alive and to do bet- to do well, because the odds are against you, so do it well.  At least if you're gonna go out, go out.  Go out trying to do something.  Don't go out just laying down crying and talking oh, you know because, you know I'm, you know (unclear) trying to get rid of affirmative action.  Yeah, they trying to get rid of it, so, so what.  You know, you try to keep it in, but keep doing what you're doing, yeah.
Story_ID: 486941
Speaker 1: We've covered a lot of your life, sir.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But professionally, as a hairstylist, you've been on a number of different movies like 'Car Wash.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You worked with a guy Richard Pryor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor, when I first met Richard, he was getting ready to do a movie at Universal [Universal Studios, Inc.] called 'Which Way Is Up?'  And they were trying a suit on him, and I was passing by the wardrobe department.  And he was--they had this white suit.  And he said, "Hey, brother, hey, brother, come here for a minute."  I said--and I went over.  He said, "How does this suit look?"  I said, "It's great, man."  He said, "No, no, no, how does this suit look?  Don't be telling me it look good because you, you're working here."  I said, "No, man, it, it just looks great; it look nice."  He said, "Well, so what do you do?"  I said, "I'm a hairstylist."  "You're a hairstylist?  You wanna work on my movie?"  I said, "You're doing a movie here?"  He said, "Yeah, I'm doing a movie."  He said, he said, "I'm gonna come over there and see if you can work on this movie."  And that's my introduction to Richard.  And I ended up doing that one and ended up working eight years with him after that.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are some of the memories you have of, of working with him?
Speaker 2: Richard, for one thing, for one thing, a generous man.  He was very generous.  Every, every movie we ever did, after we finished, he'd just give like bonuses.  And no actor I've worked with ever did that (laughter).  You know, I mean I've worked with a few, and nobody never, was, and nobody was ever like him.  I mean he was de- he was a very kind man.  And, and he wasn't funny when he was, when he was around people.  He, he wasn't a man that talked a lot.  He didn't really talk.  He kind of stayed by himself.  But he would listen to people talk.  That's how he got his material, listening to--like, if we were having a conversation, he'd listen to our conversation.  He'd be way over there but listening, can hear everything.  And he'd come up--then, if it was something you said that he really liked, he would come over and ask you could he use it.  He'd say, "Could I use this on my show?"  And most people say yeah, you know, yeah, man, just words (laughter), you know.  He was always kind to the other actors and actresses that worked with him, and you know.  He was a pretty smart.  He, he was actually an amazing man.  And, and but, I mean I'm just glad I had a chance to work with him, you know, 'cause he was truly one of the greats, one of the funniest people you'd probably ever gonna ever see, you know.  I don't think no comedian even comes close to him today.  I mean that--especially the ones that, you know, say they're out there.  I mean some of them are funny, and I think some of them are, are funny, but no one is like Richard, you know, the, the style, or the way he delivers, you know, and the way he tells stories and not, not jokes, but he tells stories, and, and, and he, he puts you in it.  And he can do that.  That's what I liked about him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, last time you guys were together was on what movie?
Speaker 2: 'Harlem Nights' was the last time I worked with him, you know, he and Redd Foxx, and Eddie [Eddie Murphy], and Robin Harris, Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] (laughter).  Those were--it was, it was a, it was a gob of us there, you know.
Speaker 1: You mentioned five names, and three of them are dead.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Redd Foxx--
Speaker 2: Redd Foxx--
Speaker 1: --Richard Pryor--
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and Robin Harris.
Speaker 2: --and Robin Harris, yeah.  You know, that's how--you know, it's--but I mean I got a chance to know them all, so it was, it was cool.
Story_ID: 486942
Speaker 1: Redd Foxx was, was a nice man too.  He was wild, but he was a nice man, old wild Foxx (laughter).
Speaker 2: He wasn't in crazy, he wasn't as crazy as he was in, in reality as he was on, on the screen, is he?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he kind of was. Redd was kind of outrageous, you know, but I mean that was him.  I mean that's the way he was.  Just like Richard [Richard Pryor] was not--and, and, and, and just in his everyday life, he wasn't really that out there, but on the stage he was a different person.  I mean he'd change just like that.
Story_ID: 486943
Speaker 1: Now you've won a couple of awards yourself in this industry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, say I have a, have a few (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wanna talk about them?
Speaker 2: You know, got the, the Emmy [Emmy Award], which I won for Jesse No- 'Jesse Owens Story' ['The Jesse Owens Story']  And then I was nominated or two of them, you know, for, for different things, TV shows.
Speaker 1: Which shows were they?
Speaker 2: One was 'Atlanta Child Murders' ['The Atlanta Child Murders'] and actually, you get a nomination for 'Jesse Owens.'  I got a nomination and I won it, so you get the nomination first, and then I won it, so those two, those two, really.  I also got award from different, different organizations, you know.  I mean it's a few.  I mean, you know, from--actually, I got something from my union [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild] for, you know, outstanding, you know, working and doing, you know, giving seminars and whatever, you know.  So it's--I got a few, you know, from the City of Los Angeles [California], from the mayor and different people, you know.  So that's about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that's three Emmy nominations.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And one Emmy.
Speaker 2: And one Emmy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Outstanding.
Speaker 2: You know, so it, it kind of works pretty good.
Story_ID: 486944
Speaker 1: You worked with a number of people.  You mentioned Eddie, Eddie Murphy.
Speaker 2: Eddie Murphy, yeah.  I worked with Eddie for five years, you know, a good man.  It was fun.  It was fun to work with--and you know and you know Eddie.  Everybody know Eddie in his group.  They were kind of wild, but we did some good stuff with him.
Speaker 1: You worked with Angela Bassett.
Speaker 2: Angela Bassett, yeah.  She's super nice, and you know, we, we, actually we hooked up--actually, I worked Angela before she really--she was just coming to, into her own.  And she, she was gonna do this movie called 'Dessa Rose.'  We, we, we had started to do it.  I think it was gonna be an MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.] movie, but MGM sold the company, and we were down in Carolina getting ready to shoot it.  We had been down there three weeks, and they canceled it, and it went away.  And it was Angela, and, and Laurence Fishburne, Cicely Tyson.  And we got back, and she got this movie called 'Jackson: An American Dream' [sic. 'The Jacksons: An American Dream'] (laughter).  So I worked with that, and then I've been working it ever since.  And then I went on for about five years after that, you know, 'What's Love Got To Do With It' and 'Waiting to Exhale' and, and, and that's, the 'Supernova,' and 'Strange Days.'  You know, we went on and did some stuff, yeah.  So, it was good.  She's, she's a nice lady, pretty lady--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and a nice lady, easy to do 'cause she's pretty, you know, easy, easy to work with.
Speaker 1: And then there's Samuel Leroy Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson].
Speaker 2: Oh, that's bad Sam.  Yeah, I met Sam--strangest thing about Sam that the people don't know is that I met Sam way before he became Samuel L. Jackson.  I met him in Decatur, Georgia.  I was doing a show with [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks and Cicely Tyson, called 'Just An Old Sweet'--'Just a Sweet'--'Just An Old Sweet Dream'--'Sweet, Sweet Dream' [sic. 'Just an Old Sweet Song'], yeah.  Sam was standing in for Robert Hooks.  And we talked, and after that, I didn't see him no more for like thirteen, fourteen years.  And he came in to do--I was working with Eddie on 'Coming to America,' and he played the hold-up man.  And after that, he left that.  He tried out for 'What's Love Got To Do With It,' and he, and then he didn't get it, but Laurence Fishburne got it.  Then after that he did--I did 'Great White Hype' ['The Great White Hype'] and been with him ever since.  But I had been knowing him all of those years, way before either one of us--I was just starting out in my career, and he was just getting ready to go to New York [New York].  He hadn't even been to New York yet.  He was still, you know, in, in, in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, see, we, we--you know, it was a blessing that we, we were supposed to come around.  And, and, and it, and it worked out and it just looked like I, I will retire off of him (laughter).
Story_ID: 486945
Speaker 1: So you're planning on retiring soon, sir?
Speaker 2: Yeah, next year I plan--2008 I plan to, you know, let the young folks have it, you know.  My bones is tired (laughter).  Let the young people have it.  Yeah, it's gonna be a good thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you plan on doing with yourself?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  But I, I am quite sure my wife [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson] and I will find something to do, you know.  I know she's gonna be doing something.  I, I'm gonna golf and play tennis.  And I'm gonna learn how to play the congas, so I might have fun.  Yeah, I just, just, just deal around.  But you know, I, I, I, I might start doing something.  I don't know, you know.  You know, you never know until you do it, so.  I don't plan to just keep working.  That's, you know, everybody saying well, then what you gonna do?  I, I can find something to do besides working every day.  You know, I've done that, so.
Speaker 1: You're gonna give something back to the industry?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I plan to help our union [Makeup Artists and Hair Stylists Guild], you know, if they need classes, and, and if I--they want me to give them, I'll give them, you know, and I will give some and also maybe cancer patients.  'Cause since I, I specialize in dealing with wigs and stuff like that, I might do a thing for ladies in how to care for their wigs and how to pick them, you know, and cut them, and how to make them look right on their head.  So that's one of the things, yeah.
Story_ID: 486946
Speaker 1: There's an expression that we hear around town these days, says whatever happens in Vegas, stays in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada].  When you're on the set, you see a lot of things; you hear a lot things.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What's the rules that you have to abide by?
Speaker 2: No names on location (laughter).  No, that they always say.  But I mean, you know, you, that's your--you know, if you're working for a person, that's your employer.  You know, you're not gonna tell on your company and have them go down.  Then you don't have no job.  So, I mean, just to me it seems that you keep your mouth shut.  It, it's not your business anyway.  You know, you work for the person.  You know, you don't have nothing to do with their life.  Whatever they do, they do, you know.  And most of the time if they do things, it's not in front of you anyway.  You might hear about it, but it's not, usually not in front of you.  It's after work, and after work is after work, ain't got nothing to do with me.  So that's my way of doing it.  I mean I can't tell on somebody.  I wouldn't, I mean even they offered me money I wouldn't do it, and I have been offered money, and I still won't do it, you know.  I mean there's people they do what they do, and it's their life.  You know, it ain't for me to go blabbing on them.  I mean I really don't care I mean.  And I'm taking a paycheck from them and then gonna blab them?  I don't think so.  I mean even though somebody might offer you a large sum of money, I mean you gotta weigh it out.  What is it worth to you, you know?  I mean to say I wouldn't want to destroy nobody's life or even put bad stuff out there because, you know, eventually it's coming back to you.  So, I'd say, you know, just keep your mouth shut and go on about your business, you know.  And then it's not your business, so I mean whatever--if, if somebody's doing something on--if the tabloid wants to know, let them find out.  It ain't up to you to tell them, you know.  And they will come to you, oh, and they do (laughter), and they come to you, you know.  So, that's what I feel.  So, I'm closed; I'm closed-mouth.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So don't see none (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I don't see it.  I don't--I mean I'm, I'm blind; you know, I don't see a thing.  You know, I, I mean I don't care who it is.  It's just not my business, you know.  I have enough trying to keep up with my life, you know, trying to keep up with somebody else's, so.
Story_ID: 486947
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, sir?
Speaker 2: Mainly, in, in, in, in this business, I, I would like to say that I mean I came in and did my job, and I was helpful to people that needed help, that I didn't turn down people, you know, trying to act like I was above the, the, the law or something like that, just doing what I wanted to do and saying the hell with everybody else, you know.  I understand that somebody helped me to get in, so I--it's always been in my heart to help somebody else.  And if anybody comes to me and if I can help them, I'll help them.  So, and, and I just want them to know when I leave and that they said that, you know, that they said well, you know, he'd help anybody, you know, and he, anybody work for him.  Even if they were horrible, he'd just, he'd hire them anyway.  So that's the way I would like to be remembered in this business and that I did good work (laughter).  You know, mainly you did work.
Story_ID: 486948
Speaker 1: I should ma- asked you, since you were a pioneer in the business, did you ever create any innovative ways of, of hairstyling techniques?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've actually created a few ways of the way I put on wigs on people to, you know--especially onto a person that has no hair, like a bald person, to make it look like it was theirs instead of putting on a wig.  I have a few techniques that I do.  And then I even try to teach people, you know, on a way to tape them on, a way to glue them on, and on a way to cut the lace, you know, and what it would do to a wig; I mean and try to, you know, let them understand the, you know, the whole thing and the technique on how to make it look like a part of them instead of like you just set a wig on their head, you know.  So that's mainly my thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just for the record, you're not wearing a wig right now?
Speaker 2: Not yet (laughter), not yet, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 486949
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I, I just, you know, feel that, you know, if this could help someone, you know, that to understand my history, to help them to understand where they need to go, I mean, that means this is what it is.  This is what I've said, you know, mainly to help someone else move along, you know.  It's knowing what you want to do, being prepared, caring about other people.  You know, even people that don't like you, you gotta care about them.  You know, and then that makes them care about you, regardless, you know.  I, I just think that the whole thing of even being a HistoryMaker or trying to do--not that you're trying to be a HistoryMaker.  You're just trying to do your job, and, and it works out that you may make history along the way.  So I just hope who's ever, you know, hear it, or listens, or read up on it on, on me or whoever, that they understand that in order to, to do this, to do what I do or what to do what anyone does, that you have to be prepared to do it, and you have to give up some sacrifice to do it.  And it's not a given because of your color or anything else.  It's just that it's you as a person that makes it work, so you just gotta stick to it and, and do it, you know, because that's what it is, it's you, you know.  If God gave you a talent, then use it, you know, then use it.  Use it for your best, you know.  Because if you use it for your best, you'll help somebody else, and you sure will, and, and, and that's the way it works, you know.  (Laughter) That's the way it works.
Story_ID: 486950
Speaker 1: Your first photo, this photo here is myself and my sister Peggy [Peggy Stevenson Harris].  It was taken around 1946 in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mom [Christine Whitaker Stevenson], my sister Peggy, and me at three.  And it's also taken in 1946.  Matter of fact, it was in Louisville, Kentucky and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it, next.
Speaker 1: This is my dad [Willis Stevenson].  This is taken in Louisville, Kentucky.  He's basically, I think this year was like about 1947 or somewhere around in there.  No, I take that back.  That's like '50-something [1950].  That was a good picture, a younger picture (laughter).  That's fifty--about '57 [1957] I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is me and, and some of my friends from 100--102nd Street elementary school [102nd Street School; Florence Griffith Joyner Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], our sixth street [sic. grade] graduation, my friend, Samuel Hickman [ph.], myself, and Willie Mack [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it, next.
Speaker 1: This is my picture of my daughter and myself.  My daughter is like about two at the time.  And this was taken around '60 [1960]--I say '60 [1960]--about '70 [1970].  It is about '70 [1970] (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. We're good, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, a picture of my wife, my youngest son, Teron [Teron Stevenson], and myself, taken at, at, at our house here and in Los Angeles [California].  This was taken around, I'd say this is around '78 [1978]--no, I took this around '82 [1982], '83 [1983], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: This is my grandfather [maternal step-grandfather], Clarence Butler [ph.] and my grandmother, Eddie Butler.  And this was taken around fifty--this was like around '56 [1956] or--yeah, somewhere around '55 [1955], '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: Well, it's taken in 1944 in Louisville, Kentucky.  That is me (laughter), new guy, new guy in town.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is, oh, this picture, this picture is myself and my wife, Rosalind [Rosalind Woodruff Stevenson].  And this was taken, I think this was taken around about '78 [1978] or '79 [1979], somewhere around in there, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 2: Oh, picture of the clan (laughter).  This is a picture of my wife, Roz, my daughter, Kendra [Kendra Stevenson Ruffin], my son, Teron, stepson, Jason [Jason Woodruff], my stepson, Damon [Damon Woodruff], and myself, taken at our twenty-fifth anniversary at Marina Del Rey here in Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on one second. (Unclear). Done, next.
Speaker 2: This a, this is a picture taken in Canada.  We were doing a film.  This is myself, the still photographer, and the makeup man, Sam's [Samuel L. Jackson] makeup man, Allan Apone.  And that was taken about, that was like 2005 I think, somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 2: Thought you (unclear) it was getting ready to fall over there.
Speaker 1: Oh, now this picture is of myself and my cousin, which I have really--that was the first time I'd probably seen her and the last time I saw her, so I really don't even know who she is, but I know she's my cousin (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   Okay, do you remember how old you were on this?
Speaker 1: This is I was just three.  It was three, and we both were around three.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself, the makeup man, Rick Sharp, and Jennifer Beal [sic. Jennifer Beals], when we were shooting 'Flashdance.'  And I think was what, '70-something [1970], '78 [1978] or '9 [1979] or '80 [1980], somewhere around in there.  I can't remember when that 'Flashdance' was (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   Okay, well, they can--
Speaker 2: But it's 'Flashdance.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That can be verified, no problem.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was just 'Flashdance'--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty [1980], yeah, somewhere in there. All right, this is a picture of Sam, myself, Allan Apone, his makeup man, and Leonard [Leonard L. Thomas], his assistant.  That was taken in Mexico.  We were doing, I think that was the shark movie.  I can't, I can't quite remember exactly if that was the shark movie or--I'm trying to think of the movie that was called.  I can't think of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Is there anything on the back of that one by any chance?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  What was it called?  Oh, got it, (laughter) 'Deep Blue Sea' (laughter).  It was (unclear) 'Deep Blue Sea.'  I, I forgot what that was.  It was 'Deep Blue Sea,' yeah,
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it, next.
Speaker 2: 'Deep Blue Sea.' 'Another 40-,' 'Another 48 Hrs.' with Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture, a crew picture really, taken of 'Another 48 Hrs.' with Eddie Murphy, Nick Nolte, and the crew, you know.  I, I can't quite remember exactly what year that was, but it was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   Hold a second, standby one second.
Speaker 2: But it was at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation], shot at Paramount here in, in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, that's good. Next.
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember that.  That is, it's a picture of myself.  This is 1975, yeah, '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it, next.
Speaker 2: This was taken, this was taken around '73 [1973], and it's a picture of my family and all my nieces and nephews, and my brothers, and my sisters, my sister Shirley [Shirley Stevenson Harris], my sister Peggy, my sister Loretta [Loretta Stevenson Sams], my sister Connie [Connie Stevenson White], and my wife Roz, and my, my father, and my brother Theodore [Theodore Stevenson], and nieces, my brother-in-law Willie [ph.], and my sister Connie in the corner, and a host of nieces and nephews (laughter) you can't see them that well but, all of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: A picture of my father taken about I think that was about 1940--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my father about 1940--I'd say '46 [1946] I guess, forty--don't know--'44 [1944], '45 [1945], about '45 [1945], '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   And do you know what rank he was and what--
Speaker 1: He was just, he was just getting out of basic--I guess he--what are you when you get out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seaman recruit.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Seaman recruit.
Speaker 1: Sea, seaman recruit, 'cause he was just getting out of basic I think there in Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my mom, yeah, my mom and my sister, my sister Peggy, taken in 1947.
