Story_ID: 119955
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Craig Strong, C-R-A-I-G, S-T-R-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Stephen, S-T-E-P-H-E-N.
Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, none you want to share I guess.  (Laughter) Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 5, 1947, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Judge, Wayne County Circuit Court criminal division.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Seventh of March.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: My house at 1744 Seminole, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the Indian Village neighborhood right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Story_ID: 119956
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People" magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone we interview.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have favorite foods. Watermelon. I used to love lobster until I developed an allergy to seafood.  I like barbecue, I like steaks, I like all the--I think the, the normal foods that most people like.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably red, as you can see by my carpet.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably yeah, Venice Beach, Venice Beach in Los Angeles [California] although I love Cape Town, South Africa, but I try to go to Venice Beach two or three times a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The quickest way to get where you're going is to look like you've already arrived."  Also, "If something is important always act your best, do your best, and look your best."
Story_ID: 119957
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father side of the family.  So we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Manila Geraldine Powers, M-A-N-I-L-A, G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E, P-O-W-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September strike that, April 5, 1907, Greenwood, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family and how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Well they're--they were originally from Promised Land, South Carolina.  And she was born in Greenwood, South Carolina.  Her grandfather had a lot of land.  He had over 200 acres, and he had the house and he built houses for his children.  So there were nine smaller homes and they named the street Powers Avenue and Powers Lane.  Her father served in the Spanish-American war.  I have a photograph of him.  And the most beautiful place he saw was Manila [Philippines] so when my mother was born he said, "My daughter is the most beautiful girl," so he named her Manila.
Speaker 1: Now there must be a lot of stories here.  Now first of all, the name Promised Land, South Carolina--is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, from what I understand it was a place for runaway slaves built and when my mother was growing up it was considered a country place.  So it's still in existence but it's still a small town and Greenwood was the big place.
Speaker 1: So runaway slaves in South Carolina would actually run to Promised Land?
Speaker 2: From what I understand--
Speaker 1: And how--
Speaker 2: And when they actually settled it, it was a place where they believed that they would well reap the benefits of being freed, and being Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now doing slavery I suppose it--was it near someplace where they could hide or something or was it a hidden place or--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I've never been there.  I tried to find it when I was in South Carolina.  But I have a friend now that bought a place in Promised Land, so I'm going out there this year to see it.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's got to be quite a story behind that it would seem.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, there were some free black people in South Carolina, you know, living an anomalous kind of life.  Being free and in a slave state but masters routinely would free slaves without a, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For whatever reason, you know.  So.
Speaker 2: What I think about though is my mother's history.  And then she believed in education and my father, her father died, and her mother moved north and sent for the children one at a time.  And my mother arrived in wintertime, and she had never felt cold.  And but she told me about coming up north was that segregation was bad, discrimination was a bad.  And her older brother had to work not for money but for coal just so they could heat the, the stove and stay warm and things weren't that good for her.
Speaker 1: That's here in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In Detroit yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did, did she come up as a teenager or was she younger (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No she was a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Child, okay.  Now is there a story behind your grandfather?  You say he had 200 acres and--?
Speaker 2: Her father.
Speaker 1: Her father, yeah this is be--
Speaker 2: Yes he had 200 acres.
Speaker 1: Yeah this a--be your grandfather right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head yes).
Speaker 1: Over 200 acres of land.  Is there a story there how he got that kind of acreage in South Carolina in those days?
Speaker 2: I understand that he was a businessman.  He at one point did dentistry, and I don't know that much about his side of the family but that he just had the big house and that my mother said that he named the boys after presidents.  He had dreams for his children.  He provided for them, and those that stayed in the South went to college.  They were educated.  Those that came up north got jobs, so there's a, a different type of feeling in the north and our family.  And that so many of them were school teachers and went to historically black colleges but the relatives in the North went to the factories and still provided for their families.  Still had homes and cars and great lives.
Story_ID: 119958
Speaker 1: Okay, I noticed in a article I was reading, you know, before we started.  I was reading about your grandmother on that side that she was born into slavery, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are there any stories about her?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a, I'm the grandson of a slave.  My father's mother was born in slavery.  And he [Erman Strong] was the youngest, and he and my mother had four children and then ten years later I was born.  No one is still alive but what I heard about my grandmother was that they lived in a store, behind the store.  And that when my grandfather died because of the laws at the time she couldn't inherit wealth.  So she was able to get some property but most of the valuables and land went to the grandfather's side of the family.  And she too believed in education and wanted her children to go to school.  But the times did not allow that.  Most of those--most of my father's family moved North.  My mother's family stayed South.  My mother's family had the education, my father's family moved North for jobs.
Story_ID: 119959
Speaker 1: Okay, now is, is there a reason why your mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] moved to Detroit [Michigan], I mean as opposed to some other place I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, only 'cause her mother moved up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And had to work and sent for her children one at a time.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it because of the auto industry you think that, that her relatives moved to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Probably (nodding head yes).
Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, Detroit seems the usually the natural place to South Carolina is to go to New, New York [City], you know, so.
Speaker 2: And then I have several relatives there.  I don't know the history of that, but on my father's side from what I understand the trains from Alabama came to Detroit.  That's why there's so many of us in Detroit from Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have roots in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have a chance to go to school here in (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, she went to high school.
Speaker 1: Detroit.
Speaker 2: And after my father [Erman Strong] died she went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Strong believer in education.
Story_ID: 119960
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Erman, E-R-M-A-N, Strong, S-T-R-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 22nd, 1902.  Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well that his mother was a slave, they were very fair-complected.  Many of them looked white and from what I understand one or two passed for white.  Most did not.  And they didn't--they lived black.  They lived in the neighborhoods the children went to public schools, and they did not--they were not ashamed of their race.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any stories from slavery that been passed down through your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Not really, other than the fact that she was--she worked in a restaurant and that she wanted her children to go North.  She wanted her children to take advantage of the opportunities that industry had up here.  So she actually helped the older children financially to move up here.  And they like most did--would come up here one or two at a time.  And send for the others and provide for, for the younger ones until they were in the positions to provide for themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, you mentioned the railroad connection, you know, Al, Alabama-Detroit [Michigan] seemed to be a terminus for Alabama people.  As well at Cleveland [Ohio] I guess in some ways that the two big cities but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, just like Chicago [Illinois] and Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Because of the railroads.
Story_ID: 119961
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay so, so when did your [Erman Strong] father come up?  How old was he when he came up to Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: From what I understand he was probably around twelve or thirteen.  And similar experience he came up in the wintertime.  And people in the South did not have heavy clothing.  So he had to wear his, his older brother's clothes until he was able to get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's up here in the nineteen-teens and in Detroit.  What did, did your mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] and father talk about what life was like up here for them in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father took a lot of pride in his appearance I know that.  'Cause my father always wore suit and tie.  He was a red cap at the railroad station.  But if you saw him and his boss together, you wouldn't know who was the boss and who was the employee because he as well as--well for him and, and members of his generation dressing leveled the playing field appearance.  So they dress for respect, and my father, my father believed in that.  He believed in manners, he believed in respectability, he believed in appearance.  And I look at him as a success.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's an aspect that I mean we've discussed it with other people before.  That people, black people at a certain time, in fact, a lot of people, not just not only black people dressed in suits all the time.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: No matter what job you had when you went to work you went in a suit.  And you what have you changed your clothes in whatever you had to wear and came back home in a suit and tie.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And I, I take after my father (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wore suit and tie every day.
Speaker 1: That was an indication of aspiration and as you say (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And he, he bought his own house, I mean the normal things, you want to buy a home, and he bought a two-family flat.  And he believed in education, made sure his children were educated.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he work for the railroad his entire life?
Speaker 2: He told me when he was real young he was a bellboy at a hotel.  But after that he got a job at the railroad station, and that was his career.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he did he have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: No he didn't, no.  But you would've never known it though 'cause my father read all the time, did crossword puzzles, and he knew a lot of words and took pride in his ability to communicate.
Story_ID: 119962
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you--are there any stories passed down through your family about Alabama that are told in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Or South Carolina I guess, I'm just thinking of--
Speaker 2: Well other than the fact that on my mother's [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] side where there was money that--they lost property.  They lost the land because the children had moved away from Greenwood [South Carolina], and they lost it through taxes and when relatives went down there to sell the timber to pay for the taxes, timber'd already been stolen.  So a lot of people lost land in the South like that.  People wanted to take the land they, they were able to get away with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well can you de--give us some idea of what your parents' personalities were like and who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother.  Only because my father [Erman Strong] died when I was in high school, and he worked afternoons at the railroad station.  So when I would get up to go to school in the morning, he was asleep, and when he'd come home at night, I was asleep.  So I didn't have that much contact with him and on the weekends--he worked on the weekends.  He was normally off on Monday and Tuesday.  So I didn't have him, so I was in school, so I didn't have that much contact with him.
Story_ID: 119963
Speaker 1: Okay, how many brothers and sisters do you have?  Or, did you have growing up?
Speaker 2: I had two brothers and two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was, was the, the household just the--your contiguous family or was it--were there more people in the household when you are growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I grew up a little bit different.  Only because of the distance in age.  It was a typical house: three bedrooms, boys had a room, girls had a room, my parents had a room.  But when I was growing up, by the time I was born, my oldest brother was in college.  And by the time I was a year old my oldest sister was in college, so I had my own room.
Speaker 1: So were you the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So well, can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in and you, you grew up in a special neighborhood on the, on the west side of right, Detroit?
Speaker 2: It's called the old west side, they, they've written a book about it because of the people that came out this little small pocket.  [HM] Judge Damon Keith, Attorney Elliot Hall, [HM] Congressman John Conyers.  Just to name a few, but it was a working class community where education was valued.  And a lot of musicians, doctors, lawyers, educators, small pocket.  The Gordy family, [HM] Berry Gordy [Jr.] from Motown it's very interesting, very interesting.  People owned their own homes and, and like I said they had a lot of value in education and sacrifice and made sure that their children were educated.  And it's a lot of firsts that I've seen came right out of that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: What are the main streets over on the old west side?
Speaker 2: I'd say, Livernois, Grand River, Tireman, Waring in that area.
Story_ID: 119964
Speaker 1: Okay. Right.  What, what were--reflect back and tell us what, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I lived two blocks from Albury [ph.] Bakery so (laughter), so it was always a sweet smell.  And we could get cupcakes and freshly made.  And get them at discounts if we wanted.  It was a good neighborhood because people took care.  There weren't factories a lot of factories in that area, we had a lot of churches.  There was a bar down the street in the next block called the Blue Bird.  And by living so close I was able to meet people like Miles Davis and Dizzy Gillespie and some of the great musicians of the time.  That was exciting for me.
Speaker 1: Now were, now would they, would they play in the neighborhood or were they?
Speaker 2: Played at the bar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the owner liked me so he'd bring me in and passed me off as his son sometimes.  And I'd come in there and show my report card or recite poems or sing.  And people would give me nickels and dimes.  And it was a very empowering and very encouraging neighborhood for young people to, to be--become successful at whatever they could do.  I loved growing up over there; it was easy to make money.  Kids could go to the pharmacy across the street and deliver prescriptions, and grocery store two doors down you could deliver groceries.  So children had a way of, of making an honest living.
Story_ID: 119965
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have very many jobs growing up?
Speaker 2: I was a paperboy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was something I really wanted to do.  As a matter of fact, one of the paperboys that I remember was Elliott Hall, who became an attorney and Vice President of Ford Motor Company.  So we'd say he was my paper, and he would correct me and say I was your parent's paperboy (laughter).  And then the paperboy that took over from him, Ron Rice is a lawyer.  And I couldn't wait to become a paperboy.  My oldest--well my brother was a paperboy so I would fold papers with him sometimes.  And he take me on his route.  So that was a great ambition for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had a great street, Colfax.  I mean my customer--I made so much money.  My customers would buy Christmas cards for me, sunflower seeds.  I'd go to all these bakeries on the way there and pick up bread for them, and they would tip me and I saved my money.  And I had a great time. I always said that's my second best job, being a paperboy, first being a judge.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was, it was deeper than just delivering the paper you had a lot of other things that you would do on the route.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my friends--I had developed a lot of friends on that street.  And, and my friends would help me deliver papers so we could play baseball or card or just talk or study together.  I really had a sense of community on that street.  Hated to give it up.  Even now some people still call me their paperboy.
Story_ID: 119966
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what, what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Church, a lot of churches were over there, and I would have to pass churches on the way to my church.  And I grew up at St. Cyprian's Episcopal Church, where I would go to Sunday school, and in the summer, there was a Bible study, and I became an acolyte.  But on the way to my church I would have to pass Pentecostal churches.  And the windows were open and I'd see the people running around and ministers shouting and screaming having white handkerchiefs and sweating.  And I just kinda thought that the Holy Ghost was not in my church.  It was in the others people's churches, and I wanted to go to other churches, and I'd look in the windows.  And stand on boxes so I could see it I would get scared sometimes just to see people running around.  It fascinated me.  I was the safety patrol boy outside of Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church.  And I had the opportunity to meet [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] because he spoke there.  And they invited me in because they wanted to take a photograph of him with someone young. So after I finish my duties, I went to the church and I, I remember I stood on a, a step so I could be about the same size as him.  So we could take the photographs, and we took them.  I never got the photographs, though.
Speaker 1: Now that, now somebody shot him for the, what is it, for the "Detroit News" or "The [Detroit] Free Press"?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was young.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I was still in elementary school but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just remember I tried to get the photographs years later, and people couldn't find them.  But it was a great experience for me to meet him--
Speaker 1: Now what, what church was it at, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: --under the circumstances (simultaneous).  Tabernacle.
Speaker 1: Tabernacle, okay.
Speaker 2: [HM] Judge Damon Keith's church.
Story_ID: 119967
Speaker 1: Now, with your father [Erman Strong] being from Birmingham was there a lot of discussion about the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on in Birmingham in the '60's [1960s] through him?
Speaker 2: No my father worked all the time.  He had four children in college at the same time.  So his schedule was different from mine 'cause like I said he worked afternoons.  And he worked overtime all the time.  So matter of fact when I was sworn into office my mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] said that she wish I would've known my father better.  But at that time in his life he was just preoccupied with tuition.  I didn't take vacations with my family.  Like they did, they would go to Idlewild [amusement park] and places like that as a family, but I was a late child, so I grew up differently.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But in a good way, because I had older brothers and sisters.  By the time I was able to travel I went everywhere.  My father was a red cap so he had a pass.  So I could get on the train and go to New York.  I could go to Chicago, and I did I traveled quite a bit.  By the time I was ten years old, I had already been to California.  So I had a different life than my classmates and neighbors.  That train gave me a different view of the world.  I saw--I my experiences were different.  And it even has affected me even now.
Story_ID: 119968
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had in our public school system [in Detroit, Michigan] we had instruments; we had music classes.  But in my household there was a piano and my older brother had a saxophone, so I played saxophone as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And George Frazier, who was a composer, lived in the neighborhood.  Roy Brooks percussionist--music was everywhere 'cause we had a lot of churches also, so they all had choirs.  And we lived in front of the bus stop so people, musicians people that were going to class with their instruments sometimes would just sit on the steps and play.  It was a great, great area era for us.
Speaker 1: Now you, you came along I guess during the time when Motown was becoming popular was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: And I was a little bit behind them but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had my own group, you know, everybody had a group.  We all had our quartet.  We were the Junior Flips, and then we became the Gents, and we performed at theaters and won savings bonds.  And we were on television one time.  It was fun.  Either you had to fight, or you had the sing.  So a lot of us became singers (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  What was, was television a big part of it or, or movies did you like both?
Speaker 2: I liked that we didn't have a television.  I mean my father--I was one of the last person in my age group and my group to have a TV and radio.  But (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you grew up in the era where most people had a TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most people had a car we didn't have a car either.  But the bus stop was right in front of the house so.  And like I said my father [Erman Strong] was preoccupied with paying tuition.  So things like that, material things like a car and television we just didn't have.  Or, I didn't have it.  We never had a car until my brother got drafted, and he bought a car.  I remember when I was in elementary school, we finally got a television so--but we lived without it.  We made it.
Story_ID: 119969
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, we're talking about growing up and off camera you were telling me a story about trying to be privy to your father's [Erman Strong] conversations--what, what would you do?
Speaker 2: Well, see like I said my father worked at the railroad station.  And he worked afternoons so sometimes I would stay up, and I'd hide behind the sofa just so I can hear my father and his friends talk.  And, you know, people'd smoke cigarettes and drink and sit around the dining room table.  And I remember my mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] would get up sometimes and have to go and close the window so the neighbors couldn't hear.  But that was my way of, of learning what men do and, and what they think about.  And my father, since he worked for tips--my father always knew how much money he had at all times.  He had a money jar, and I remember I would just watch him just count his money, count his money and put it in the jar.  And go to the store and go to the bank and get checks to send to my brothers and sisters.  One experience that I really liked was paying bills.  That was a big deal.  My father would dress me up take me downtown on the bus, and we would go to [Commonwealth] Edison and pay the utility bills.  And go to the Hudson's [department store] and he would always let me pick out what I wanted but he would always buy what he wanted me to have in terms of clothes.  I like colors, and he wanted me to dress conservative.  But he always made sure that I had a--that I had a suit, tie, Sunday shoes.  That I was always well-dressed.  Hat, coat, scarfs, gloves.  Like I said appearance was important to him but I just remember getting on that bus to go downtown that was exciting for me.  And, and you learn, my father would have me--if, if everyone was seated, and a lady got on the bus, I was the first person had to get up to give up the seat.  And if another lady got on the bus, he'd get up.  But, you know, you learn manners you learn how to get on a crowded bus and say excuse me and pardon me.  And you learned etiquette.
Speaker 1: Sort of protocol to right(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Protocol, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, as the younger would get up and then if somebody else got on he would get up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Didn't curse or anything like that, I mean it's a different, different day.  'Cause a lot of people took the bus.  But they would--you had to be courteous.  It's a learning experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, so early on now, now you are known from what I've seen of all the fellows here as a fairly snazzy dresser, sharp brother.  Did you start--did that start when you were young?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause my father always made sure I had Sunday shoes, suit, and tie.  And appearance was important, my mother would tell me if something is important you always act your best, do your best, and look your best.  And even as a child I would wear white shirts.  And very often a tie with my sweater.  I liked that, and I still do.
Story_ID: 119970
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me 'bout grade school.  What, what grade school, school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Sampson [Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great school, it was a school that [HM] Congressman [John] Conyers--and it was a west side school.  And my experiences were a little different in, in that because I had older brothers and sisters.  And that my parents [Erman Strong and Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] had lived in that house so long, a lot of the teachers had taught my brothers and sisters or the teachers were contemporaries of my brothers and sisters.  So that people knew me.  They knew where I lived, they could call my mother if I was acting up.  And I grew up a little bit different in that neighborhood because of the fact that I had parents that owned the house and lived there so long, and I had older brothers and sisters, so everybody in the neighborhood knew me.  So I was always on good behavior because I knew that if I did anything wrong my, my mother would know about it before I got home.  Plus it was a very supportive neighborhood.  My mother kept me active with the [Boy] Scouts and every organization you could think of and there were always these fundraising activities, you know, to sell, sold cookies or whatever.  And I lived in a neighborhood that would reward you.  I mean they would help you.  So if I needed to raise a certain amount of money on raffle tickets for the scouts, I was able to reach my goal.  I came in the neighborhood--grew up in a neighborhood where across the street was a pharmacy which had a soda fountain and a bar and that block had a grocery store, and you had numbers runners over there.  And people would just reward me, I mean I'd get all A's, and I'd show 'em and people give me nickels and dimes.  If I learned something I could sing a song and people would give me money.  It was this very encouraging supportive to excel.  And it's a great way of growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it really sounds like, like it is, yeah.  So now Sampson Elementary School now that--were there black teachers?  I gu, I guess there were if there was some of your brothers and sisters contemporaries--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it was integrated.  But one of my fondest memories was a teacher, Mr. Gilbert.  Well plus the teachers lived in the neighborhood too. I mean, you know, I used to have to--well within about four blocks, two of my teachers I would see on the way to school sometimes.  So, you know, you knew where they lived, they knew where you lived.  It was a different type of experience.
Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well I had quite a few favorites.  I loved, I loved my teachers, and I was double promoted.  Teachers were just very helpful, but I had a teacher Mr. Gilbert, who ultimately served on the board of the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History.  And to be on a board with one of your former teachers, just a great experience.  And even as a judge to have some of my former elementary school teachers on a jury, you just, I just felt so proud.  And I also found that when my teachers, some of my teachers retired, they would call on me to be the guest speaker or to give comments at their retirement 'cause they were proud of me and I was proud of them.  'Cause, you know, we all know that without teachers none of us would be able to do what we're doing now, so we owe our teachers.
Story_ID: 119971
Speaker 1: Okay did, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: Okay, history.  Okay, were, were they teaching black history in those days at all?
Speaker 2: Not so much, but well I had older brothers and sisters, so I learned a lot.  They would buy me books on history, and then just by being in my neighborhood there was a lot of racial pride.  There were a lot of ministers.  Paul Robeson would stay in the neighborhood.  He would stay on Hazlett [Street in Detroit, Michigan], and a lot of churches would support him.  So we had people like Paul Robeson, we had people like [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], who could come and preach and make money.  These are Civil Rights Movement leaders and of--and unions lived in my neighborhood.  There was a lot of political activities.  A matter of fact, I met our governor [most likely G. Mennen "Soapy" Williams] when I was a kid.  I was still in elementary school, 'cause he visited a house six doors down when he was campaigning.  So the mayor, Congress people, political folks.  You would actually meet them at least in my neighborhood because a lot of people were involved in politics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So-[HM] John Conyers is from that neighborhood, you were saying right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember his campaign at all when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was one of the first campaigns I ever worked on and that was by accident.  I was voting--probably my first time voting.  [HM] John Conyers' father was in front of Sampson Elementary School passing out literature.  And I went in the back door, and there was my precinct.  So no one was back there passing out his literature, so I went and told his father I said, "Mr. Conyers, no one is back there passing out his literature."  So he said, "Well here you take some, and you pass it out."  So I spent the rest of the day passing out his literature.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a--that's quite a story there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and not realizing one day I'd pass out my own literature.  But it was a very interesting experience for me.
Story_ID: 119972
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you go to middle school or did Sampson [Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] go all the way to eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Eight grade, then high school I graduated from Cass Tech[nical High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is a famous school here.  It had over twenty different curriculums.  You had to apply and get accepted to that school it's a special school.  Many of the leaders of our city graduated from Cass Tech.
Speaker 1: Right.  It's famous countrywide, I mean nationwide basically.  Cass Tech, Detroit [Michigan], yeah.  So did you have a particular area that you, you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Chem, bio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor at the time 'cause my oldest brother was a dentist.  And my other brother was in medical school when I was in grade school.  And my family encouraged medicine.  My sister was even a science teacher, and she wanted to go to medical school but, you know, father [Erman Strong] couldn't send her.  He sent the boys, but he'd couldn't send the girls.  But my sister was a science teacher, so I always had animals around and then in high school you go picking frogs and just the things that, that you studied but I was going to be a doctor until I went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.](simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Then things changed.
Speaker 1: Now at Cass Tech, did--what was my question?  Oh, okay so you were a chemistry biology ma, major at Cass Tech.  Oh, I was gonna ask you like what colleges did your brothers and sisters attend?
Speaker 2: Well my father use to say, "You're gonna go to college.  Go to any school you as long as it's University of Michigan [in Ann Arbor, Michigan]."  So my, my oldest brother graduated undergrad and from dental school at University of Michigan.  My sister won an essay contest, and she went to Vassar.  And it was a very big deal.  I've got--I collect black memorabilia, and I found a scrapbook someone made.  And I saw a picture of my sister in it when she was at Vassar [College in Poughkeepsie, New York].  And she also went and got a Ph.D. in California.  My other sister University of Michigan undergrad and Columbia [University in New York City] for her Masters but she died short of her Ph.D.  And then the next brother, University of Michigan undergrad, Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine].  So University of Michigan was a big deal in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were at Cass Technical [High School], did you have a favorite teacher or activity?
Speaker 2: I loved to socialize when I was at Cass.  I loved Cass.  I think I only missed about three days of school.  But yeah, I liked science, I liked going to Cass.  I like the fact that I was taking classes that my friends in other schools were not taking.  And I liked being knowledgeable.  Cass promoted that.  It was a great, great school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you run for class office, did you read, you know, receive any special honors at Cass?
Speaker 2: No, it's kind of interesting because in elementary school that's where I got all the honors (laughter).  But by the time I got to Cass I realized that everybody was smart at Cass.  So I just basically stayed in my area which was chemistry and biology, just trying to stay afoot--stay abreast with that.  But socializing too.  I, I liked going to other schools.  I liked going to other neighborhoods, and I well--learned how to party.  And I learned how to dance and developed a, a reputation of being the person that you call when you want to know what's going on 'cause I had a lot of friends.  And in my early years at Cass, if people would get in fights at parties, no one fought me 'cause they all knew me.  And there was--I, I really think I developed my social skills at Cass, or at that time in my life.
Story_ID: 119973
Speaker 1: Now were there--were there gangs in Detroit [Michigan] in those days?
Speaker 2: No we didn't really have gangs but nevertheless, you know, neighbor, neighborhoods have their own groups, and people would fight.  And, you know, just growing up guys would front off each other things like that but nobody would do that with me 'cause I was friendly.  I like people.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were the styles like when you were growing up?  And what was the popular music and dances, you know, when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Oh we had I think we had a different dance every week.  You know, Motown we had Mickey, Monkey, and how you do the monkey, the Bop, the twist, it was just so many--the freak, just a lot of different dances.  And by growing up in a Motown era and living on the street from Motown, Motown was on the same street that I was on maybe about ten blocks down.  But you could actually see the artists in the neighborhoods, and it was great.  And having a group was very important.  When I was at Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], I said--well, we had a singing group, and I remember we met some of the Temptations.  And our bass went up to Melvin [Franklin], the Temps, and said, (demonstrating a deep voice) "Hello Melvin, my name is Lamar" put on this faux.  Melvin said, (voice deeper than Lamar) "Hello, Lamar, my name is Melvin" just blow him out the box (laughter).  And I loved that story (laughter), and it was just fun.  I mean, I used to go down to the 20 Grand that was a big place I mean all the entertainers were going to 20 Grand.  I use to go down there on Sundays 'cause they use to let the kids coming in Sunday afternoon and learn how to dance.  And then I would go to the roller-skating rink on Sundays take the bus there.  Did a lot of socializing.  Well it's turned out to be a good experience for me 'cause I think it helped me learn how to get along with people better.
Speaker 1: Okay now that, that's an experience probably a lot of teenagers in those days wish they could have had.  When you're in a city where you can see the Temptations on the street or the Four Tops, Marvelettes, you know, and--
Speaker 2: And, and appearance was important, and the fellas would add band lines Italian knit shirts and we took pride in, in the way we looked and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Did you know the different brands?  Could you tell what shirt was which by looking at it and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Pretty much so but not what--I definitely can do that now, but back then it was basically band lines and Italian knits.  And a lot of kids had spent a lot of money on clothes.  I didn't but many of my friends did.
Speaker 1: I hear there is a lot of competitiveness around clothes in those days.  I remember growing up we're about the same age and growing up in the same kind of neigh, neighborhood everyone'd look at your socks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh had to match (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Did you have Florsheims [a type of shoes] on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I had to I had (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Or did you have Johnson & Murphy's [a type of shoes]?
Speaker 2: Well I had one pair of Bally's [a type of shoes] that's what I remember.  And Johnson and Murphy's you had to have Johnson and Murphy's, and they had to be shined.
Speaker 1: Everybody had, you know, the kids that didn't have some of this stuff they caught hell in school.
Speaker 2: Yeah but most, most of my friends did.
Speaker 1: It's like I mean, and it didn't, it didn't necessary matter in those days how much--what your income was.  Everybody would, would manage to rake up enough to get (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well especially Detroit [Michigan].  See we had the automobile industry.  So there was a lot of money out here and, you know, kids could drop out of high school and get a factory job and make as much as their parents, so it was a little different.
Story_ID: 119974
Speaker 1: Right, that, that raise, raise a question to that your family was different and unique in that your father [Erman Strong] didn't work for the auto industry.  And your brothers and sisters and yourself, you know, attended college in an era when a lot of people would to just as you suggested: drop out of school, get a job at Ford [Motor Company] or Chrysler or something, and you making as much as, your dad makes.
Speaker 2: Right, and see my neighborhood changed when I was young.  Well, I was talking about the old west side, all doctors and the lawyers.  Well by the time I grew up it wasn't like that.  Lot of people from the east side moved to the west side and it just--the neighborhood changed.  The values changed.  Drugs came in and, you know; I just hated that--I just went to the funeral of one of my friends probably the last one that got on drugs.  But a lot of my friends were able to make money at the factory, get a car, convertible.  And they were so young, and they had all that money.  Got into drugs and it just ruined so many of my friends.  I mean it's a hurtful experience to speak at funerals of your friends and to see people who knew them later on in life who knew them as a drug addicts and not as productive children who were creative and good at sports and who had potential.  Who were intelligent but got on drugs.  The drugs took 'em down, ruined their lives too many of them.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates at Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan]--I know that the Cass classmates, classmates probably, probably very few of them fall victims of drugs?
Speaker 2: Probably none I mean, you know, kids from Cass they graduated from Cass were from all over the city.  So you were selected.  It wasn't a neighborhood high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your neighborhood high school would've been Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Northwestern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] and Chancy [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But too many of them fell by the wayside, and, and it's sad because some of them even went to private schools.  Some of them had parents who were educated but drugs took 'em over.
Story_ID: 119975
Speaker 1: Okay now said when you were on the verge of graduating from Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] did you still want to become a physician was that still your goal?
Speaker 2: Not really 'cause I didn't like--I liked the knowledge that I learned.  I like the idea that I took zoology, morphology, trigonometry, physiology, and anatomy.  I like the sciences.  But I didn't like the smells, I didn't like pithing frogs, I didn't like cutting open animals, I didn't like that.  And it was civil rights time, and I was interested in that I like the idea of seeing people like Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.].  And meeting people like that.  As I said my father [Erman Strong] was a red cap, so we had passed.  So I traveled when I was young I had a sister who was teaching in New York [City].  And I would stay with her several weeks of the summer, and she took me to Adam Clayton Powell's church.  And I'll never forget they had a reverend--
Speaker 1: Abyssinian [Baptist Church in Harlem, New York] yeah.
Speaker 2: Abyssinian and he would walk down the aisle doing his fingers like this go from side to side touching people everybody wanted to touch him.  And after the service he met with me he let me come into his office.  And one of the questions I asked was why was he doing this, why did he always move his fingers like that.  And he told me that the reason why he was doing this because people would grab his hands.  And after so many grabs it would hurt.  And people would always try to give him things--cards, money, notes--and he, what's he gonna do with them?  Because he in a robe he didn't have any pockets.  So that was interesting for him to talk to me freely like that but it made sense but well (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story it's a reason for everything.  You know, that's, that's something that you would think, maybe some kind of, you know, had some kind of spiritual meaning or something like--but it's really to keep him from (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, television--I mean I'm seeing demonstrations, I'm seeing lawyers going to court, I'm seeing Thurgood Marshall.  and I, I just really did not want to go into medicine.  I felt that I should go into urban planning or go into social work or something like that 'cause I like people, and I like dealing with people's problems.
Story_ID: 119976
Speaker 1: Did, did, you know, some of the activist types here in Detroit [Michigan]?  I know that there were some people that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Reverend C.L. Franklin.  Well first of all as I indicated my neighborhood was very political.  Precinct delegate lived a few doors down.  So, you know, I always saw people handing out campaign literature people voting and candidates coming to your house.  I said I met the governor and the mayor by the time I was ten, so politics were important.  I would also--well I'm sorry, what was the question?  I started thinking about something else.
Speaker 1: Well I was asking you if you met any activist types and if you knew any activist types in Detroit [Michigan] here during the movement?
Speaker 2: I remember being stuck with [Stokely] Carmichael and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and taking my mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] to see H. Rap Brown.  We had to take the bus, but I really wanted to see if he was at a theater.  My mother ran out of that place say he's crazy.  He was calling Detroit destroyed.  He was talking about people burning up the city.  And, you know, people were responsible they didn't want to buy into anything like that.  Then Robert C.L. Franklin was a friend of [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], that's Aretha Franklin's father.  He was one of the--well creators of, of the March on Washington because see the March on Washington, D.C.--well we had one here first.  And there was a precursor where that was the model of the big March in Washington, D.C. [Detroit Walk to Freedom, two months prior to the March on Washington in 1963].
Speaker 1: Was that in '63 [1963] as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, same summer?
Speaker 2: Naw, I think it was the year before.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's '62 [1962] then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but many of the people from Detroit that were the leaders were people in the neighborhood, so I grew up knowing folks like that and meeting people and having an interest.
Speaker 1: Did you know Milton Henry [also known as Gaidi Obadele]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Albert Cleage [also known as Jaramogi Abebe Agyeman] and--?
Speaker 2: I used to go to Cleage's church [the Shrine of the Black Madonna Church], Reverend Cleage, we were central, I have relatives over there.  And with Milton Henry he had the Malcolm X revolutionary party [sic the Malcolm X Society].  He had an office in the same building that my orthodontist was in.  So I had the opportunity to meet him when I was in high school.  It fascinated me to see the Malcolm X revolutionary party [sic the Malcolm X Society].  And, and he's one of the reasons why I wanted to become a lawyer.  Milton Henry, just meeting that man and talking to him.  It's interesting how people would spend time talking to young people even if they didn't know them.  And I could go, I mean those were the experiences I had.  So I had a lot of political folks around me.  And it was easy for me to even go into politics because of the influences and people that I knew I was kind of drawn to it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: They had the arts movement, the Black Arts Movement started up in those days and with Ron Milner and [HM] Woodie King and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Loved them, you bringing up names--Ron Milner I saw all of his plays.  I loved Ron Milner; I spoke at his funeral.  Ron, there was a place called Concepts East [Theater] and sometimes there were more actors in the building than audience.  And they would charge two dollars to come in and if you didn't have two dollars whatever you would donate because they wanted an audience.  But I used to go and see his plays all the time.  I loved him.  And I was just with Woodie King a few months ago.  He's really being acknowledged at this stage in his life.  [HM] Ossie Davis, [HM] Ruby Dee--I met them along the way.  And well [HM] Judge [Damon] Keith, and it was always art in my neighborhood.  Visual art, musicians, painters, entertainers.  I grew up in a neighborhood that encouraged that so I was acquainted.
Story_ID: 119977
Speaker 1: Yeah, just we were just talking off camera about some of the different movements in Detroit [Michigan]. The Republic of New Afrika, the Ahmadiyya, the Islamic movement, the Nation of Islam.  Were all of those a part of growing up?  Did you know people in these?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Plus we had well Father Divine [Reverend M.J. Divine], who'd come to Detroit.
Speaker 1: You had Prophet Jones [James Francis Marion Jones] right here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, Prophet Jones was in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Yup.
Speaker 2: And he lived over on Boston [Boulevard], and, you know, I had the opportunity of meeting people like that growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, Prophet Jones I don't think I've ever asked anybody from Detroit about Prophet Jones but he--I remember him being on national talk shows like Phil Donahue and Joe Pyne.  He had some kind of jewel-encrusted cane and a ring on every finger.  And a cape, and, you know, this was the black lot like Father Divine or (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Sweet Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca].
Speaker 1: Sweet Daddy Grace right.
Speaker 2: He was in the same league, I remember seeing him at Hudson's department store in the men's suit section.  And he just pointed out suits that he wanted.  Didn't try 'em on, didn't touch 'em, just pointed them out.  Fascinating.  Just like you saw the rings and he had his bodyguards with him.  He wouldn't touch money or anything.  I mean they paid for it, and he'd pick out what he wanted.
Story_ID: 119978
Speaker 1: I've never asked anybody this either and then if you could--growing up during that era, I know the rhetoric that was going on.  If you dress well, this, this high dressing thing and with all the rings and all that stuff there's a lot of pimp-oriented talk in the--on the street level amongst teenagers in those days.  How you get a girl, what you do, and how you make her do what you want her to do and all this kind of stuff.  In addition to that you had the manners on one side how to treat 'em but then you had somebody else on the other side telling you how to use 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't experience a lot of that although I knew pimps.  And yeah, we talked about girls.  As a matter of fact when my friends would help me with, deliver my papers.  I was a paperboy until I was probably at least 15.  But we'd sit around and rap to each other, we played cards in the basement, and we would read, and we would come back.  And come up with expressions, what is, what is love?  It's the dot over the letter "I" in the word kiss.  Baby let me saturate you with spasms of exquisite rapture and beauty serino [ph.].  You know, we would read, and we'd come to the table and give expressions.  We would rehearse the, the lines out of [HM] Smokey Robinson's music, Motown.  But we respected women because we all wanted to rap, we wanted to persuade, respect them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: The rapping in those days just is, is just a distinction here.  Rapping in those days meant your ability to communicate (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right speak well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: With a woman right?
Speaker 2: That's right to communicate.
Speaker 1: With a woman usually.
Speaker 2: With a woman yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not just--not rhyming with words.
Speaker 2: Naw, no you had (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But you were rapping, and a dude would rap he (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: A persuasion of a woman for romance (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but we would learn from each other.  And it was art form for us too, but we would read.  You know, we would recite.  We, it, it took effort to do this, but we learned from it, but we respected women, too.  Different ball game.
Story_ID: 119979
Speaker 1: Okay, so out of this cultural, rich cultural context herein, in Detroit [Michigan] now how did you--what made you decide to attend school at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to my brothers, (coughing) excuse me, my brother graduated from Howard's medical school [Howard University College of Medicine in Washington, D.C.].  And when I was a teenager I went to his graduation.  I saw Howard and loved it, so I wanted to go to Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what did you like about it?
Speaker 2: I loved the fact that it was in Washington, D.C.  I loved the fact that it was predominantly black.  I loved the fact that I was with students from all over the country and from all over the world.  And I loved the fact that people that I read about come would come to that campus and speak.  They had the Pan-African movement, so there were conferences there and you'd have all these leaders from all over the country including Reverend [Albert] Cleage, who by that time was I think Jaramogi [Abebe Agyeman].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Abebe yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  [HM] Nathan Hare out of San Francisco [California] was there.  [HM] Ron Karenga [Maulana Karenga] brought his principles to Howard, I bought the book.  H. Rap Brown, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure], Reverend Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]--I met all these people while I was a student at Howard and heard them speak.  It was fascinating for me even taking classes such as a revolutionary movements different types of classes.  But just meeting folks that I was reading about fascinating--fascinated me.  And even now I'm so proud of this--Debbie Allen and her sister [Phylicia Rashad] were students there.  One of my classmates Hubert Brown [ph.] is a doctor, and he may be the Prime Minister of Bermuda right now.  But where I go there's always somebody I know from Howard.  Great experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you mentioned Debbie Allen, Phylicia Rashad, [HM] Jeff Donaldson was teaching art I think at Howard in those days.  Now did--who were some of your favorite professors at Howard?
Speaker 2: Professor Brown in history, but it wasn't so much the professors.  Well, I'll say this one, one thing that was really outstanding to me later on was the fact that James Nabrit was the president of the school and we took the school over, and he resigned.  And later on in life when I read about him I just really felt that we should not have treated that man like that.  He was a great man.  He was a great lawyer, civil rights lawyer, we took over the school.  But, you know, at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was part of that core that Charles Houston--Hamilton Houston taught and all that.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what were the students thinking?  Are you, you were there then so what were the students thinking when they took over the--
Speaker 2: Well that he was out of touch but, you know, students were taken over schools across the country.  And so that wasn't so much of a big deal.  But I just felt that they did not deserve to be ousted like that, and at least I was at a school that did not destroy the property.  I mean the students when, when we took over the school it wasn't well we didn't tear up anything.  We were protecting it because we found, you know, neighborhood people, coming over there trying to break in and steal property.  And here we are protecting it.  I remember being outside the ROTC building and somebody was tried to set it on fire.  And I put it out but, you know, we were concerned about that because we believed that if we would have burned down our school they would not rebuild it.  It was like that's what they wanted us to do, tear it up.  But we wouldn't do it.  But something that--well, since we talking about the presidents of the school, [HM] Dr. [James E.] Cheek became the president when I was graduating.  Took me to lunch just to give my view on what Howard, Howard should change.  And, and I like that, that he took the time to take out a student, a graduating student.
Story_ID: 119980
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those were the--were I guess it sounds like, you know, from other people, people I've heard talk about this period of time.  And you all were really in the horns of a dilemma.  You, you wanted--you were caught, caught up in the a movement for change but at the same time you didn't want to destroy, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Howard [University in Washington, D.C] is something that people loved and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah and plus I was, I was at Howard at a great time too because, you know, before that well you almost had a divide.  In that, you had the kids that were wealthy and the kids that weren't and clothes made a difference.  But when I was there everybody was in the dashikis and jeans.  You know T-shirts with Malcolm X on it, so you didn't have the division based on material things.  Also I loved Howard, I loved being there with James Brown singing "[Say It Loud-] I'm Black, and I'm Proud."  I mean that was our anthem, and we get up there and sing.  And then people like Donny Hathaway would come to campus and perform.  I pledged across the burning sands of Alpha Phi Alpha there, and it was at a time when we did not shave our hair 'cause we grew afros.  And my fraternity took pride in grades so we had to study four hours a day, and we had to recite poems.  And out of nineteen brothers on my line our line point average was 3.1.  Two of my line brothers were Phi Beta Kappas.  So education was really stressed.  That was a great time to pledge a fraternity.  And also, there was students from all over the country from other schools that would come out.  There were student exchange programs.  I just loved Howard, I loved the Caribbean Association, countries I never heard of, I'm, I'm socializing with, with students from other areas.  Africans were there; we had African teachers.  It was a melting pot of, of the world.  Some great times, great times.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're major at, at Howard was--did you major in the sciences at Howard?
Speaker 2: I started then I ended up with the social sciences.  You know, history and humanities and psychology.  And I don't--my emphasis went from the physical sciences to the social sciences.  And I was really into people, social work, urban planning and ultimately becoming a lawyer.  It took me in that direction.  Deal with problems people were having and to try to change the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Change our country.
Speaker 1: So, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, your B.A. at Howard was in--what was it in history or was it in?
Speaker 2: Well in social sciences [in 1969].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Broad (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, so just a (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It was broader.
Speaker 1: Just social, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 119981
Speaker 1: Alright, so it's been tough to leave Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].  Now you, you--when you graduated you came back to Detroit [Michigan] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Went to law school here and move back home with my mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] which was probably the best thing.  Because, you know, Howard at that time in my life it was a lot of socializing too, and I needed an environment that I could really study.  And coming back home living with my mother again gave me the discipline and the environment that I needed to focus on law school.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to Detroit Law School.
Speaker 2: Detroit College of Law [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: De, Detroit College of Law right.
Speaker 2: Which is now part of Michigan State University [in East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay well, how, how was that, how was that experience?  Was that what you expected, was it the experience you expected?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't what I expected, 'cause I, I remember I was wearing a dashiki and afro.  And I'm in a school with older students.  And a couple of black students told me I better get rid of that afro, and I better get rid of that dashiki.  The dean of the school taught first-year students in a class called civil procedure.  And he gave me a D.  I couldn't believe it, I got a D.  The older students told me, "You better cut that afro, and get rid of that dashiki."  Well I got drafted, and when I came back to law school I had a part in my hair and I was wearing sweaters and sports coats and white shirt and tie.  He was a teacher again he gave me a B.
Speaker 1: Now, now do you think really he was a, it was just a sub, it was a subjective thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I really think he was sending a message (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Reaction of his based on what you look like.
Speaker 2: That's right and, and the older black students told me what to expect, and they were correct.
Speaker 1: Were, were there any black professors at, at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No. Detroit College?
Speaker 1: No.  As a matter of fact, there were hardly any day students after the first year.  There were two of us that were day students in my class, and probably about four in the whole school.  Most of the black students worked, they were older.  And the--Detroit College of Law was a hands-on school.  I mean if you graduated, you were expected to pass that bar the first time, and we did.  It was a great school for me.  And I do believe that appearance did matter.  It really did.
Story_ID: 119982
Speaker 1: Okay, now you say, say you were drafted, how, how far along were you in law school [at the Detroit College of Law, Detroit, Michigan] before you were drafted?
Speaker 2: One semester, and I got drafted, and I got sent to boot camp.
Speaker 1: So your dra, drafted into the army?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1960 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 1: Seven, Seventy-one [1971], Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got--'70 [1970] I got drafted and couldn't believe it, that I would go to boot camp.  Instead of officers--instead of being an officer, I was a private.
Speaker 1: Now were you expecting to be drafted at that point?  'Cause I, I remember those were the days when they had a lottery and all that right?
Speaker 2: I was caught up in the lottery.  The [Vietnam] war was basically over.  But the lottery was still in existence.
Speaker 1: It was trailing out, they, they didn't get out of there til '74 [1974] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, but.
Speaker 1: But, but.
Speaker 2: You know it wasn't really any, any need for it, but I don't know.  So what they were putting us in into the reserves.  And I just really felt, I felt discriminated against.  Here I am, a graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]; I'm in law school, and I'm a buck private.  And some of my classmates who were white were officers.  And I'm saying now this isn't right, but anyway, I--that was the world at the time, and so I went through the Army Reserve and left as a corporal.  Although I was a lawyer, Army would not let me get into JAG [Judge Advocate General] Corps.  But a friend was in the Navy, and he was a JAG officer and he encouraged me to join the Navy Reserve and I did, and I ultimately loved it.  And I just retired over a year ago from the military as a full commander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were able to help adjudicate cases as a judge (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I was a judge.
Speaker 1: As the judge okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ultimately in the courtroom in San Diego [California] so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So you don't have to finish law school to be a--in the judge--in the advocacy court?
Speaker 2: Well yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh you do?  Okay so you did the exam I'm sorry I just got the sequence off (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, see (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I had to serve almost seven years in the reserves and so by that time I was a lawyer by the time I completed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I was still a corporal, and I joined the Navy as a reservist but I was a lawyer at the time and ultimately a judge.  So, it ultimately became a great experience, and it helped, you know, in that time I learned discipline and learned more about me.  About what I could do and it turned out to be a good experience.
Story_ID: 119983
Speaker 1: Okay, now who are some of your--did you have any--well I suppose you did but who were some of the black attorneys who served as role models for you here in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Milton Henry, Kenny Cockrel [Sr.].  When I was a student at Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], I used to go to down to Wayne's State on Saturdays to study and to listen to this student named Kenny Cockrel [Sr.].  He was a law student who had been an Air Force but he could rap.  I mean he could talk, talk about anti-imperialism.  Just get up there and have a crowd around him. I loved that man, and when he was a lawyer he ultimately became a member of our city council, but we always said as long as Kenny Cockrel was around there always somebody we could trust.  He was like the Johnny Cochran of, of my time.  And, you know, he just--he would take pro bono cases, he was the brother for the cause and did a lot.  And then, you know, you had [HM] Damon Keith, Mike Walls, Harold Hood they, there were a lot of lawyers I knew because I had older brothers and sisters.  So many of them were contemporaries and plus just being in my neighborhood.  Had lawyers growing up down the street who lived down the street, so it was pretty easy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for me to be around lawyers.
Speaker 1: Okay, Damon Keith became a judge in '67 [1967]. Yeah, when you were--yeah we were looking at the "Jet" [magazine] in the other room of (laughter) the picture of his family and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah and he had a (laughter) core violets [ph.].
Speaker 1: Right, right see because the federal judge, you know, appointed by Lyndon Johnson in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 119984
Speaker 1: Detroit-- so when you actually come back to civilian life this is what about 1977, '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Well I was in the reserve (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For so I was a civilian I just had to, you know, go on weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After that first year so for six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, did you go through a period of time when you, you were in private practice as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Trying cases and I mean handling cases?
Speaker 2: Yes and, and that experience started as a law student.  There was an organization called Wayne County neighborhood legal services.  And they provided legal services for the poor, and the needy, the elderly.  And I became a student attorney.  See I want to give back right away.  I mean coming out of Howard University we were charged with the responsibility of returning to our communities and using our education to help others.  And I wanted to do it so working at Wayne County neighborhood legal services gave me the opportunity to do that.  Paid me about two dollars an hour.  The going rate for law students at that time was probably making about six or seven dollars an hour (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: About what year is this, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one, '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what it did, it allowed me to go to court as a law student which gave me a tremendous advantage.  Because by the time I became a lawyer I, I knew how to do certain types of legal cases.  I knew the judges, I knew other lawyers because I was in court as the student.  So that was my first experience as being a lawyer was actually being a student attorney.  And it helped propel my career but also gave me the opportunity to get out here and help others.  I remember there was the organization called TULC, Trade Union Leadership Council, and they had meetings on Saturdays.  They would help retirees and I went over there to volunteer, give them free legal advice on Saturday mornings.  And the president Buddy Battles told me well, you know, man we have real lawyers for our seniors you just go back to law school.  But he remembered me.  He remember me wanting to do that and he was one of my greatest supporters when I ran for office.  Excuse me.  But I did practice law for almost five years before I was appointed to a referee in traffic court and elected the same year.
Speaker 1: Now how did okay, so how, how did these events take place?  Now you're a pretty young man that's been pointed you're not thirty yet right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And when you're appointed a referee and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became a lawyer while I was still twenty-five, so that was--I was young.  And I wanted, I wanted to practice law right away.  I worked for a law firm for a few months and then I went in private practice.  And it gave me the opportunity to do what I really wanted to do which was a lot of volunteer work.  I got on a lot of boards, I was a parol aid volunteer worker.  Helping people out of prison with their transition.  I was on the board The Wolverine Bar Association.  I was active with the Detroit Bar Association doing pro bono work.  Active with Model Cities, you know, collecting clothes.  I was active with TULC [Trade Union Leadership Council] working with the union folks and the Democratic Party.  And I was just so proud to be a lawyer that any, in any way I could help I would.  Plus I didn't have--I, I was still single, living at home with my mother.  So I didn't need money, and, I mean, I could afford to do volunteer and work I did have a family to feed.  And I did it, and I was very happy to do, to do that, I mean, money was never an object for me.
Story_ID: 119985
Speaker 1: Okay, how did your appointment as the judge take place?  Did you did you run or were you appointed what?  What happened?
Speaker 2: I was appointed a referee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by that time I'd became the president of Wolverine Bar Association.  These are the black lawyers for the State of Michigan, and I was vice chairperson of the Wayne County neighborhood legal services, so I stay with the program.  And since I had started going to court as a student, as I indicated a lot of judges knew me, a lot of lawyers knew me, and there was a vacancy.  One of the judges--strike that--and one of the referees was appointed a judge.  That's a lady right there Judge Jessie Slate, who robed me.  When her vacancy came about Judge William Hayes ask me was, I interested in being appointed to that, and I just couldn't believe it that he would give me this opportunity.  I was somewhat scared to take on the responsibility, but he told me that he's given me an opportunity that I may never get a life in my life again.  And I should seriously, seriously think about it and I did.  So I was appointed a referee in the same year it was an election for judges.  And by becoming a referee I felt comfortable in that position that I could actually become a judge and adjudicate cases, and so I ran and won.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was, was it difficult to run for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was difficult because I was young I was the youngest person out of 23 who were running.  And but one thing I had was I had a lot of support.  I had young people helping me.  The Bar Associations gave me good ratings.  A lot of people helped, and I had resolved myself that if I did not win I would just run again but I won.
Speaker 1: Okay this is 1978 right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But, you know, it was just I just had to smile on this because just remember when I was appointed a referee coming into the courtroom.  When they would say all rise hear ye hear ye Honorable Craig S. Strong presiding.  It would take a few minutes for me to stop smiling I mean I'd come on the bench, I was so happy, I was so proud I had to cover my face sometimes.  The idea they're talking about me, I couldn't believe it.  And the people liked it, I mean because I was young people would just treat me different. Especially young people, I mean, they just really like the idea that I was a young judge and had an afro.  And people could identify and I really, really was committed to the community in terms of speaking in schools and showing up at events.  I was proud to, to be a member of the other judiciary and I wanted people to feel that--especially young people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I could do it, they could do it.
Speaker 1: I can imagine yeah you probably got a lot of attention in the public school black history month, and he can bring you out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, plus I was still active in the organizations.  I, I was a member of so many organizations I couldn't even keep track.  And then demands on the time was so great but I could do it 'cause I had just gotten married.  And I didn't have any children so I could do things like that, and I did stay on a committee and I still do.
Story_ID: 119986
Speaker 1: Okay, when we were talking in the last reel on the newness of being a judge, you know, and how proud you were to be a judge and all the activities you got involved in.  But how did you feel about adjudicating--you said mostly criminal cases right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all I do now is criminal and I, I still feel the same amount of pride in serving as a judge. It's not a job, it's an honor and that responsibility.  And I still believe that every day that I go to work I'm doing something important, and it gives me a lot of satisfaction.  What I'm disappointed in is the type of cases I'm doing now seems like most the cases I do involve narcotics.  Either drug dealers or on drugs or drug-related 'cause I see the impact that it's had on our society and especially our youth.  When I became a judge in the old recorders courthouse, a criminal court for the city, adults were seventeen years or older.  And if you were under that age you went to juvenile court.  Not anymore.  Because of the violence of the gangs, the guns, and drugs there is no age.  I've had defendants who were fifteen or younger.  I've had a such violent cases that I just, it just makes me wonder what is happened since Brown vs. Board of Education [1954].  What has happened since the Civil Rights Movement that will cause people to disrespect people?  To cause people to want to harm people?  To cause people to want to get into drugs the way that we have and to live the type of lives that people live?  I mean the violence associated with it, it's mind-boggling.  And it's saddening 'cause I--for so many of us things have not gotten better.
Speaker 1: To what extent you think that economic deterioration I guess of the black community of Detroit has had--has played a part in that?
Speaker 2: Tremendous, tremendous 'cause without the jobs, people want money.  I mean we're in a very materialistic world, and people want the same things.  They want cars, houses, big clothes, especially when you're young.  And too many of them don't have the means of, of getting the funds to buy them.  So they do drugs, they steal--well not steal but, you know, they, they've gotten involved in this drug trade.  And then a lot of people are depressed, you know, economics has a lot to do with that about self-esteem.  You can't find a job you don't have any money or whatever, they turn to drugs.  And they become drug addicts, and they do the things that drug addicts do which is steal, and rob, and kill and it's just a deterioration of our community.  So economics plays a lot, a lot in causing crime.
Speaker 1: Now do you--I've heard [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson and others criticize the criminal justice system for over penalizing certain kinds of drugs possession that seems to be more prevalent in the black community.  For instance, the possession of crack cocaine is penalized greater than the possession of cocaine which is more expensive and is more likely to be possessed by whites.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you agree with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we always should look at our criminal justice system very closely to make sure that everybody is being treated fairly.  And that's the focus of their argument is the fairness of it.  We need to look 'cause we have to be fair.  That's what justice is all about getting what you deserve.  If you didn't do anything, nothing should happen to you.  If you did something you need to be treated fairly.  It shouldn't be based on race, color, ethnic, religion, money or wealth.
Story_ID: 119987
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So I agreed to it, I agree.
Speaker 1: That the--have there been any attempts to change the, the--I guess the, the statutes in terms, terms of whether we have--?
Speaker 2: Yeah they doing that.
Speaker 1: You know, whether you have the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, through people like [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson bring it to the public's attention, things change.  So there are efforts being made right now.  And there is--and other issues such as punishment, you know, the lifer laws, three strikes out type laws that cause these extreme sentences that's being looked at in those states that follow that just like sentence guidelines. Trying to make sure that people commit the same type of crime get the same type of punishment that's been created.  So the system always needs to be looked at and always needs to be measured in terms of fairness.
Speaker 1: Oh the public in terms of crime in the black community the public--the black community seems too often call for more severe punishment for people that commit a violent crime and such and that it's not--well I mean do you think the severity of punishment deters crime?
Speaker 2: I would hope it does but with the number of cases I have I don't think it does.  I don't think people think about getting caught.  A lot of these cases are emotional, and a lot of them are drug-related.  And they have their own world I'm doing--I have so many cases now in which drug dealers are defendants, either drug dealers or people involved in that industry.  And it's a violent world they live in, and it's a mean world they live in, and it's a harmful world that they live in 'cause it affects all of us.  You know, all of us.  I don't hardly know of any family that doesn't have somebody doing drugs.  Just the harm, the types of cases I get--I mean I've had defendants robbing their grandmothers.  I mean I just had one guy just got out of prison.  A week later, grandmother's eighty-seven, he robs and steals her wedding rings and pawns them for drugs.  Family comes to the court want to bond him out 'cause they want to do something to him.  They're telling me "Hey, don't worry, judge, you don't have to worry about it.  We gone take care of him."  He pled guilty, he's back in the penitentiary.  But, you know, young folks today is, this lack of respect, this violent culture they live in--it's a terrible world.  Get too many cases, there're cases where--well two sisters paid a teenager to kill their mother because they want to divide the insurance proceeds.  And when I sentence them I told them that their worst punishment was gonna be that nobody is gone come to visit them 'cause they killed their mother.  Mothers would visit you when no one else will, but they killed their mother, so nobody is gone visit them.  I just had a case where a convicted dope dealer, he admitted on the witness stand that he is a drug dealer, but he burnt people alive.  I mean had some women, stripped them, he beat 'em with, God, tied them up and poured gasoline over them and struck a match, burnt them alive.  And I've had other cases like that I just read couple days ago eleven-year-old dope dealer, thirteen-year-old dope dealer just got murdered by people robbing a drug house.  I've had cases where fourteen-year-olds are running drug houses and I, I want know about the parents.  I mean, how, how the parents let the kids do this, but that's the kind of world that's out here for a lot of them.  Cases that I do lot of young people will lie all over the place or will not get involved.  This attitude of snitching is real, and there are people in this community that would kill people for testifying in court.  So it's a world out here that it's a mean, that's mean and violent, and we gotta do something about that.
Story_ID: 119988
Speaker 1: Now there, there's an aspect of this that--think is fairly new.  Though it's been around at least ten years or more is that we've heard that people--grandparents, grandmothers usually often are supported by drug money (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Can it be?  I'm sure they are (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Households, you know, where it's these houses in Detroit [Michigan], and other cities are and succeeding generations live in them.  You know, they're usually owned by the older relatives, but they really run by the younger relatives?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that situation exists in some families.  I think it's more prevalent in families with young mothers. That's what I see, defendants with mothers maybe thirty and the mother is in the drug world, so you have generations now you have babies being raised in crack houses.  Look at the type of person they're becoming, which is compounding the problem.
Speaker 1: So you're saying like you have a defendant that's a teenager but yet their mothers only thirty years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: It's frustrating.
Speaker 1: So, where does Wayne County [Michigan] stand in terms of the proportion of black people in--incarcerated?
Speaker 2: Well judging by what I see I would imagine it's probably more blacks percentage-wise that are incarcerated.  Most of the defendants are African American, and most of the cases are coming right out of Detroit [Michigan].  In the surrounding cities there are more jobs, there more--better housing.  The conditions that lead to crime, you just don't find to the same extent out there.  But I, I believe that if you did if you found the same level of poverty the lack of employment and education, lack of opportunities, there would be an increase in whatever population.  Because I think the factors are pretty similar that cause crime especially drugs.  I mean drug addicts whether you black or white you're not gonna be able to keep a job.  You're gonna be stealing, you just gonna live a different lifestyle, so it's out there.
Speaker 1: Now have you as a judge, have you tried any kind of creative sentencing for offenders that you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I tried but well I know when I first got on the bench I was very enthusiastic about helping and I would get friends to hire probationers.  One of my friends owned some Burger Kings, and he hired a young man that I had placed on probation.  And he called me a few months later to tell me that he had been embezzled out of $4000.  Because we could not--we did not detect that that man was a drug addict, 'cause the man had come out of Tennessee.  I still participate in a variety of programs.  As I indicated earlier I was with a parole aid volunteer project to help parolees.  I was supportive of the Phoenix [Job Corps] organization which would help offenders get jobs.  And I try to do that from the bench as well.
Story_ID: 119989
Speaker 1: Right now I'm involved with Jackets for Jobs.  That program has provided clothing for women for their job interviews.  They just included men a few months ago, and I was their first guest speaker and something very unusual just happened.  We had a young man in Detroit [Michigan] who was convicted of murdering an eighteen-year-old when he was eleven years old.  And he was just released from, from being incarcerated.  He's twenty-one and last month I saw a photograph that was taken of that young man coming out of court.  In which he had on pink shoes, and white suit, pink shirt and tie and a fur coat, and white hat.  And he was criticized for looking like that he didn't look--it wasn't appropriate.  And there was an outcry on the community for him 'cause he looked--he didn't look like he was repenting for what he'd did.  He looked almost like a gangster or a pimp, or this is what (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Celebrating somewhat yeah.
Speaker 1: This is what from the article yeah viewed him.  And when I read the article I said that I need to mentor him.  He was in another city and I, I just felt I need, I need to talk to him.  I need to kinda show him how to dress 'cause appearance is important.  And lo and behold Jackets for Jobs program called me telling me that this transition program called them to help that young man.  And so I met him, and I got with him and went through suits and ties and shirts.  Helped him pick out clothing, telling him what's appropriate and learning things like the fact that he never tied a tie before.  You know, he just got out of jail, I mean out of being incarcerated.  They don't have ties, so he doesn't know how to tie a tie, doesn't have cufflinks.  So he doesn't know cufflinks.  Belts--it's the whole works so I spent time teaching him how to tie a tie.  I mean just not just giving him a tie but showing how to put all this together, what is appropriate.  And it was in the newspaper a couple weeks ago where they show me teaching them how to tie a tie.  But yeah I still involve myself in trying to solve certain types of problems in our community.
Story_ID: 119990
Speaker 1: Okay, now you, you started off you, you weren't all, always in criminal cases when you started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well I started off as a referee in traffic court (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Traffic okay.
Speaker 2: So I was also in traffic the Warren's violations but that same year I got elected as a judge to the criminal court and merged into the County Court.  So I've been a criminal law judge for more than a quarter of a century.
Story_ID: 119991
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the, the changes you notice are things getting worse rather than better.
Speaker 2: Yeah, unfortunately drugs, crack cocaine, in particular, moved in, and economic opportunities have decreased.  And, you know, the conditions that lead to crime is still here.  We still have a lot of young people dropping out of high school and turning into criminals.  And as I said the lack of economic opportunities really hit our community hard.  But I think the drugs, drugs more than anything else has caused such violence in our community.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there anything that causes you to have any hope for the future of Detroit in this regard?
Speaker 2: Well we have to have hope; I mean that's why a lot of people are volunteering to do whatever they can to help other people.  We have so many programs out here; we have so many organizations of trying to help.  One thing I'm, I'm just glad it's Bill Cosby in the fact that people of his stature coming into the community trying to get people to help themselves.  [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan has changed his message in that his theme is so much focused on self-help and changing lives.  The volatile statements that he used to make which would detract from his messages I think have been lessened.  And so that people can really hear his message.  His message is get up and help your own selves.  Get your communities together get your family lives together.  You have a lot of people trying to help in a lot of different ways, and we have to keep hope alive.  [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson talked about that.  It's as true then as it is now.  Keep hope alive.
Story_ID: 119992
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you're active in a number of organizations including NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Black United Fund?
Speaker 2: Yes, Adopt a Child for Christmas, Northern Youth Improvement Council, Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, quite a few.  Quite a few I support, quite a few I may not be a member of, but I will volunteer to help.  And I will provide financial assistance to them.  You can't do it all, but you can help.
Story_ID: 119993
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I know there's been quite a bit written about your involved in African American history and with the Charles [H.] Wright Museum [of African American History].  And being here in your home you have a tremendous collection of photographs and memorabilia and artifacts, antiques.  Tell us about now how did you start this, this collection and, and what, what started you collecting this memorabilia?
Speaker 2: Well first of all I had photographs of my family, and I have older brothers and sisters so they would buy me cameras, and I would take pictures.  But I also liked history.  My brothers and sisters would buy me history books.  And then when I would read about people, I started collecting articles about them--sheet music or whatever.  I was a coin collector.  When I had a paper route I would get change I would just go through every nickel and dime looking at dates.  'Cause I'd have my books so I can collect them, and I would do the same for silver dollars.  And over the years I developed an appreciation what, what I would hate is to see people throw away pictures because they wanted the frame.  See we were just talking about that a minute ago.  So I would buy the pictures and the frames and keep them 'cause people would destroy them.  That's why I have such a large collection of my black photographs.  People would destroy them, and I would keep them.  So the interest has been there but it started with my own family. And I'm glad I did it 'cause I do have some pieces that I've given to the museum, and I've encouraged other people to collect and to, and to donate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now directly behind you on the left is a, is a photo--this is an example of what you have is a photo of George Walker.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Look like it's signed by him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It is it's authentic.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I bought that in another state, and I found a cigar box and I have his sheet music and a lot of memorabilia.
Speaker 1: And George Walker just tell, just tell us a little bit about him yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well he and Bert Williams were supposedly the first African Americans to make over $100,000 a year in the entertainment world.  Then they started vaudeville.  They were well-known performers of their time and if you look they dressed well too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right (laughter), right we can see him there on the shot George Walker right behind you there.  Part of Williams and Walker, you know, I guess the precursors to, you know, Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, Dave Chapelle, you know, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, two entertainers that made money.
Speaker 1: You know, okay and what, what other pieces do you have.  You have, you have any--what's the piece that you think is the most valuable or the most rare piece that you've been able to find?
Speaker 2: Well photographs, tintypes, solid photographs African pieces.  I have pieces from missionaries from Africa that are couple hundred years old.  Those are priceless.  And well coins, but it's not the value of it that's so important to me it's the fact that they weren't destroyed.  The fact that I have piece of art like this and that I'm willing to ultimately give them out or give them away one day.
Speaker 1: All right is there any one piece you think is the most--that is your favorite?
Speaker 2: That one (turns as he points toward a picture).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in the cigar box.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I love it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: William and Walker yeah they (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Williams and Walker cigar box.
Story_ID: 119994
Speaker 1: Those are unique.  So now you're a Mason as well right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're an Alpha, a Mason, I don't know you're a lot of?
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: You got a lot of different (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Golden Heritage Member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and an active member with Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] alumni just a lot.
Story_ID: 119995
Speaker 1: Now, now you're one of the founders of the Association of Black Judges of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now how did that organization get started?
Speaker 2: Because black judges were being attacked, and I say the newspapers warned them that they were trying to abolish the court that I was in, the recorder's court.  And the newspapers were making black judges look bad, and we decided that we had to form our own organization.  As a means of combating the racisms of, of that time and I'm glad we did.  It has brought us together.  I think it helped the public learn to respect us as black jurists.  My court ultimately did get abolished, and we were forced to run countywide which meant that we had to run in forty other cities.  Detroit was majority African American, Wayne County is not.  So we were forced to deal with racial, racial elements right away.  And I have to say one thing that I learned.  Our county--well I have to go back on this.  My court was so efficient that we had to help the County Court out.  So the governor sent us 500 cases from outside the city of Detroit [Michigan].  Now it scared a lot of folks.  They didn't want to come to Detroit.  They were afraid of black judges.  They didn't want to come to the city; you had the white police officers out there.  And they loved us 'cause we didn't adjourn the cases.  They felt our, our work habits were good.  They feel justice.  They were getting treated fairly, and we disposed those cases so quickly that the Governor gave us all the criminal cases of Wayne County [Michigan].  And then my court ultimately got merged into the County Court but what it did is it gave respect to black judges.  And when we did have to run out county, people were very hosp, hosp--people were very friendly, people were very respectful.  And another thing I learned in comparing backgrounds of judges of my generation we had different well we--our qualifications were different.  I mean our histories were different, I mean we didn't have--I don't want to offend people, but we didn't have generations of judges and lawyers.  We had to earn ours, so it was a little bit different background.  I know mine was so unique compared to the others.  I mean 'cause I had a military history, public service, and Bar Association work.  Been the president of three Bar Associations others didn't have those qualifications.  But they were respected these qualifications were respected and I was well-received out county.  And but, you know, is a--at the association I think made it possible for us in a lot of ways to get positive publicity as well as a very positive image.  You know it's a good organization.  We help schools, we help students we, we do a lot of things, a lot of community work.
Speaker 1: Okay was it difficult at first to get elected in the light of the critique of the press and so forth as a black judge?
Speaker 2: I'm only comparing that to countywide I, I think one of the reasons I was able to get elected was first of all we had Coleman Young is a major.  So people wanted to vote.  My qualifications were somewhat unique because I was already president of Wolverine Bar Association.  I had a lot of public service out there, and I've always served as a referee in traffic.  So I had qualifications I just didn't have age.  But citizens gave me a chance and then in running countywide things had changed there were a lot of black judges.  I think the judges before me had harder--well had a much more difficult road 'cause you still--in my court had the first black female judge in the state Judge Geraldine Ford.  She only been elected a few years before me.  They made it easier for someone like me to even think about becoming a judge.  And then get elected 'cause they were already judges.  Judge [George W.] Crockett, Judge Elvin Davenport, Judge Robert Evans; there were quite a few.
Story_ID: 119996
Speaker 1: Two things I wanted to ask about the first--well first ask you about the Wolverine Bar Association.  Now that's the, that's the local chapter [for Detroit Michigan] of the National Bar Association (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: That's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Which is the black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Northern statewide organization (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: For black lawyers and judges (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was instrumental in my career.  When I was a law student I wanted to go to a conference, and I went over to Wolverine Bar to help get some money.  It was a BLSA [Black Law Students Association] conference, black law students conference in Chicago [Illinois], and the president wrote a check out--his name was Don Hopsin--wrote a check out for $100 right then and there.  And he asked me just, just do one thing, come back give us a report.  Wolverine Bar sent four law students from four law schools.  And--well from four different law school--and I was the only one that come back and give a report.  I started going to Wolverine Bar meetings as a student from time to time.  So when I graduated and passed the bar, elections were taking place and that same lawyer who was now a judge nominated me to be secretary and the president of the Bar Association seconded the nomination.  And I became an officer of Wolverine Bar within about three months after being a lawyer.  That's the greatest honor.  And because of that I became active with the National Bar Association and I prepared the newsletters.  I would represent the Bar Association at all the community meetings and go to the State of Michigan--I mean go to the State Bar of Michigan,  Lansing, just to represent.  And as a result of that I became well-known in the legal community but I was involved in so many different projects.  And it helped, and I went up the ladder so that by the time I was thirty I was already president of the Bar Association.  And I was still involved with Wayne County [Michigan] neighborhood legal services, you know, and I was going up that ladder.  And I was going to be the chair the same time I was gonna be the president, and I could do that 'cause I had just been a appointed as a referee in traffic court.  But the Wolverine Bar propelled me. I mean there's no question in my mind I would not have gotten on the bench in--that early in my career without the influence of that bar association, the opportunities it gave me, and the ability to, to learn and to contribute.
Story_ID: 119997
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were also discussing during the break about the election process.  Name recognition and importance of it and elections for judges where often the black community doesn't know who--unless they are real familiar already.  Don't know who the black judges are necessarily.  It's usually a lot of names and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well that's true, that's true but I think the public is, is more concerned.  And I, I think the public is probably a little bit more knowledgeable because we have television, radio, and interest in who represents who.  Although there's still instances of people still getting elected using and having the same names of other elected officials.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think there's a friend of mine was telling me recently in Detroit [Michigan] Coleman Young's son (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I just swore him in.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I just swore him in.
Speaker 1: There's a story out in the neighborhood some, someone in the neighborhood said Coleman Young is back (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (laughter) He's a nice young man too and I had the honor of swearing him into the state legislature last month.  And I wish him the best.  Good kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well he's not a kid anymore.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He's a man.
Speaker 1: But he at one time his name was not Coleman Young.
Speaker 2: No, his name was Joey [sic Joel Loving], and he changed his own name once he was emancipated--he became an emancipated adult.  I'm glad he did, I mean, you know, he was raised away from Detroit, which was good for him.  But now he's back, and he's a nice young man, wants a life of public service, wants to contribute.
Speaker 1: Okay, you mentioned some Hathaways that, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we have some couple of unusual elections.  One was John Murphy, we had a generation of John Murphys in the state of Michigan.  And we had a judge named John Murphy, who we just got.  There's a black lawyer with the same name who was elected.  I mean nobody really knew him but he got elected by the he's a great judge.  And we also had a lawyer, he, well with--we have the Hathaway family generations of judges.  And it's several Hathaway judges sitting right now.  One, one Hathaway lawyer married a black probation officer who went to law school.  And she got elected as a Hathaway.  And names are important.  Names are important.
Story_ID: 119998
Speaker 1: Okay, now you've been involved in a number of venues where there are celebrities present.  And you have also you have a huge collection of photographs with yourself and everybody from James Brown to [HM] Smokey [Robinson].  And the people in Detroit [Michigan], all of Detroit celebrities and Bishop Desmond Tutu we can go on and on.  Almost anybody you can think of, you know.  Now how did how did you get to (laughter) be in so many occasions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Public service, public service it still goes down to public service.  Being active with the organizations being active with well for instance I was on the board with Michigan Cancer Foundation.  Della Reese was the entertainment, they assigned me to escort her.  The Congressional Black Caucus, I've been going to their meetings for twenty years, so they have celebrities there who were on panels together.  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], it's all about the public service if I was not involved in public service I would not have met many of the people that you seen on these photographs.  Even James Brown I was on stage with him presenting him an award years ago.  And it's very interesting 'cause he and I became very close he would take me out to breakfast or invite me over to his suite.  He would see me with nobody else--it's only his hairdresser and I.  And I just really thought a lot about that man but it was the public service.  And most of the entertainers you see me with believed in public service.  That's why they're there.  I'm in today's paper that you saw yesterday's paper with Smokey Robinson, but that's because of Image Awards The NAACP.  I was with Clint Eastwood yeah Clint Eastwood a few weeks ago--The Trumpet Awards, you know, honoring how African American achievement.  I met a tremendous number of celebrities and personalities just by being involved in these projects and organizations, so it's interesting, interesting.
Speaker 1: Now with your popularity and with all the celebrities that you've met your, you're known for dressing too.  I mean have you ever been approached by the media for one of the television judge programs?
Speaker 2: There's been talk but, you know, you have a lot of judge programs.
Speaker 1: I think there nine of them now from what I count yesterday in the paper (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, you know, I've had some TV executive want--who brought up some other projects behind the scenes. Other types of shows, other things I can do in that area.  As a matter of fact James Brown's manager wanted me to leave the bench.  He suggested I leave the bench and become a manager with someone like James Brown because of my background as a judge and as a lawyer, skills like that are needed.  Couple of people that I'm very pleased to have met is Winnie Mandela and Bishop [Desomnd] Tutu.  And that evolved out of being a international observer in the first all-race elections in South Africa.  And that would not have come about if I had not been active with the National Bar Association because the National Bar Association went to South Africa to join apartheid to develop a international Black Bar Association.  And I was part of that delegation, and I returned at my own expense to help in the election. And it was kind of ironic that I knew, excuse me, three of the election commissioners.  And I had met them because of community service by being there beforehand and being a candidate of another organization.  I met Bishop Tutu as a result of being in the election.  I introduced him to Rosa Parks because I was at two events at the same Hotel.  Rosa Parks was speaking at one he was speaking at the other I went to both.  I told Bishop Tutu I have just come back from South Africa, and, you know, use the accent and everything.  So Ms. Parks was here, said I'd love to meet her. And I told her Bishop Tutu is here so she finished her speech early, so I took her down to hear his speech and introduce them.  But is all about the community service being at head tables of organizations because the entertainers are the speakers.  I seat 'em next to me so it's all about the community service that was drawn all of this.
Story_ID: 119999
Speaker 1: Okay when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: In my personal life yes, and even in terms of my career I still enjoy what I do.  However I could've sought a higher position.  When I first got elected I received a letter from Harvard University saying that I was selected to, to attend the John F. Kennedy school of I mean public administration [sic the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] to get a Master's.  I didn't have the money, and I thought maybe I could get invited again.  And it didn't happen they only do that once, and I turned them down.  But that was because I had just been elected I was in debt, and I didn't know that I could've gotten grants to pay the tuition.  So that was a lost opportunity.  Certain organizations had offered me board positions, and I didn't take 'em.  I kind of wish I had.  Including Masons know they wanted to make me a thirty-third degree Mason after I got elected, and I didn't feel I was old enough or worthy enough.  So I didn't take it, so it was twenty years later before was offered again.  But, you know, you have to seize opportunities but I feel I've had a very fulfilling life.  I feel I've done some things and still a lot more to be done and I'm willing to still try to help others.
Story_ID: 120000
Speaker 1: Now what do you see yourself doing next time you gonna-re--are you thinking about retiring from the bench anytime soon are you or you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Not anytime soon but I have increased my participation in organizations to be more national.  One is the Trumpet Awards.  I love that organization; I love what [HM] Xernona Clayton is doing.  And people, a part of that organization encouraging me to become more active with them, which I'm sure I'll do if the opportunity is there.  I still go around the schools I, I speak at schools across the country.  I just spoke at the Booker Elementary school in Las Vegas about three weeks ago in robe and with the gaffle.  I'm getting offered or offers to speak more I'm going to start doing that.
Story_ID: 120001
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Probably the same ones I had before.  Education, the fact that we have too many young people dropping out of school.  Respect, it's too many young people don't show respect.  They not trained to show respect.  Employment opportunities are missing.  One thing I'm kind of disappointed at is our city.  The way it looks.  Efforts are made to make it look better, but we're not going as far as we could, especially when it comes to the casinos.  We could make them look spectacular and give people reason to want to put more money in Detroit.  Certainly crime, I mean I experienced crime like everybody else.  I was at the Image Awards this weekend during the show my burglar alarm company calls me telling me that my alarm is on.  I was at the Congressional Black Caucus about to go to the dinner. Burglar alarm company calls and the police are over here because someone had broken into my house.  It's only a few months ago.  Car got broken into a few months ago.  I'm a victim of crime just like everybody else.  So I feel this, I mean is no nothing foreign to me.  When I go to court I know what people are talking about but these are problems we have to deal with, and I'm still trying in my own way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One thing that I've started doing telling these young people to pull up their pants and put on a tie.  When I talk about education or the law in the schools, my last few minutes of my presentation is about being appropriately attired.  Explained that appearance is important in telling these boys to pull up they pants and put on a tie.  And put a suit and tie in their fashion rotation.  And I tell him I'll teach them how to tie a tie, and I'll give him a tie if they don't have them.  I'm dead serious about that issue.  It may be small to some, but it's big when kids can't get jobs because they don't know how to interview.  They don't know how to look to be appropriate.  All this hip-hop gear that they're wearing, pictures of Tupac instead of Thurgood.  I'm bringing it to their attention somebody's got to tell em.  I mean their parents not 'cause they let 'em come to court like this they let 'em go to school like that they need to be encouraged.  Every chance I get I mean in public I will make some comments.  I, I reward people with nice things to say about them when they do good.  And when they're dressing right, and I offer criticism to whether they want it or not but these young people they need more attention.  They need more attention gotta be helped, and we all have to do it.  That's what I'm trying to do in my own way.
Story_ID: 120002
Speaker 1: Okay, count--when you look back at everything you've done at this point what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm still working, I'm still (laughter) working on that one but I still do the same things I've always done.  My mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong]--I say my mother had me in every organization imaginable.  From scouting to the stamp committee to student council to the glee club.  I mean I still my life is still like that.  I'm still a part of a lot of organizations.  I still help causes.  If anything maybe that, maybe the public service.  It seems though that dressing has become somewhat of a legacy.  I was with Steve Harvey in Los Angeles [California] a couple of months ago, and we really had a chance to talk.  And I mean we've been friends a long time but, you know, I was telling him that I've been the president of three bar associations.  I'm a retired commander from United States Navy, been to South Africa for the election.  And nobody will report that but if I walk out of here with a yellow suit and some yellow gators and a yellow hat, it's in the papers, is in the papers.  So it's kind of interesting what matters to a lot of people.  But I do get a lot of press play on my appearance.  And that's why when I talk about it, I talk about it in terms of people being appropriated attired.  And dressing for respect, dressing for success--well for respect like my father [Erman Strong] dressed coming from Alabama.  So that people would respect him I mean my generation we dress for success, so we get these jobs.  You know, these doors of opportunities gave us, and we want to look like the people that we were working with.  We have to blend in.  Then dress to impress like I do sometimes cause after you can dress for respect and success, then you can jump out you come out with some gators if you want to impress.  But also I dress, well I'll let that go (laughter) but anyway (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 120003
Speaker 1: You're one of the few people that has a room for hats.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Isn't that something that they put that in the Seattle newspaper ["Seattle Pi"] during the Super Bowl?  They--the photographer or newspaper writer thought that was fascinating that a man has a room of hats.  And you look at it you see the different colors the orange, the pink, the purple, and the traditional colors.  But the photographs in there are all black men with hats.  And some of the pictures are over a 100 years old, it's part of my collection, but you see the importance of appearance throughout generations of African Americans it's interesting room not just for the hats but for the photographs.
Speaker 1: Do you see this dressing tradition as a form of art?
Speaker 2: I do, I do 'cause people decorate themselves some people call me one lady use the term colorific because of the colors that I wear.  Even this suit look at the colors in it; it's kind of, you know, it's a dark color suit.  It's a pinstripe, but it's about four or five different colors in there, it's subtle.  Yeah, (laughter).
Story_ID: 120004
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked that you think we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well I felt very honored about the military.  That was a very important part of my life.  I was the only African American judge that anyone knew of in the Navy period.  And that was important in my career being a member the Million Man March, or participating in that, was important just like being in the election in South Africa extremely important.  Being on some of these boards (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What was the--well just go back to the--being a commander in the Navy and being a judge in the Navy.  Was there ever a time where, where it really made I mean do you think it really made a real big difference in how a case you being a black judge?
Speaker 2: I don't know, the military least while I was there was a pretty fair.  I think the biggest impact was just being an African American judges because attitudes do change.  And people do have a sense of fairness when they see diversity on the bench.  Also as a naval officer I would go to schools dressed in, in the uniform, and even if I talked about law, sometimes I'd have on my Navy uniform.  And the Adopt-a-Child for Christmas program, I have photographs in uniform with them.  So people could see this and I talk about careers in the military.  I think it's a great opportunity and still do, so I encouraged that.  What haven't we talked about (simultaneous)?
Story_ID: 120005
Speaker 1: The Million Man March I wanted to ask you about that too because you mentioned that or something.  What, what was your role in the Million Man March did you have a special role or did you just (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: None particular but I was just glad I went.  I felt the Brotherhood there I felt the encouragement.  It was just one of those things you do in life that you're glad that you were a part of to see a million men come together like that.  The feeling that we cleaned up behind ourselves, the respect that was shown to everybody.  Passing the hats putting the money in there and nobody worrying about somebody taking money out.  Just the brotherhood that the--going on that bus bonding with the people on the bus.  And having our own rules and regulations--no cigarettes, no drinking.  And being on that bus with strangers basically but we bonded.  And the encouraging subjects we talked about the networking just the brotherhood part of it was a great, great experience.  Excuse me.  And the speakers that came out it was just a full day of encouragement.  A full day of commitment, and I'm sure everyone who participated there has--well their lives were affected, and they've improved themselves.  It was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, this was back in '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Have, have you gone to subsequent--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --marches? Was there a Million Women March?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Million Family March (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Million[s] More.
Speaker 1: Yeah Million[s] More, right, right.
Speaker 2: I was at that one as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And even in terms of [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan, I've gotten to know him over the years and I have a tremendous amount of respect for him.  I'm sad that I missed him being in Detroit [Michigan], but I was at the Image Awards NAACP's event least I could do both (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: He gave up one of his last major presentation right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No wait a minute, I was at Don Barden's fifth anniversary.  I've been traveling so much recently I was at Don Barden's fifth anniversary of his casino.  That's why I had to miss that I'd already made my commitments there, and I wasn't able to change my plane and come back.
Story_ID: 120006
Speaker 1: Okay, you, you were saying when you came in, and you tried--there's a murder case going on right now that your trying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I do more murders.  I probably do more murders than probably any judge, least around here [Detroit, Michigan].  And one thing that I was also proud of was getting this house--at early in my life 'cause I grew up two family flat in front of a bus stop.  And to buy a house with ten trees and 7000 square feet, that's a monumental task for me.  But it's something I wanted, and I saved my money.  Just like buy my first Cadillac or my first car, it was my paper route money and those coins that I had saved.  You know, to buy, you know, what people have to visualize things and they have to work for 'em.  I tell the young people the only way--the place you see success before work is in the dictionary.  Because those are the types of things my mother [Manila Geraldine Powers Strong] would say to me.  Just like, "The quickest way to get where you going is to look like you've already arrived."  I'd get quoted on that one quite often but, you know, mothers tell you things that you have to listen and learn from.
Story_ID: 120007
Speaker 1: Okay, now oh well tell, tell us about your family now do you have any, any children?
Speaker 2: Yeah I have one, thirteen.  And nieces and nephews.  I don't have any siblings everybody in my family is deceased.  So it's kinda strange that I just lost my brother a few months.  I wanna say, you know, he was a throat, surgeon.  And, you know, it's interesting my oldest brother was a dentist, so he was the only dentist I ever had in my life.  Pulled out my baby teeth with his fingers.  So to go through this transition losing your parents and all your brothers and sisters and finding yourself out here by yourself it's a little--it's not a pleasant feeling, and it's something that I'm still adjusting to.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a thirteen-year-old son?
Speaker 2: (nodding his head yes) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright is he here in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well is there anything else before I asked my last question?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There probably be a ton of things I'll think about on the way to work I wish I would've talked about.
Story_ID: 120008
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you for spending this time with us.  And our last question though is similar to the legacy question but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who was unselfish, as someone who tried to make a difference.  I'm starting to get remembered in certain ways.  I've been active with the Charles H. Right Museum of African American History for over a quarter of a century.  And they want to do things with me.  I mean I've been asked to donate my robe and start collecting personal items to give to them but how do I--as someone who tried to make a difference.  And like I said for my community service.  The--and the community service both on and off the bench.  I wanted to be remembered as a judge, as a fair judge.  And how I used my judgeship to help others.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 120009
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS)
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay sir, tell us about this photo.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Quincy Jones and I at the Trumpet Awards last month in Las Vegas [Nevada].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead sir.
Speaker 1: That was taken in the first all-race elections in South Africa, where I was a international observer that Nelson Mandela had won.  So this is at one of the celebrations in Cape Town [South Africa].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, all right.  Go ahead and tell.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Dick Gregory and I at the Congressional Black Caucus probably ten years ago.  I was on a panel, and he was on a panel.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Manila Powers Strong.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay I'm ready.
Speaker 1: These are members and family members of the Detroit Stars from the old Negro Baseball League.  This photograph was taken at the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, and the event was sponsored by the Afro-American Sports Hall of Fame.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay go ahead and tell us about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: That is Singer Aretha Franklin at her birthday party a few years ago.  Taken in Detroit, Michigan.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: That's singer Rick James, this was taken backstage after one of his concerts.  That is a recent photograph of [HM] Judge Damon Keith, Actor Billy Dee Williams, and myself.  The event was in Detroit [Michigan], and it was a book signing that Billy Dee Williams--a book that he wrote or co-wrote.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: This photograph was part of Detroit's celebration there was--Detroit would celebrated its 300th year.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Detroit (unclear) Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That is singer Anita Baker.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Was taken in Detroit.  That's Judge Damon Keith, (laughter) ambassador--well that's [HM] Andrew Young when he was Ambassador, United Nations that's my former wife, Brenda.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right I'm ready.
Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson, [HM] Reverend Al Sharpton.  This was taken at one of the Operation PUSH conventions.  That is rap star and businessmen, Jay-Z, this was taken at the Detroit auto show two months ago, yeah so.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 1: That's fight promoter Don King, champion boxer Tommy "Hit Man" Hearns, and myself at Attorney Willie Gary's office in Stewart, Florida.  The photograph was taken December of the year 2006.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, this was taken at Debbie Allen's Dance Academy's performance.  That's the comedian Sinbad, that's [HM] Berry Gordy Motown.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay ready.
Speaker 1: Again at Debbie Allen's Dance Academy performance that's Michael Douglas and his wife, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Catherine Zeta, Zeta-Jones.
Speaker 1: Catherine Zeta-Jones.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm kissing Rosa Parks, the mother of the Civil Rights Movement.  This was on her 84th birthday in the Bahamas.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  She seems to enjoy it.  Okay, sir, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Singer, actor [HM] Harry Belafonte taken a few years ago at--Naw I think that was in New York [City].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Rosa Parks and [HM] Dorothy Height; she is the president of National Council Negro Women.  This was taken a few years ago in Washington D.C.  Being honored in Detroit at a luncheon from the Afro-American Sports Hall of Fame.  I was a board member.  That's Muhammad Ali and then to the left Mike Farr that's not Mike (simultaneous).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  [HM] Mel Farr.  Mel Farr.
Speaker 1: Mel Farr and on the right, Dave Bing.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Naw it's not dust.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is in Detroit at Shane Park Theater, where I am giving singer James Brown an award.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Dr. Charles Wright founder of the Museum of African American History.  Photograph taken at the museum.  That picture is over exposed.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That was a good party man (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay I'm ready now.
Speaker 1: That's author Alex Haley at his book signing in Detroit for the book "Roots."  I believe that was taken in the late '70s [1970s].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, top left.  Okay, we got that one, top left one, please.
Speaker 1: These are photographs from Howard University [in Washington, D.C.].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This one specifically.
Speaker 1: This was on the yard by the Alpha Fountain, and I'm speaking one of the members of the Alpha Court.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, I'll do the next one to the right of that.
Speaker 1: Brothers around the Alpha Fountain singing our Alpha hymn.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Singer Donnie Hathaway, who returned to Howard University's campus where he had graduated.  He's surrounded by the members of Alpha Phi Alpha.  He's leading us in an Alpha song.  Which one?
Speaker 2: That's a member from college school days.
Speaker 1: So did I and just met big brother almighty.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Did you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Big Brother Almighty.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That, that's on the campus of Howard University; probably in about 1969.  Those were my big brothers before I pledged, the brother on the right is now a federal judge; his name is Wiley Daniel.  And the other brother in the middle was his brother, Stuart.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Did you wanna give an (unclear).
Speaker 1: No.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay ready.  Go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 1: That's taken from the black (simultaneous).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Detroit?
Speaker 1: Right.  The book.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Go ahead show us the cover of the book, ready.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh that's Who's Who in Black Detroit.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Can you move your left hand?  Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm the first person featured as an interesting personality.  The photograph shows the robe as a judge, interest in fashion, and support of the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History.  The plastic off.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh is it okay for, okay.  Ready, go head.
Speaker 1: Alright this book was commissioned by me as Chair of the Judicial Council of the National Bar Association.  I wrote a foreword, and this is the 2005 addition which contains biographies of judges from across the country.  I never even thought about it like that.  Yeah that's what I thought of--okay well, I introduced yeah.  There gonna be tables.  Bishop Tutu and Rosa Parks in Detroit I introduced them after they both were guest speakers at two different events.  Actors Clint Eastwood taken last month February 2007 at the Trumpet Awards in Las Vegas.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh we did, okay.
Speaker 1: [HM the Honorable] Minister Louis Farrakhan, photograph taken at the Congressional Black Caucus in Washington DC.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: General Chappie James, taken at the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American history when his father was being honored into the Hall of Fame for the museum.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay next one.  And we have Smokey Robinson. Okay go ahead.
Speaker 1: Singer Smokey Robinson and his wife Frances [Gladney] taken at The Trumpet Awards in Las Vegas.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  You have to get this picture.
Speaker 1: Election in Wayne County [Michigan] that's Skip Butch Hollowell or Melvin Butch Hollowell, who was running for office.  Jennifer Grant on running for governor and myself running for re-election.  She and I were elected.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: [HM] Xernona Clayton, founder the Trumpet Awards with her husband, Judge Paul Brady.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay Mrs. Clayton's first name again.
Speaker 1: Xernona.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah Xernona, Xer.  Okay ready.
Speaker 1: Early campaign literature.  President [George H.W.] Bush at my home in the early '80s [1980s]. out for now
