Story_ID: 13039
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  And I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And Samuel Adams is the observer.  And so I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Leander Shaw, Jr.  L-E-A-N-D-E-R, J. Jerry, Shaw, S-H-A-W, Jr.
Speaker 1: And Jerry is spelled with a J-E --
Speaker 2: J-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date?
Speaker 2: September the 6th, 1930, and today is--what is today?
Speaker 1: Is it the 19th?
Speaker 2: 19th, July.
Speaker 1: Nineteenth, okay, April 19th, 2002.
Speaker 2: And can we have your location?  The location we're at.
Speaker 1: This is the Supreme Court Building, State of Florida.
Speaker 2: Can we have the address, the street address for it?
Speaker 1: 500 South Duval Street.
Speaker 2: Okay, D-U-V-A-L-L?
Speaker 1: D-U-V-A-L.
Speaker 2: Oh, A-L, okay, street.  And I'd like to have your profession, sir?
Speaker 1: I'm a justice on the Florida Supreme Court.
Story_ID: 13040
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food, probably I'm a steak and potatoes person.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I like the water, and I have a house on the beach so I go there.  And if I'm going out of the country, I like to go to the islands.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying.  I get that mixed up with the grass.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Is that--that's cute.  What does that mean (laughter)?
Speaker 2: People will think there's a great problem.  And I've been around long enough, and I'm long enough in the tooth now, where I know even that will pass.  And I--some things are important; some aren't.  Most things that many people, younger people think are so important and so critical, at this stage of my life, I get it mixed up with the grass (laughter).
Story_ID: 13041
Speaker 1: Your first name, where--do you know what its origin is, you know, who you're named after?
Speaker 2: Leander and Hero were characters in Greek mythology.  Leander or vice versa would swim across the Hellespont to see Hero, I believe.  And the gods became jealous of them and caused this great storm to come up, and he was drowned.  It's a great tragedy (chuckle) in Greek mythology.  Now, where my grandfather [Benjamin Shaw] got that name from, totally eludes me because I just can't imagine him being familiar with Greek mythology.  But for some reason, he came up with the name Leander.  And my father was Leander [J. Shaw, Jr.], and I'm Leander.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the grandfather that was named--is it Wysock [sic, Wysong]?
Speaker 2: Benjamin.
Speaker 1: Benjamin?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Wysock.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's on my mother's [Margaret Anderson Shaw] side.
Speaker 1: Mother's side, okay.
Story_ID: 13042
Speaker 1: Let's actually talk about your father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.]. And I'd like to know what you know about his growing up and his background.  And, you know, you can touch upon your grandfather [Benjamin Shaw] too.
Speaker 2: Well, my father came from a family out of Sumter, South Carolina, right outside of Sumter.  And they had a farm, several acres as I remember.  And he was the first in his family to go to college.  And he worked his way through college, and--as a waiter and a short-order cook and that type of thing.  And several of the other brothers and sisters were inspired by him, and a couple of them ended up going to college, the younger brothers and sisters.  But that was quite an occasion when he graduated from--when he even got in college, quite frankly.  And then he went on to get his doctorate degree.  And, and he was a principal in Lexington, Virginia, a small college town.  Most people associate it with Virginia Military Institute and Washington and Lee University.  But back then, he was principal of a Lylburn Downing High School, which was the quote "black high school" at that point.  And then he went on to get his doctorate degree, and he became dean of the Graduate School here at Florida A&M University.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought that was interesting that he became dean.  Do you know--what year was that?
Speaker 2: It must have been in the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Now, did he share with you anything about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  And, in ways, we--he never sat down and spoke about it in detail, but it would come on occasion.  For instance, when he retired, I thought it might be nice for him to have a little garden or something like that to piddle around in.  And he rejected it offhand.  He said, no.  And I said, why not?  He said, let me tell you something, son.  He said, I wouldn't tell a horse, another horse to get up if he was sitting in my lap.  And then he went on to tell me that he had plowed and this type of thing, and I never knew that about him.  But, and when he was in his teens and all, apparently, he did a lot of picking cotton and plowing and that type of thing in the Carolinas.
Speaker 1: Did he--do you know where his inspiration came from to go to, you know, to go to college?  Was it your grandparents or was it --
Speaker 2: No, there was a cousin, Lola, who is--lives in Barnwell, South Carolina.  She was his inspiration.  She was a college graduate.  And she was just determined.  She took a liking to Leander, and she was just determined that Leander was going to go to college.  And every chance she got to talk to him about it, she tried to get him off the farm.  And she eventually did.
Speaker 1: And where did he fit within the family structure? Was he--
Speaker 2: He was the oldest.
Story_ID: 13043
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Margaret Anderson Shaw] and her growing--you know, her family?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was from a family of teachers.  All my aunts that I can remember on my mother's side were teachers.  My grandmother was a teacher and my mother was a teacher.  And it was just expected that they all gonna go to college, and they were gonna teach.  And they were almost polar extremes, my father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] and my mother.
Speaker 1: And where were--you mean in terms of their background.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: But where was your mother originally from, her family?
Speaker 2: Virginia, Salem, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And did she share--was she a talker?  Did she share anything with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, she did.  She was--my mother was quite a remarkable person, ahead of her time, quite frankly.  And she stressed the value of education in its broader sense, not just the formal education of going to school.  She fenced and she wrote poetry.  And she was a teacher in the high school there, when I was there.  And she would write the Thanksgiving play, for instance, and write all the parts for the people.  Lexington [Virginia], where I grew up, was a rather remarkable place because it was a small college town.  And, of course, everybody knew Professor Shaw, as they called him then.  And, and everybody knew my mother.  And one of the remarkable things that I remember now is that I never heard of my mother referred to as anything but Mrs. Shaw, by white or black in Lexington.  She was very active on the City Council, and going to meetings and that type of thing.  Students from the university, it was not unusual for them to come to the house talking about poetry and that type of thing.  I can recall--people did a lot of walking in those days and times.  They would walk from the city and walk home from--well, it was a town.  It wasn't a city.  But it wasn't unusual to, for the police car to roll up and my mother get out of it.  And what had happened, one of the policemen, and these were white officers, saw her walking back to the house.  And they'd stop and pick her up and bring her home.  So it was quite a remarkable thing, now that I can--I didn't consider it then, but now that I look back at it, I find it to be rather unique.
Speaker 1: Now, did she share any stories sort of, about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Other than the fact that she--it was a very close-knit family, and that just personal stories that, I don't know whether this is the kind of thing you want, Buckingham, Virginia, they, they initially--my, my mother's side of the family initially came from Buckingham, Virginia.  And I had aunts and so forth that remained there.  And here again, they were people that were very active in things that went on in the community and that type of thing.  And it seemed to be, that you have two really prominent black families there.  The Jones and the Andersons.  My mother's side was the Andersons, and the Jones boys were rough and ready and tumble and this type of thing.  Buck Jones had worked in the mines in West Virginia.  And the first thing that the Andersons would tell their daughters, I don't want you involved with these Jones boys.  And, of course, the girls couldn't wait (laughter) to meet the Jones boys.  And so, and they married back and forth, the Jones and then the Andersons.  So, and I used to go there during the summer when my father and mother were working in these various schools and so forth around--in Virginia.  And they would dump me off in the summer.  And I would go there and stay with my aunts and uncles there a lot of times in Buckingham.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you parents meet?  Do you know that story?
Speaker 2: I think they must have met in college, I believe.  I'm pretty sure they did.
Story_ID: 13044
Speaker 1: Are you--there are two kids--
Speaker 2: There are--uh huh, just two of us.
Speaker 1: You and a sister [Jacqueline Shaw Willis].
Speaker 2: I have a sister.
Speaker 1: Are you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the older.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're the oldest.  Your father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] must have been happy.  He had a baby boy.
Speaker 2: Right (laughs). It worked out right, I guess.
Story_ID: 13045
Speaker 1: I was wondering what your earliest memory of growing up is?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a very happy child.  And I guess, as I consider it now, obviously a principal in a small town like Lexington [Virginia], wasn't making a lot of money.  But for some reason, I always thought that I was well-to-do, quite frankly.  And my parents were able to provide certainly the necessities and the luxuries, I guess, some of them.  And when I look back and think about it, I think none of the people then thought about whether they were poor or whether they weren't poor, or this type of thing.  They just enjoyed what they had, the people in that town.  And we all considered ourselves about the same, quite frankly.  And if one family, if a kid in that family got a sled, then you wanted a sled.  And you'd bug your parents till you got it.  And nobody considered themselves any richer than the other, or poorer than the other.  You just know you had, and somehow your parents came up with the wherewithal to provide it for you.
Speaker 1: Now, Lexington, how large is--a town was it?
Speaker 2: It's about the size of Tallahassee here.
Speaker 1: So, how large?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't gamble on the number, a thousand people.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the town at the, you know, at the time that you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very--it was a small college town, a Southern town, of course, and you had your written and your unwritten racial rules.  They were not as rigidly enforced in Lexington as they were in other towns.  And I suppose that was because it was a college town.  And many of--well, most of the black people in town worked in one of the universities or the other.  And the students knew the people that worked there.  And when we first moved to Lexington, as the principal, for instance, city fathers made sure that my father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] had a place to live.  They made sure that the bank financed--they found the property, five or six acres, and found the financing and the builder to build a home for this principal that they wanted to stay there.  And one of my first memories is of people coming to the house to welcome the new principal in and bringing these little white bags that they called knots.  And I didn't know what a knot was, had never heard of it.  But what it was, these people that worked in the kitchen and the dining halls of the universities, when breakfast was over or dinner was over, you had all this bacon left.  And you had all these rolls left, and you had all these, you know, all these things left.  And they'd, they gave that to the kitchen help.  And this was their way, this was their welcome wagon.  They--this was their way of telling the new principal, welcome.  We're glad to have you here, and, you know, so many of bought of the people bought these knots (laughter), you almost had to sneak it into the garbage can cause you'd have a whole table full of biscuits. You didn't want to throw it away, but here they came with these knots (laughter).  The whole thing was full of biscuits and rolls and eggs and all this type of thing.  But I thought it was quite unique too, and we certainly appreciated it.  And they were the kind of people that would do anything they could for you.  And I found that to continue.  It wasn't just something that was superficial.  And here again, we had--even though I was the principal's son, and the principal was a big person, a black--big person in a small town like that.  It was not unusual for somebody to see you doing something wrong and to cuff me and send me on my way, and call home and tell my mother [Margaret Anderson Shaw] what had happened.  So it, it does sort of take a village to raise, you know, a person.  And that was very prevalent in the town.
Speaker 1: So you, I mean you say that you were not from a, you know, a wealthy family, but at the same time, they were very, you came from a very cultured family and an esteemed family within that community, right?
Speaker 2: I would agree with that, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother and father teach at the same--I mean he was the principal, and she taught (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the principal and she was a teacher there in that school.
Speaker 1: Did she teach English?
Speaker 2: She taught English and something else.  I forget what the other courses were.
Speaker 1: Now, what age were you when you moved there?  Do you know that?  But then, I know you were born in 1930, but I'm--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I guess I was 9, 10 years old, very young.
Speaker 1: And you were moving from where when you moved to--you moved from?
Speaker 2: I think we were moving from Salem, Virginia at that time.
Speaker 1: And that's where your mother's family was?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember the move with any--do you remember before Lexington at all, your life in Salem?
Speaker 2: I remember doing a lot of moving around.  Apparently, my parents were teaching in small places, Bali Hai, Virginia and this place and around and about.  And I remember that kind of moving, but it's very vague.
Speaker 1: And your sister [Jacqueline Shaw Willis], how much younger is she than you?
Speaker 2: She's three years younger than I.
Speaker 1: So do you remember your--do you remember first moving to Lexington, when you moved there?  Do you remember that part at all?
Speaker 2: Not the move itself, but I remember, as I say, this experience of people coming around welcoming us.
Story_ID: 13046
Speaker 1: Did you go to the school--what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to the same--well, not--back then, as a black, it was the only school I could go to.
Speaker 1: So that school [Lylburn Downing High School] went from first or kindergarten to --
Speaker 2: Right straight through high school.  And when the Brown [v. the Board of Education] decision came down, there was not a problem in Lexington.  The city fathers met, and said, this is the law.  Everybody can go to any school they want to from now on.  It was just simple.
Speaker 1: But you paint a community that had a little more, it seemed, you know, decent relationships between black and white.
Speaker 2: It was.  It--I did not recognize it as being that unique at the time.  But it was.
Story_ID: 13047
Speaker 1: What was the young Leander Shaw, Jr.--I mean what was he--what were you like?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I, I was an average kid.  I liked to swim, and got into a lot of trouble and fought--well, for one thing, I was always large for my age.  So that sort of threw me into a leadership position by virtue of being bigger than (laughter) everybody else.  So I played basketball and football and that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Did you--I'd like you to just talk a little bit more about, you know, your family life, the life in Lexington [Virginia], just some anecdotal stories.
Speaker 2: Well, there--I remember when I first had to establish myself there in Lexington among the kids, my peer group.  There was one fellow there, Cookie, who was sort of the, the bully around.  And we got to be very good friends right off the bat.  And then--but Cookie was always the leader.  And I was a little frightened of Cookie, quite frankly, but then liked to be with him because he would beat up the other kids.  And so you always liked to be around the hero.  And then finally Cookie and I got into a fight.  And I beat Cookie.  So that was my introduction into a leadership position (laughter) in Lexington among the kids.  But here again, we did the things that kids do.  We got in fights and one thing I remember, we didn't have any swimming pools or anything of that nature.  We all swam in the river.  And the white kids swam in the river also.  And this is where we'd--sometimes we'd get in racial fights, whites and blacks fighting.  Kids would fight.  We'd get there first, and then they would come, and we'd fight them.  Or they would get there first, and we'd come, and we'd get into those kind of fights.  And they're so different from the fights now.  These were just fist fights.  One side won, and one didn't.  And the next time we got together--saw each other or whoever got there first would fight the other group that was coming down.  But as far as any weapons and knives or guns or--I can't even remember anybody picking up a rock, quite frankly.  We would just fight, and one group would drive off the other group.  And, but some reason, it was that Southern culture that we weren't supposed to swim there together.  But as far as getting along and our parents and that sort of thing, it was, it, it was almost a paradox because we seemed to know instinctively that we were not supposed to like each other.  We didn't know why.  But that was just the Southern culture at that point.  But then the grown people apparently had a lot more sense than we did as kids, and got along very, very well.
Speaker 1: What about any stories around, you know, your family life, you know, what it was like?  Chores in the yard--
Speaker 2: Well, I used to go--here again, like I said, I was, would go to Buckingham [Virginia] during the summer.  And there, there was Aunt Mildred and Aunt Julia, who were quite different.  Aunt Mildred reminded me a lot of Mammy Yokum.  In fact, to the bonnet.  She wore a bonnet, and she was married to one of the Jones boys, Paul Jones, who was one of the strongest guys there supposedly.  They had stories about how strong Paul was.  One of the stories I remember is something about a dog attacking him, and jumped at him.  And Paul grabbed the dog and grabbed him and broke his jaws right in, as he was in the air.  And then another story of Paul lifting a wagon off of somebody.  He was just one of the strongest people.  And Buck, of course, was his brother.  And Buck gated horses, which Buckingham is hunt country.  You have a lot of fox hunting there, and you have a lot of people that come from the North to hunt foxes.  And Uncle Buck would gate these horses.  There are different gates that horses have.  They trot and then they go into another gate, and they go into another one.  And this is revered by people that know horses.  And Buck had quite a reputation for that, and then he had one show horse, Peaches, that he would demonstrate to these people just what he could do with a horse.  And this, I remember this horse as being almost human.  Uncle Buck liked to imbibe a little bit every now and then.  So he would go to these juke joints and, back then, they didn't have cars.  He'd--you know, he rode Peaches there.  And at the end of the night, somebody would put him on Peaches.  And I can recall being there with Aunt Mildred when Peaches would come and neigh at the window and we'd get up and get Buck off the horse (laughter).
Story_ID: 13048
Speaker 1: Was your family a religious family?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Speaker 1: It was more academically oriented.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, so in--so what is your life like in Lexington [Virginia]?  Was it around, you know, was your father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.], were there--I know you said there were students, your mother's [Margaret Anderson Shaw] students in and out, you know, reading poetry and things like that.  Was there, were there other things sort of happening around, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, my father was involved in most of the things that happened there in the town.  He was invited, you know, input from the principal.  I guess, you had, well, in the academics and so forth, you had the principal, and you had, I think we had one black doctor there.  We had no black lawyers.  In fact, I'd never heard of a black lawyer until I'd got up and moved out of Lexington, quite frankly.  And although I speak of the closeness of the races in Lexington, going to the dentist, I would have to go in the back door because there was no black dentist there.  And the white dentist that treated blacks, by custom, you had to go to the back door.  And there was a room that you sat in back there.  And here again, observing custom.  But, you know, once you got there, the person was courteous, as I remember.  And we weren't disrespected, but this was the custom.  And that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--you know, when you were in school, did you find, did you feel under any pressure because your mother taught there and your father was the principal?  Or was it, you know, the opposite or--I mean I'm just, you know--
Speaker 2: I think I was too dumb to really feel the pressure.  I didn't feel any, not at all.
Speaker 1: And so it was almost like an extended family in some respects, the whole environment?
Speaker 2: It was, um-hum.  The teachers, they all knew all the kids by, you know, name and face and so forth.  As you saw from the pictures, it was very small classes and so forth.  And so everybody knew everybody, and they knew the families.  So it wasn't but so much trouble you could get in without somebody coming up and telling you, you ought to be home or you ought not be here.  I recall skipping class one day and going to the pool hall.  And I'm in there shooting pool.  And this older fellow comes up to me, this man comes up to me and say, and told me, you shouldn't be here.  You ought to be in school.  What are you doing here anyway?  And after stammering a lot, he said, well, I'll tell you what.  You go on home.  You get out of here.  And I did, I went on home.  But people, you know, felt free to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any subjects that you gravitated to or, you know--you sound, you know, your description of yourself was like a typical boy, sort of, you know, you got into typical mischief or whatever, but were there any things that you sort of gravitated to or wanted to be or--
Speaker 2: Well, I always thought I was gonna be a doctor.  And I think my parents--and I think that's because my parents wanted me to be a doctor, quite frankly.  I think they sort of geared me in that direction.  And I just took it for granted.  Certain things I took for granted that now I recognize that other kids, a lot of other kids did not take for granted.  For instance, I took it for granted that I was going to college.  It was never any doubt in my mind that I was--that that's where I was going.  It's what we always talked about.  And I can recall now--I don't know whether they intentionally did it or whether they just was part of my particular family, but around the dinner table, we discussed current events, what was happening, the newspaper, what was in the newspaper.  This was a part of sitting down talking at the table.  So I was up to snuff on most things that were going on.  And it never occurred to me that there were so many families that did not have that same type of growing up, those advantages.  And I think that's pretty--that's tragic now.  And I think that might be a part of our problem, that you don't have that home system that gives you a value system that you operate from.  I, I think that's critical that, that you, you just need that.  Or if, if you don't have it, you're very fortunate if you come out the other end of the horn whole.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any one of those discussions as sort of, you know, the family discussions about events or the, you know, strike, you know, still stay with you?  Did anything, any event or thing that--
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember any particular one.  It was just whatever was going on at the time or whatever was in the paper, or whatever was happening on the world scene.  It would be discussed around the table, and my sister [Jacqueline Shaw Willis] and I were encouraged to participate in it.  We weren't pushed to the side, you kids don't, don't know anything about what we're talking about.  We were encouraged to join in any conversation, to ask questions and we did.  And that was part of our learning process, now that I look back on it, as much as the formal training.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any subjects that you gravitated or, you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: I liked math, and I thought I was pretty good at it at the time.  (Chuckle) I enjoyed it anyway.
Speaker 1: Now, so you--in your parents' minds, maybe because they were educators, they saw that a doctor would be sort of the next wrung up.  Do you think that's what they thought?
Speaker 2: I think that's what it was.  I think a doctor was the next rung up on the scale, so to speak.  And, and I just accepted that as, well, that, that's--I don't see anything wrong with being a doctor (laughter), and so--
Speaker 1: Did you have any other interests at all or things that, you know, did you have an interest in music?  Did you an interest in sports?  Was there any--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother taught music.  And she taught all the kids that took piano, black kids, that I grew up with, and tried to teach me.  But for one thing, my hands were so large (laughter), I had trouble hitting the scales exactly where they were supposed to fall.  But other than it, it cut into my more important football practice (chuckle) and basketball practice.  And she finally gave up on me.
Speaker 1: Did you consider it somewhat sissy or whatever--did that ever enter into the equation?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It just took me away from things I wanted to be doing.  I wanted to be out with the kids, and here I am setting down banging on the piano.
Story_ID: 13049
Speaker 1: The other question I'm wondering, you know, if you take yourself back to Lexington [Virginia], are there any sights, smells or sounds that remind you of your childhood there?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I guess--and that's why spring probably is my favorite time of the year because I can remember after the slush and so forth of the winter, sitting on the side of the house with the first really warm rays of the sun falling on my face.  And I would just sit there for, I guess an hour or so, just soaking it up, just like a flower or a plant in the summer soaking up the rain and the sunshine and this type of thing.  But I can remember that as being, you know, one of the most pleasant feelings I've ever had, just sitting there, having that sun shine on me.  And you would were thinking anecdotal things.  I worked at a place called Hurley Hall during the time I was in high school also.  And this was one of these old antebellum homes that had been turned into sort of a bed and board.  And I was sort of a butler, the Man Friday, a little bit of everything.  And this was a very unique place, and the people that ran it, you had these two old maids, sisters, that ran it.  And it was almost something, like something out of 'Gone With the Wind' because she had this old antebellum home with all this memorabilia, muskets and old guns and swords.  And there was a story behind everything they had there.  And you had this nephew who had had all the advantages--oh, they acres and acres and acres, hundreds of acres of land around it and raised cattle and this type of thing.  And this nephew had gone off to war and had come back.  And when he came back, apparently, he was affected by what he had seen, and he became alcoholic.  And we would--I would talk to him a lot.  We would do a lot of talking, and every now and then, they would dress him up, Effinger was his name, they'd dress Effinger up and send him to a coming out party to, I guess, try to get a wife (laughter).  And Effinger would last about a week (laughter).  He'd go up, and, of course, they knew the family name.  And the name and everything was proper.  And, but for his alcoholism, he'd a been a great catch.  But the next thing you know, Effinger was back (laughter), hanging around.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--so, oh, there's one question I have for you.  You have, it seems, a very--you have an affinity towards water and, you know.  Did that, did any of that come from your childhood at all, swimming in the river?
Speaker 2: Probably so.  And we didn't have parks or anything like that.  And this was the thing that we'd all get together, the kids in the summer and after school, and go down to the river and go swimming.  In fact, it was very dangerous what we did because we would dive off a place called "the rock."  And it was sheer cliff, and we'd have to scramble up this cliff.  And, as you got older and more experienced, you'd get further and further up the cliff to impress the younger kids, how far you could go up the cliff and dive off of it.  And then when the cliff got in the water, it started going, and if you didn't know that, you'd, you could hurt yourself.  And the way I learned to swim was, one of the older kids, and you just threw them in the water.  And that's how so many of us learned to swim.  And he was an excellent swimmer himself, and finally got me out.  But I guess that's where I got my initial love of the water.
Speaker 1: Were there any other events or things or people that helped form you during, you know, in your youth or teen years?  Were there any other, anyone else outside of your family that, you know, (simultaneous) -
Speaker 2: I think my family had more influence on me than anybody else.  People ask now, you know, who are your heroes?  And then the more I think back on it, and the more I reflect on it, my answer is that my family were my heroes.
Speaker 1: Now, the sports, were you pretty good at sports at--
Speaker 2: I thought I was (laughter).  I, I--as I said, I was large for my age so I was pretty good, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you played, you said, football and--
Speaker 2: Basketball.
Speaker 1: Basketball.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I played center in basketball and played end on the football team.
Speaker 1: And were there any sports heroes that you, you know, you particularly followed or you had a heroes or people--
Speaker 2: Not really back then because I didn't know of any pro sports and I just knew we had a football team, and all the kids that could play were on it, and it just expected if you were large enough to go out for football.
Speaker 1: Well, were there any, I mean were the things like the Defender, the Chicago Defender or the Pittsburgh Courier or events like that, current events, were any of those discussed?  Or I mean, there may be another newspapers.
Speaker 2: They're papers I delivered.  One of the--let's see, Afro-American, was it the African American?
Speaker 1: The Afro-American's out of Baltimore, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I think I delivered that weekly.  And then I had a regular daily out for a while that took me through the cemetery (chuckle), so I, I guess that's where I gathered some of my confidence.  I mean I'm not a scary or a fearful type person because I used to go through the cemetery every morning before--in dark, before dawn, to deliver papers.  And I'd start out in the morning and pick up a dog, looked like, about every mile (laughter).  So by the time I finished, I'd have a string of dogs with me (laughter).  And then they would all disappear.  And the next morning when I'm delivering the papers, I'd start picking up dogs (laughs).
Story_ID: 13050
Speaker 1: In high school, when you're then, you're, you know, about to graduate, are there any thoughts about--I mean you said college was always, you know, there was no thoughts, and at this point, you're thinking that you're gonna go on and be a doctor, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But how do you end up choosing West Virginia State [University]?  Is that because your family--
Speaker 2: My father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he knew everybody there.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And how did you find that experience?  You had--at West Virginia State, you still have a lot of family around.  Were they close to that?  Where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any family in West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Not in West Virginia, okay.
Speaker 2: When I got there, my father introduced me to several of the professors that he knew there.  So they kind of kept an eye on me.
Speaker 1: So this is like 1948, right?
Speaker 2: '48.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And what, what I'm confused about is that you majored in political science--
Speaker 2: Political science.  At that point, I had started moving away from it.  And when I got there--
Speaker 1: You mean before you went to college, you had started moving away from wanting to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was just going to college, quite frankly, and taking courses.  And then it dawned on me that I really did not like biology and the things that I would have to have.  I, I took the basic courses in biology, basic courses in science.  And they just bored me, quite frankly.  And then these courses I would--I took in political science and history, I found them fascinating.  (Laughter)  And I just kept taking them without any real direction of what I needed to get out of school, to graduate, quite frankly.  And then all of a sudden I'm in my second and third year of college, saying, you've got to have something to graduate from college.  And, and then when I looked around, I had enough credits there to double-major in political science and history.  So that's how I ended up with that.
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts at that point then when you were doing this?  And how did you end up--you mean, you say you're just, you were taking courses of interest to you?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I, uh-huh.  I just--I don't know how I thought I was gonna be a doctor (laughter) and not take more science courses than I did, but I took what I liked.
Speaker 1: Did you find--were your parents guiding you at this point or were there, was this environment, you know, because you're away from your parents really for the first time, are you sort of coming into your own?
Speaker 2: I think I was, I think that's what it was.  I think I was just coming into my own and not quite realizing that I ought to be--and I can't ever remember having an advisor in college to tell me that, look, what do you want to do?  What are you heading towards?  I can't ever remember that.  So I would just sign up for courses that I wanted to take and took the ones that I liked.
Speaker 1: But was anyone influencing you then, when you said you had, you know, friends of the--you know, that your father's, or people he had, who had taught him?
Speaker 2: Right, well, I think maybe they were the ones that might have been advising me in the other directions, take these courses because I remember Canady was in political science.  And he was a great friend of my father's and maybe these are the people that were sort of pulling me in another direction, which wasn't too hard to do.  It was--
Speaker 1: You mean pulling you towards the--
Speaker 2: The political science and history and this type of thing.  But I think it was more on my own, quite frankly.  It's just things that I, I found of interest.  And it was a great experience to me to learn things that I had, had never been exposed to, and never knew that the, any of these things.  And the more I got into them, the more fascinating they became.
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the things that you found fascinating or that you studied or learned about then?
Speaker 2: Well, politics.  And the history of the country.  Very--in high school, history was very superficial, especially to black kids.  And at West Virginia State, which was a predominantly black, you know, whatever it was, a black university at that point, they stressed black history.  And here, you know, I was learning things I'd never heard of before and never knew before.  And I wanted to know more, and so I would take more courses in it.  And then how the branches of government, the interplay between them and so forth.  I had no idea of, of any of this, how this played.  I knew we had an Executive Branch.  I knew we had a Judicial Branch, and I knew we had a Legislative Branch, and that was about the extent of it, very superficial.  But then, when you start putting it all together, and seeing how they evolved and, and the significance of them, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Now, this--was West Virginia State, was it sort of an extension of Lexington in some respects in that it was a nurturing environment or were there other things that were sort of forming you as a young man?
Speaker 2: There were other things.  I, I was on my own then for the first time.  And I was experiencing things that I hadn't, I hadn't an experience the first time.  And then since I worked off campus--I didn't have to work, but I wanted the money, and so I worked off campus, waiting tables at Daniel Boone Hotel there.  And my father was--in fact, he was surprised to find, and, in fact, sort of angry that I was wasting my time working when I didn't have to.  But I, I think I was sort of finding my own wings at that point.
Speaker 1: And were there other things or experiences that influenced you during that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, not really.  That was--college was a, really a fun time for me.  I, I was not a very serious student at that point.  I just--I was away from home the first time, and I was just enjoying it.
Story_ID: 13051
Speaker 1: You graduate in '52 [1952], did you--when did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married in--after I came back, after I graduated from law school really.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, nothing else before--
Speaker 2: I went into the military after I got out of college, and I took ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps].  And I had to serve a compulsory period of time.  I went in with a commission, which was--and, in fact, I gave consideration of staying into the military for a while because I was what they called DMS, Distinguished Military Student, which gave me a regular Army commission, as opposed to a commission, ROTC commission that they could, what they called "riff" you back to a sergeant or something.  My commission, I couldn't be riffed back.  And here again, I was very young to, to have a commission at that point.  And, but then I got in the Army, and very soon, I found out that I was gonna--(laughter), that wouldn't last cause I couldn't take directions that well.  And I was running into things that I knew I was gonna get in trouble and spend 10 years in the army, and then find out that somebody gave me a bad efficiency report, which I knew I'd get sooner or later.  So, and then that's when I started thinking about law, quite frankly, because the country here was changing.  And that's another thing that led me into political science and history, that the country was changing.  And, you know, Brown [v. the Board of Education] decisions and these type of things were coming down.  And black lawyers, I, I learned about them for the first time.  They were being very influential in this change that was taking place in the country.  And so I, I got attracted to that, and by the time I came out of the Army, I knew that's what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 13052
Speaker 1: Do you know how his name is spelled?  Is it C-A-N-A-D-Y?
Speaker 2: I think it's C-A-N-A-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he finally committed suicide, jumped in front of a train.
Speaker 1: Why did he do (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, terrible.  Yeah, but at West Virginia State, he was one of the prime professors there.  And, of course, John [W.] Davis was the president of the university then, of the college, it really was.
Story_ID: 13053
Speaker 1: When you're in the service though, you're thinking that this was not--what experiences did you have and where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: I was stationed in Korea.  I was in Japan, and the rest of the time, it was Fort Sill and Fort Knox.  And Fort Sill and Knox, I think were the--
Speaker 1: And what were some of the experiences you had that said that this was not the place to be for you?
Speaker 2: What the military?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you the first--we used to go to summer camp before we, before I graduated.  And I was always fascinated by these other schools that sent people to summer camp like--and these were Ivy League schools and VMI [Virginia Military Institute] and the military schools and so forth.  And I always thought that, God, if we can just keep--we had a little old school like West Virginia [State University], how we gonna keep up with these kids?  Then when I went into the military, I went in, in artillery.  That's--and artillery back then, we didn't have the computers and all we have now.  And there was a lot of math involved, triangulation and, you figured out a lot of things with what we called slip sticks.  It's something like a slide rule.  And I found out that we were ahead in West Virginia, we were ahead of a lot of these kids that came out of Ivy League schools and so forth.  We did better in summer camp and in the military, once we got in it, than they did.  So I think, I know we talked about it, and until you are thrown into that type of situation, I think there is a questioning of yourself.  Can I compete favorably?  You always would think I'm growing up in a high school; I'm growing up in a black college, and now--and then when you found out--I think that's where I first found out that not only can I compete, I can compete favorably.  So I, I had received a good education.  But my father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.]--there was a small black world back then in some respects, he knew [James Carmichael] Evans, Dr. Evans, that was in the Pentagon back then.  And so when I went in service, he told me if I ever got a, if I ever needed or felt the need to let him know because Evans had told him, you know, if you ever, if you really need me, you know, feel free.  They went to school together.  And the reason I knew that I wasn't gonna last was in Korea, you had--the war was grinding down, and you had a lot of people that wanted to make the military a career to come over to try to get some combat experience in their record.  And some of them were just outrageous.  They just--and I recall this one colonel coming over, and we had a black USO [United Service Organizations] group that was coming to entertain the troops.  And I was exec in a firing battery.  So he called me in to tell me that, wanted me to go down and meet this group.  I said, why do you want me to go down and meet them?  Get somebody from service battery to go down and meet them.  He said, well, they, you know, they're a black group, and, they're--I said, well, these people are professionals.  They see people all over the world.  So they don't necessarily want to see me.  I said, I'll see them when they get there.  And so we got into a little bit about that.  And then we got into it about something else.  And he finally called me in, and I guess a Dutch uncle talk, to tell me.  He said, you know, he said, you've got a wonderful career ahead of you, but you have the wrong attitude.  And you're young, you, you've got a commission, and you'll go far in the military.  But you're gonna have to change your attitude.  And so, he just caught me at a wrong time.  I said, I don't have to change nothing.  I said, you ought to change your attitude.  I said, you're in for the long haul.  I said, I'm putting in two years, and I'm out of here.  (Laughter) And so I knew then that I wouldn't last.  So that's when I knew I'd put my two years in and leave.
Story_ID: 13054
Speaker 1: You were sort of, you had started on one track.  How had the idea of law school start percolating?  And who did--cause you said, you know, I came from a background where I didn't know any black lawyers--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering what--
Speaker 2: Well, just reading what was going on and black lawyers being in the vanguard of changing these things.  All, all of a sudden I know that there is this called a black lawyer out there that I, I just didn't know about before.  And they were practicing a top-flight brand of law, and to the extent that they were changing this nation.
Speaker 1: Now, where were you when Brown v. Board of Education decision was handed--were you on--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember it coming out?
Speaker 2: I remember it coming out, but where I was, I can't--
Speaker 1: All right, were there other--
Speaker 2: I think it was around the time that I was coming out of the army as I recall.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone--did Thurgood Marshall, was he someone that you admired?
Speaker 2: He was one of my all-time heroes.  He was right up there with [A. Leon] Higginbotham.
Speaker 1: And when you came out, you said, let's see, you went to--you start law school in 1954, right?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four, right.
Speaker 1: That was the year that this decision came down, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide Howard [University]?  I mean Howard was one of the places really--
Speaker 2: I started out at Brooklyn Law School.
Speaker 1: You did.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  When I came back out of the military, New York was the only place to be.  That was the only place to go home (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you had become a world (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had become a world player (laughter) at that point, and I headed dead for New York, and went there with New York City Youth Board there.  I worked that for a while, with the Red Hook section.  And, in fact, I went back to West Virginia [State University] to take, I think I took a chemistry course or something back there just to get back into it.  And after bumming around there in New York for a while, I got on in law school.  And I liked it and would have stayed there, but for the fact that my father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] came up and at that point, I was living down in the village [Greenwich Village].  (Laughter) And the two, two guys had gone to Summer Stock or something and they'd gone to Europe and we subleased--me and my buddy had subleased the apartment.  And so he didn't like the lifestyle that I was living.  So--and he, again, like I say, it's a small world, he and [George M.] Johnson, who was dean of the Law School at Howard at the time, were good friends.  And so he convinced me I would drive on back with him to talk to my mother [Margaret Anderson Shaw]--he was going back to Virginia then to see my mother and said, come on and help me drive back.  That's fine.  So we drove, and then the closer we got to Washington [D.C], he started talking about Howard.  Howard's a nice school.  Why you don't want to go to Howard?  No, I like, I like Brooklyn.  So we stopped at the campus.  He took me in and introduced me to the dean, and then he said, let me talk with the dean a little while.  So they talked, and the dean comes out and said, well, Leander, we're glad to have you.  We're glad to know you're coming (laughter) here to Howard.  (Laughter) And I said, well, you know, I didn't want to dispute my father.  So I just let it go, and then when we got in the car to drive on down to Virginia, I said, what did he mean they're glad to have me?  I'm not, I'm not going to Howard.  (Laughter) If you're going on my money, you're going to Howard.  (Laughter), so he just--and we talked about it.  And he said, look, you're not gonna practice law in New York.  You don't like New York, and I--cause I told him, I didn't like New York that much.  By that time, it was just--the thrill had gone off of it, and I knew it was a place I wouldn't want to live.  And I'd bummed around enough.  So he said, look, come on, you need to come on down to Howard.  These are people and you'll meet people that you will be practicing with, that you will know; you'll be running into the rest of your life.  And he said, now, unless you're gonna stay up here and live in New York, it just doesn't make any sense for you to go here and not get the experiences of Howard.  And sure enough, Howard was training your premier civil rights lawyers and all that thing.  And then he talked and it made sense what he was saying.  He said, you'll be thrown into contact with people that, you know, you'll know for the rest of your life.  And so, that's how I ended up going to Howard.
Speaker 1: And how long had you gone to Brooklyn Law School before this?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: A year, okay.  So you really enjoyed the law school experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You just--your father didn't like your lifestyle?
Speaker 2: He, he didn't--well, he caught me at a bad time (laughter).  I had company at the time, and, in fact, I, I enjoyed New York, Columbia and Juilliard, you know, I was--you know, people over there, and I think House of Flowers was playing at that time.  And you had the cast that would come down there in the Village.  And I knew a lot of those people.  A lot of people that go to Columbia and those schools up there live in the Village and when something's going on, the word just seems to get around.  So we'd go from one party to another party to this place.  And the place I was living, there was one big room in front, a huge room.  And it was a kitchen and the living room and everything else.  Then there was a small, a one-bedroom and a bath, of course.  And the kitchen table was a bathtub (laughter) with a tabletop over the top of it.  But that was what was there in the Village.  That's where, what a flat is.  So, and I thought it was great.  I, I enjoyed it.  It was all this room to party in and so forth.  And so I thought it was great, but I'm kind of glad he came up there and (laughter) got me at this point.
Speaker 1: So you had great love for your father--or respect, right?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of respect for him.  He was a wise old man.  I knew--but I didn't discount what he had to say.  I didn't always agree with him and didn't always follow it, but most of the time, I found it to be pretty sage advice.
Speaker 1: Now, at the time that you enter Howard, it's a pretty special time cause Thurgood Marshall's--I mean, you know, he's coming off campaign run.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He wasn't, he wasn't associated with the Law School at that time, was he?
Speaker 2: No, but I, I can remember him being there.  And I guess maybe he just was visiting or something.  But I can remember him well.
Speaker 1: Who was the dean at the time?
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: Johnson.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And who were some--were there teachers or friends that influenced you there?  And was there a difference between the education that you received there and what you were receiving in Brooklyn or--
Speaker 2: I would not say that the education was different.  Your social surroundings threw you into a different mode from what I would have at Brooklyn.  Brooklyn was strictly, you lived off of campus and so forth.  You came to something that looked like a factory, and it was the Law School.  And you went there, and you took your courses and you left and went on back wherever you were going.  And, but Howard, it was a more congenial atmosphere.  And we talked more, here again, about social issues and things that were, that involved black people.  And you didn't get that in Brooklyn at all.  You just went there.  That's a primarily Jewish school, quite frankly.  They had more Jews there than anything else.  And it was geared strictly towards teaching, passing the New York bar.  But Howard had an appreciation of the fact that they were sending lawyers out that were going to be practicing all over the country.  And so they stressed, not teaching towards any particular bar, but giving you a full appreciation of the different legal theories and so forth.
Speaker 1: Was there any professor that you gravitated to or any--or subject that you particularly liked?
Speaker 2: Well, I always liked constitutional law, and [Charles] Charlie Quick was one of my professors that I thought a great deal of up there.  And [James A.] Jimmy Washington, who taught property and this type of thing.  I always, I liked Jimmy a lot.
Story_ID: 13055
Speaker 1: Are you thinking at this time what you want to do when you finish?  Do you have any thoughts about this?  I mean there's a lot--you're at law school at a time when a lot of the, you know, there were a lot issues.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was filing cases--
Speaker 2: I wanted to get down here in the South.
Speaker 1: You wanted to get--okay.  You wanted to play a role here with the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I wanted to be involved in, in what was going on.
Speaker 1: So, is that what you end up doing?
Speaker 2: I did, yes.
Speaker 1: What were you doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I came, well, I came--when I first came to Florida, I taught in the [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] Law School.  See A&M had a Law School at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, okay, I want to--was that, did you come to Florida because your father [Leander J. Shaw, Sr.] was now dean at A&M?  No.  When did he become dean?  When was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was dean when I came to Florida.
Speaker 1: How long had he been dean at that point?  When did he--
Speaker 2: I think 3 or 4 years.
Speaker 1: Was his move, did he move--how did he end up coming here?  Was he at Lexington before--
Speaker 2: He was at Lexington, and I remember he went back to get, and got his doctorate degree and then went into higher education.  That's how he got away from Lexington.
Speaker 1: And do you know where he was before he came to A&M?
Speaker 2: I think he came to A&M probably from Lexington, as I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was dean of what--
Speaker 2: The Graduate School.
Speaker 1: Of the Graduate School, okay.  Graduate School of what--
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: Did they have the grad--I mean--
Speaker 2: They had a graduate school then, and he was dean of that Graduate School, right.
Speaker 1: And so that's really the reason because your family was here, and you came to Florida A&M.  Or you had an opportunity?
Speaker 2: No, I, when I first graduated I, from law school, I went out to St. Louis.  We had a friend out there, Judge Dugett (ph.) who had just gone on the bench, and who wanted me to come out and take over his practice, which was great for a young kid getting right out of law school, to come over and take out a practice.  So I went out there to study for the bar to take that.  But I hit it at the wrong time.  It was just--the winter was coming in.  And I went through one of those winters in St. Louis.  And so I got a call from my father, and we were just talking about other things.  And he had just happened to casually mention that if I knew anybody out there, that they were looking for--Dean [Thomas Miller] Jenkins was looking for a law professor for, at the University, A&M University.  I said, pin it down.  I, I cannot live here in St. Louis.  So that's how I ended up coming to Florida just to get away from that weather up there in St. Louis.  I, I knew that I wasn't gonna stay there in St. Louis.  So there wasn't any use of me staying up there and even taking the bar.
Speaker 1: So you--you know one other thing I want to ask you about the [Washington] D.C. experience?  Did you--Howard [University] experience cause you said there was a social part to it.  Were you introduced at all to D.C. society or did you have exposure to that?  And was it different than what you had experience or was it sort of similar to some of your experiences in New York?
Speaker 2: My exposure to it was just that, you know, you would meet people.  And people would introduce you to other people.  And you have GS-13s and super-grades there that somehow gravitate to law students (laughter) and--but it's not very difficult to get into a social setting in Washington if you're in law school (laughter).  Does that answer your question?
Speaker 1: That answers it.  Where did you get married?  You said you got married--
Speaker 2: I got married right after I graduated from law school, immediately after I graduated from law school, I got married.
Speaker 1: So you went to St. Louis with, you and your wife went to St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you decide to, you know, to go to Florida A&M, this is all--so you're coming to Florida.  It's not like you've been here before, but--I mean been here before, but you've been here a long--
Speaker 2: I had visited Florida before.  That's the only thing I knew about Florida.  I had visited my father.
Speaker 1: And was this--how long had the law school been established here at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but it was well established at the time I came.
Speaker 1: It was.  Okay. So what--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, it was on its last leg, now, when you look back at it.
Speaker 1: So what were you teaching?
Speaker 2: Contracts, Criminal Law and Writing, I believe; something.
Speaker 1: So was this--but you hadn't taught before.  Had you taught before at all?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Was this sort of second nature because of your family or did you have to bone up pretty quickly for this?
Speaker 2: I had to bone up for it.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it, right.  I was reading right--a page ahead of the students (laughter).  We all enjoyed it.  No, I think that it was a good experience for all of us, quite frankly, because, you know, law is law.  And, and the perimeters and the paradigm is there.  And it's just a matter of what books you're gonna teach from and your approach to it.
Speaker 1: Now,--
Speaker 2: The principles are there.
Speaker 1: How long did you teach?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I think I was there about 3 years, about 2 or 3 years, I believe.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide not to do that because I know you went into private--you went into private practice after that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What made you decide to go into private practice?
Speaker 2: I could see its law school was gonna close.  And I had a friend in Jacksonville, Earl Johnson, who wanted me to come there to practice anyway.  So I took the bar and went on to Jacksonville, began practicing there.
Story_ID: 13056
Speaker 1: The types of cases that you're handling are those cases that are, are they centered around a lot of civil rights at that point in time?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  We did a lot of civil rights.  In fact, Earl [Johnson], the lawyer I went into practice with, represented Ink Fund.  So we were going all, all around the state really, Live Oak and all sorts of--any place that needs--school opened, golf course, something.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about the Ink Fund?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: The Ink Fund, you said?
Speaker 2: It was a litigation arm of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: How did that process work?  Can you just describe them for historical purposes?  I mean how--you know, what the mechanism that was set up and how that was formed--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not too sure that it, it just worked.  And why, even now I don't know because if something, for instance, if the, if the NAACP felt that a golf course should be the thing that we should concentrate on next to try to integrate, they would contact Earl.  And so we would do that.  Well, sometimes, they sent some money to file the suit; sometimes they didn't.  Now, if we won, we would get our fees.  But it was a hit and miss thing about how much money we got out of the Ink Fund and how we got it.  And we would need bail money sometimes to get the students out of jail, and this type of thing.  And I can recall on occasions getting money for that.  But as far as paying us for our services, the Ink Fund paid very little of it, quite frankly, as I recall.
Story_ID: 13057
Speaker 1: I want to talk about that period though when you are with--what was the name of the firm?  The private practice, what was--I mean I know you said Earl [Johnson]--.
Speaker 2: Harrison, Feingold, and Shaw and Smith, was that the firm?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm talking about Earl was one of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, Earl Johnson.  Earl and I were just together.  We were two partners.
Speaker 1: Two partners, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and he went to, he was from West Virginia.  He was from right outside of Institute, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so he was married to the daughter of one of the officers at the Afro-American Life Insurance Company.  And he told me of this great practice he had down there where he's handling all these big cases for Afro and so forth.  And so he induced me to come to Jacksonville and join up with him and help him handle some of all of this work.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of work?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A lot of work (laughter).  No.  (Laughter)  No, I almost starved to death (laughter).  He wanted to share--misery loves company, and I guess he wanted me to come and share his misery (laughter).  But I enjoyed it, did a lot of pro bono work (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were you learning during that time period?  Was there anything that you learned specifically about the process cause that was your first time really, getting out of the theoretical.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, well, it was a good learning experience because I learned to handle all types of cases, everything from probate to criminal to going to Justice of the Peace Court in the morning and then City Court right after that.  And you're, you're just steeped in every type of conceivable legal situation you could find yourself in.  So it was a great learning experience.
Speaker 1: And you did that, and then like 5 years into it, you also then became an assistant public defender, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 13058
Speaker 1: When you read the different books talking about the Civil Rights Movement, you know, a lot more is talked about in terms of Georgia and Alabama and Mississippi. And I was wondering what was actually happening here in Florida and, you know, what were the events that were sort of critical during that period, you know, from 1960 to '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Well, St. Augustine was the place where they said that Martin Luther King was going to get killed.  So that was right up the road, of course, from Jacksonville.  And they were arresting so many kids there that they couldn't even put them in the jail.  He had to put them in them in the armory.  They opened up the armory and put them in.  And you had a doctor there, Dr. [Rober B.] Hayling, who was a dentist, another one of these unsung heroes who--we used to meet at his house.  And the kids would plan the strategy and so forth, where they were going.  And, of course, they would end up getting arrested.  And we'd get these telephone calls.  So we'd have to try to find these bondsmen.  It wasn't but 2 or 3 then in the state, that would bond out kids on those kind of things.  So we had those on call, and we'd get our cars and drive on to St. Augustine and get bond set on these kids.  There were lawyers, for instance, Joe [Joseph W.] Hatchett.  Joe would drive in from Daytona Beach.  I'd drive in from Jacksonville, and we'd meet and--at Hayling's house and plan strategy of how to get them out and this type of thing and what the next move would be.
Speaker 1: And what were some of those strategies that you employed because it had--it was part legal and part other-part strategy.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what you were going after.  If you were going after a hotel, then you would get some people to get registered and to go to, in the swimming pool.  You knew that was always gonna be flash point.  So you'd go down to, they would register and then go down to swim.  And, of course, there would--things would start happening.  For instance, all of a sudden the pool was closed, and they were pouring acid in the pool or they're getting ready to clean it and this type of thing.  And this would happen two or three times.  And then you would complain, and so why is this, you know?  We're never able to use the pool.  And you'd start building your case from there.  So, with the golf course, you'd go out and try to go in and play a round of golf or something like that.  And you'd do it 2 or 3 times, and we had some whites that were involved.  They would go at the same time or go right behind us.  The golf course was open.  It was closed when we would be there, and build a case and file your suit.
Speaker 1: So were the fights, were they around mainly like hotels, public accommodations?
Speaker 2: Public accommodations and golf courses, that type of thing.  They initially started out in five and dime stores, and so forth, sitting at the counters, the things you've probably seen in magazines, the kids sitting up at the counter and not getting served.  And finally the cops come and get them, taking them to jail.  And then you get that issue litigated.
Speaker 1: Well, did you ever feel that--well, let me--did you feel that you were really making progress?  Did you feel you were part of the team making progress at that time?
Speaker 2: You were doing what had to be done.  Whether you're making progress or not, it was problematic.  You knew that if you didn't do this, you weren't gonna make any progress.  Sometimes you questioned how much progress was being made as a result of what you were doing.  But then, you know, somebody had to do it.  Somebody had to file the suits; somebody had to make the challenge.  And that's what you were doing.  And the pressures were such, the lawsuits and the kids being arrested and parents involved and so forth, it brought pressures other than in the legal arena on cities.  The next thing you know, there's a Biracial Commission established.  And then it addresses some of these issues.  So some of it happened right directly in the court; others happened as a result of court action.
Speaker 1: And I had really forgotten about St. Augustine, but I remember reading about that and that there had been even some issue in the King camp about taking on St. Augustine.  And it was--.
Speaker 2: They were going to come there.  And you recall also, Mrs. Peabody, who was--I think he [Endicott Peabody] was the governor of Massachusetts at the time, his mother [Mrs. Malcolm Peabody] came down and was arrested.
Speaker 1: And it was--.
Speaker 2: And, well--.
Speaker 1: There was also, I think the King camp or, you know, people like Andy [Andrew] Young and those felt that, it was a situation they weren't able to control.  Locally, there were some statements made, and I think they were having trouble controlling, you know, doing it in their typical, non-violent way.  I think that, that was one of the--.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's true.  You needed both.  You needed both, quite frankly, because I remember in Jacksonville, the non-violent group would have gotten killed if it hadn't been for another group out there backing them up.  And that group was decidedly not non-violent, and let it be known that if you hurt these people, you're gonna have to deal with us.  And they were always there on the side.  And when the guys with the ax-handles and all came, see, you would have the non-violent group sitting at the lunch counters.  And a group would show up in trucks and get out and start handing out ax handles and come inside.  Well, there was this group over on the side, they would come in behind the ax handle people.  (Laughter) And so that stopped a lot of the violence that would have been because you did have that group out there.  And that's the groups that couldn't be controlled by the non-violent people.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened?  Can you describe St. Augustine and the events around that and what happened?  Wasn't it --
Speaker 2: Well, we were trying to integrate the, the hotels and that type of thing there.  And I think you had the Catholic Diocese up there or something.  And there was a feeling that the church would speak out at a certain point, which it never did, as I recall.  But this was a, a very entrenched [Ku Klux] Klan group up in there.  And so I, I think that's why St. Augustine became so explosive.  And up here in the panhandle, the same thing.  You've got a lot of Klanspeople.
Speaker 1: And did--and what was the result of St.--didn't it turn bloody?  Didn't it--was it?  No.
Speaker 2: I don't think St. Augustine got bloody.  You had a number of kids that were--you had arrest just about every other day.  You would have 40 and 50 kids picked up and put in the armory.  And then we'd have to go get them.  And they'd pick them up the next day and arrest them again.  In Jacksonville, it got bloody.
Speaker 1: It did.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, we had some riots there.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the results of like when these events happened, what happened afterwards?  Were things changing at all after, you know, in Jacksonville and St. Augustine after, you know, those events?  Or did it just--was that just sort of the beginning and it took sort of years?
Speaker 2: It took years really.
Story_ID: 13059
Speaker 1: In the public defender's office, were there any tensions, you know, of being a--I mean when you came on as a public defender, were there other black people there?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was that sort of a strange place sort of to be, in some respects?
Speaker 2: No, I think everybody accepted at that point that it was a point in time that this was a logical next step, that it was time to have a black in the public defender's office.  And so that was relatively painless.  I was accepted well.  No problem.  And, and a lot of that I attribute to the public defender at the time, who was Ed Austin.  He made it known that, there's not gonna be any problem here.  And I find that's often the case.  If the person up to the top makes his position clear, then everything else seems to fall into focus.  However, when I went from the public defender's office to the state attorney's office, the transition was not quite as easy because by this time, Ed Austin, now was the state attorney.  And I was in private practice, and he was trying to get together a crew to, that he wanted in the state attorney's office with him.  And one of the inducements to get me in there, he said, I'll make you head of my capital crimes division, which I don't think that another black in South was head of a capital crimes division in Florida.  I don't know, but I don't think there was.  So I, I knew if I didn't do it, it would be years and years and years before it would be done.  So I went with him, and one of the problems was that, that--it was put to him, was that white women would be reluctant--you couldn't make me head of capital crimes division because white females would be reluctant to discuss rape cases and so forth with me.  And at that time, rape was a capital crime in Florida.  You could get executed for rape.  And this was set up as the great stumbling block.  And so here again, Ed said, well, that's who it's gonna be.  And then--in fact, I had, I guess that, of the ones he brought back, I had as much, probably more trial experience than just about anybody else there.  And I tried just about all of the capital cases.  So he said, if they're gonna be tried, Leander is gonna try them.  And I was advisor to the grand jury and that type of thing.  So I just moved on into at that point.  And, and there were overtures.  Some officers in homicide didn't like it, you know, and, but once it became clear that if you want your--if this is gonna be tried, this is who is gonna try it.  And then after a while, I found that the officers started coming in and wanting to know what else I needed and what should be the approach.  And after a while, it was almost a sponsoring system.  They would come and, and ask me, what, you know, what did I need to try the cases.  And so it worked out.
Speaker 1: You must have been a very special person in a lot of respects then?  Don't, wasn't he, or was he a principled man?  I'm just--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Ed, Ed Austin.
Speaker 2: He was.  Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: What was his background and what --
Speaker 2: He was just a good old Southern boy with a great--good instincts and a good sense of right and wrong and fairness.  And he just, you know, saw that it was time for change.  And some things were just so blatantly unfair that it just went against your, your sense of justice and fairness and fair play and everything else.
Speaker 1: Now, the Capital Crimes Division, what did it do?  What was it responsible for?  I mean you said --
Speaker 2: Capital Crimes?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--
Speaker 2: Anything that carried the death penalty.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of crimes were they besides (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Rape and, rape and murder.
Speaker 1: And so, did you find yourself torn at all or was there any case that was a particularly high-profile case, that, you know, there was a lot of pressure on you during the time, cause you were there for 3 years, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that you remember?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember any particular case that, that had a lot of pressure on it.  All capital cases, so they're all heavy-duty cases, you know.
Speaker 1: So what did you, in terms of cutting your teeth as a young lawyer, what did you learn there that you didn't learn at the public defender's office?
Speaker 2: Well, between the two, the public defender's office and state attorney's office, I guess I got more trial practice than--in short length of time, in 5 or 6 years, than most lawyers get, oh, maybe in a lifetime because I was always before juries.  And lawyers that go with firms, you think of lawyers being before juries, but that's not the case, as you know.  All lawyers are not before juries every day.
Speaker 1: And did you--now, at the time that you're doing this, are there many other blacks appearing before these juries?  You know, black lawyers.  Are there many trying --
Speaker 2: There weren't many because there weren't many black lawyers in the state of Florida.  You could count them on, on--there was a time when there weren't ten black lawyers that I knew of in the state of Florida.  And we just knew each other and we knew everyone there.  And the black lawyers that were there in Jacksonville, of course, did appear in criminal court.  And they handled just about any type of case.
Speaker 1: How many black lawyers were there in Jacksonville at the time?
Speaker 2: In Jacksonville?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I think about four.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Earl [Johnson], Ernest Jackson, Rutherford McGriff, [Daniel Webster] Perkins, but he was so old at that time, he wasn't doing any practice appreciably.  I think that was about it.
Speaker 1: And what about the jury system in all of that?  You know, at that point in time, it's fun to be a black representing.  And most of your clients, most of the people who, let's say Earl and them were representing were black most times, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I would think probably 100 percent--?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, early on, it was.  See my practice, when I went back into practice, evolved into a different practice than it was, right.
Speaker 1: Right, but that was because you had had all this different experience too, right?
Speaker 2: And I was with a mixed firm.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's great cause okay, I want--but, so this, but I, what I'm just trying to understand is the jury system cause there's a lot of cases around jury systems and things like that.  And I was just wondering what was happening here in Florida and composition of the juries and--I'm just saying nationally, there were cases coming out around the composition of juries, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --around that time.
Speaker 2: Well, juries were drawn from property owners, the list.  And so I don't know whether you say there was anything improper about the way the jury personnel was drawn.  But they had, many of them I assumed, had some preconceived notions of black and white.  I don't doubt that at all, but that's gonna be found in the South.  And I don't know how you deal with that.  But I, it, apparently, it didn't affect many of my jurors.  I, I had a very good record.  And it wasn't just when I was working for the state.  When I was for working against the state in the public defender's office, I had a good win record.
Story_ID: 13060
Speaker 1: You work in the assistant state's attorney's office for 3 years, what makes, what attracts you back into private practice?  Did you get recruited back?
Speaker 2: It was just time for me to move on.  It was just time for me to get out of state's attorney's office and go back, go, go into full-time private practice again.
Speaker 1: Was that financial or just, it got too hot or it was frustrating or what was the deal?
Speaker 2: It was just something I knew I wasn't gonna do all my life, that it wasn't any use in spending much more time in it.  I couldn't go any further in, other than being the state's attorney himself.  And I'd proved everything that I could prove in the office, that a black could handle it, that it wasn't some kind of science or something no black could do.  So the road was open then for blacks to come on behind me.  It had been done.  And, well, it was time for me to get out and make some money too.
Speaker 1: And so this firm, can you describe the firm and what the position was there--?
Speaker 2: Well, these were, in the main, fellows that had worked in the state's attorney's office with me.  Harrison had worked with me, Finegold had worked with me.  And we were all sort of protgs of Ed Austin, the state's attorney.  And when we got out, we all went our separate ways, quite frankly, but then we'd see each other in the courthouse and everywhere.  And we decided that why didn't cut our costs by getting together because when we talked about it, we decided we were doing just about the same thing.  Most of us had reputations by that time as being criminal lawyers in the main because that's what we were doing.  And then we talked about, like Finegold was a developer.  He was a multi-millionaire.  He had shopping centers and all this type of thing.  And so he was hooked into the building industry.  So we'd get some contractors.  Harrison knew most of the bonding companies there.  So some things were just natural, and we decided to go together, and it was a very successful practice.
Speaker 1: And what was the nature of the practice then?  Was it, was it mixed commercial and, and (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a mixed bag, probably stressing criminal law.  We did a lot of criminal work.
Speaker 1: Was the nature of the criminal law, what--was it on the level of the things that you had seen in the state's attorney's office or was it --
Speaker 2: We represented everything from death row to misdemeanors.  And, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: About the only thing--well, we did take on some, we kind of discouraged domestic (laughter) cases, but to keep a client, if we had to, we'd do it.  But we didn't go out after that.
Speaker 1: Did you find that--I mean this was pretty historical here, right?  I mean you--cause this is back in 1972, was it historical--were there other (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: No, there was no--I think that, I don't think there was another mixed firm then.  I know there had been some talk about me going with another firm when I was getting ready to leave the state's attorney's office, one of the larger, established firms there.  And I found out later the reason that I was not invited because the trial lawyers in that firm objected, that--well, where are we gonna put him?  That we got to bring him in at the trial level, and we had to work ourselves up to get here, and in the firm, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And so that was the objection.  I couldn't come into one of these larger firms as a trial lawyer.
Speaker 1: Did you like private practice the second time around?  This is much different than your first time with--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I liked it.
Story_ID: 13061
Speaker 1: Is it that you're appointed by the [Florida] governor [Reubin O'Donovan Askew] in 1974?  What--?
Speaker 2: Well, I received a telephone call from the governor's office asking would I be interested in coming to Tallahassee and, as a worker's comp [compensation] commissioner.  And of all the practice I had ever done, I suppose I had done less worker's comp than anything else.  I had, I'd done some, I knew what it was about.  And we would be do it to keep--here again, to keep a client rather than lose the client.  If he had a worker's comp case, we'd handle it.  So, but fortunately, we had a great worker's comp judge that just wouldn't let things go wrong (laughter).  So I had to think about it a while.  I told him, yeah, let me think about it.  And then I got a call, they called back the next day, "Have you thought about it?"  And I really haven't.  Finally, they convince me that, look, what you need to do is come out--you need to be in Tallahassee where things are going on.  We've heard your name.  You need to come on up here.  And so this was right out of the governor's office.  So I came up--I decided, well, maybe that's where I ought to be.  So I came on to Tallahassee and went with the old worker's comp commission.
Speaker 1: Who was the governor at the time, sir?
Speaker 2: Askew.
Story_ID: 13062
Speaker 1: What was your experience, the Industrial Relations Commission, did you enjoy that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I--well, we did--we didn't stay with it long enough to get--it was going out of business also.  And I--I don't know whether that says something about me (laughter).  Everything I get into is going out of business.  But the Industrial Relations Commission also closed down.  And they added an extra judge over to the district court of appeal in Tallahassee to handle that caseload.  And, so that's where I put my name in for that.  I was one of the ones to put my name in for that job.  And that's how I got on the district court.
Speaker 1: The Industrial Relations Commission, why was it going out of business--why was it being phased out at that point?
Speaker 2: They decided that the intermediate court here in the state should handle that, rather than have this special court, which was not really an Article V court to begin with.  It was just a court that would handle domestic--I mean industrial relations matters.
Story_ID: 13063
Speaker 1: When you were appointed as judge, you know, for the opening that came up, who was the governor at that time?  Was it--
Speaker 2: [Bob] Graham was the governor when I was appointed.
Speaker 1: And how did that whole process work?  You got a call?  How did it work?
Speaker 2: No, at the appellate level where there is a vacancy, your name is put in.  You apply for it.  There is a nominating commission and you put your name.  There, you're interviewed and this commission, this judicial nominating commission then will send three names up to the governor.  And the governor must choose one of these names that have been sent up.  And so, fortunately, my name was one of those that came up and fortunately, I was chosen.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you were chosen, you know, outside of the other two candidates?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Hopefully, I would like to think because of my qualifications.  Now, whether other things played a part in it, you never know; whether it was the politics of the time or whether the governor felt that it was time to do certain things.  You know, these things you never know what plays a part in something like that.  Fortune sometimes just has a, has a role in it.  But I, I think I was as qualified as anybody on the list he had.
Speaker 1: Did it take some time to adjust to being a judge?  You know, in the court of appeals, did you--I mean cause it's different.
Speaker 2: Not really.  It, it's different, but it didn't take me any adjustment time, and maybe because I was just thrown into it.  And, and it was something I enjoyed.  And I just took to it like a duck to water.  I just enjoyed it.  I enjoyed the challenge and didn't find it burdensome.  And if I had to put in long hours, it wasn't a problem.  I didn't see it as a chore as such.  And I didn't find it that difficult, quite frankly.  And here again, harkening back to years before when there were no black judges or maybe one black judge or something in Florida, one of the reasons given was that no blacks were qualified, that it wasn't a racial thing; that if they found some blacks that were qualified, then they would, of course, have as good a chance as anybody else of being appointed.  You and I know that's not, not the case and was not the case then because you had black lawyers, who had been winning in every court in this country.  And this isn't some kind of obscure science that only certain people can do.  So, but maybe I had--by that time, I had become qualified.
Speaker 1: And you--the [Industrial Relations] Commission had prepared you some for the transition though, certainly on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I, yes, I guess judging there was a good transition, I suppose.
Speaker 1: Did you find--at this point in time, were you--you're the only black person serving on the court of appeals when you came on?  Had there been anyone before you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think that--oh, yes.  There had been a black justice--Hatchett, Joseph [W.] Hatchett, a very distinguished Justice, went from the Supreme Court.  He went to the 11th Circuit and then became chief judge of the 11th Circuit, federal court and now is a senior partner at a law firm here right in town [Tallahassee], bills out at $350.00 an hour (laughter), yes.  And there were lawyers, there were judges on the district courts as I remember--I'm sure there were other judges by that time.  There were other, other judges here in Florida.  I was the only one on the Supreme Court, but was there any--was there another district court judge then?  I think there might have been one or two district court judges, um-hum. What do you think?  Just a moment--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any case that came before you--I know you've heard a lot of cases, but I wanted to really ask about this, while you were on the court appeals, that particularly stands out?
Speaker 2: On the court of appeals?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I can't think of any particular case that jumps out, no.
Speaker 1: Was there anything during that time, that 4-year period that stands out or, you know, was sort of part of the building process?
Speaker 2: No, it was just what you would expect at, at a appellate court level.  And I had no problems with my peers on the court.  I got along well with them.  It was very congenial.  No problems with lawyers that appeared before us, so it was really no problem.
Speaker 1: But there is something about what makes a good judge and what makes not a good judge.  I mean there is that factor, and then I've heard other jurists, judges talk about how it can be lonely or, you know, even the whole issue of conflicts or, you know, the role in the community, that type of thing.  I'm wondering, none of that effected you, none of that--would that take some getting used to?
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that takes some adjustment because if you are a people-type of person, then you've got your friends and your buddies and your, you know, your smoking buddies and your beer-drinking buddies and this type of thing.  And once you get on the bench, something changes.  They are reluctant to call you for lunch, for instance.  Before, the day before you go on the bench, the two of you've been eating lunch just about every other day for the last three years.  Once you go on the bench, those friends are reluctant to call you because they don't know--they feel that you don't have time for them, that they, that you are having lunch at that point with other judges and that type of thing.  When the fact of the matter is, you are probably having lunch alone, if you're having lunch or you're probably working through your lunch period, quite frankly and would be happy to have somebody call and say let's go to lunch.  You can't call them because they can hardly tell you, no.  And they don't know whether it's a command performance or, you know, this is the same old Leander just wanting to--and then I can tell him, nah, I don't feel like going to lunch today.  So you don't want to put them under that kind of pressure either of telling you, "No, I don't want to go to lunch with you, Judge."  But I'll be handling a case there before you tomorrow; hope you're not mad at me.  So it can become a little awkward.  And what do lawyers talk about?  They talk about cases.  So when you go to lunch, what are you gonna talk about?  You can't--you can no longer talk about cases.  Or they don't know what cases to talk about.  They don't know what's before you or they don't, they don't know whether you can talk about cases at all.  So it--there's a, there's a little of awkwardness that you have to get over.  And then you have to make your friends know that, yes, I can talk about legal matters.  I can't talk about cases that are appearing before me.  I can't talk about cases that are appearing before me.  I can't talk about cases that are gonna be before me, and you know that are gonna be up here before me.  But I don't live in a cave, and we can talk about something that's happening at the U.S. Supreme Court level or what's going on in the country, and things we used to talk about.
Story_ID: 13064
Speaker 1: What prompted the transition from the District Court of Appeals to the [Florida] Supreme Court here?  And what is in the--is it in the pecking order, is that--
Speaker 2: Well, we have a trial level.  We have three tiers; trial level, an intermediate court and then the Supreme Court is the, is the top court in the state.
Speaker 1: And so you were on the--
Speaker 2: I was, I was on the intermediate court.
Speaker 1: You were on the intermediate court, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, the district court.  In fact, I was right down the hill here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this was really a move up here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is the composition different?  I mean how many judges are on the court of appeals versus(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on which district court you're in.  I think there're about 12 or 13 down in the First District Court of Appeal, more there than any place else because they handle more administrative-type matters than any other district court.  And under our Constitution really the district courts are the courts that are set up to handle most of the cases, to be the final court for most of the cases.  We are what you call a court of limited jurisdiction.  Our jurisdiction comes out of the Constitution, that spells specifically capital cases, bond validations, blah, blah, blah.
Speaker 1: But on the Florida Supreme Court, how many--there are--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven of you.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, on the United Supreme Court, there're nine.  So it varies from state to state too.
Speaker 1: And this court hears cases.  Does it hear the cases that--are they bumped up?  Does it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Our cases come up from the District Court.  Some can come directly from the trial court, but they are matters spelled out, extraordinary writs and things that are spelled out in the Constitution.
Speaker 1: Now, was this much of a transition or was it not?  You know, coming from, you know,--
Speaker 2: It was a very--it was a big transition.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: The transition--it's several.  You know that now you are on the top court in the state.  And if you and your peers screw it up, there's no one looking over your shoulder, if it's a state matter.  Now, if it's a Federal matter, it's, the person can take it into Federal court.  But if it's a state matter, then there's no one looking over your shoulders and once you decide it, then those are the rules.  When you're on the District Court or lower court, you try to do a good job, and you do the best work you can, but you have the security of feeling that if we screw it up, there's somebody above us that's gonna straighten it out.  There's no body that's gonna straighten it out if we mess it up at this level.  And so you're always--it takes on an added element of running more what-ifs through your mind.  You've got to try to think of every conceivable way this thing could play out because lawyers are going to--the creative creatures that they are, they're going to test it and challenge it in every conceivable way.  So you've got to not only think of the case you have immediately before you, but you've got to think of every way that this could impact the marketplace and the practice.  So it almost takes you back to the time when you first start practicing law, had a lot of butterflies in your stomach.  And you never finished your research, you know.  Here you're walking into court, if I had one more day (laughter), you know.  You always want that one more day to do something else.  And you try to feel that way on the Supreme Court, you know, if I had a little more time to do it.  You get more comfortable with it, you know, the longer you're on the court that, and you've seen so many things that you say, well, I'm pretty, I'm relatively comfortable that this is all that can be done in this.  But you don't have that security of thinking that somebody's going to correct it for you.
Story_ID: 13065
Speaker 1: What was the composition of the [Florida Supreme] Court that you came on back in 1983?  What were--who was here with you and what was the composition?  When I say composition, even philosophies and--
Speaker 2: Well, it was more conservative than it is now.  And the Supreme Court of Florida was sort of re-establishing itself at that point.  It had come through a pretty rough period when some justices had been put off the court.  And there was some scandals that had gone on court-wise that the court had, had--was just overcoming.  So the governor recognizing that, had appointed some very distinguished lawyers throughout the state.  So you had some tremendous judges on line at that time.  I know Jimmy [James C.] Adkins, for instance, when I came on the court, Jimmy was--and we laugh about it now, I mean when he was alive, when I, after I came on the court because I was trying to file a suit for some kids in St. Augustine, of all places and went into the clerk's office.  And the clerk, the person at the desk said, you can't file that here.  And it was under a sort of obscure section of the juvenile code.  And I said, what do you mean I can't file it?  He said, no, you just can't file that here.  We've never had anything like that.  I said, whether you've had it or not, I can file it.  No, you can't.  So I said, well, you'd better go talk to your clerk and get a reading from that.  I said, I'm a lawyer in Florida.  I can file anything I want to file.  She talked to a clerk.  The clerk came out and told me, you can't file that.  I said, well, you'd better go talk with a judge; went back in; came back out and told me, the judge said, you can't file that.  So, a young lawyer, what are you gonna do if you can't file your papers, you're dead in the water (laughter).  And I'd never run in, never heard of anything like this.  And so I called up here at the Supreme Court of Florida.  I just got on the telephone and called and see about getting this, somebody on the court.  And I got Jimmy Adkins and told him what had happened.  And he said, well, I'll tell you what.  He said, I cannot tell you how to practice law.  He said, and I can't--and I don't want to hear about the facts or any of the case cause it might end up here before me.  He said, but you wait around five or ten minutes and then try again.  Maybe you might get them filed this time.  So I waited about five minutes; went back in.  And I got them filed.  So once I came on the court up here, I talked to Jimmy about that.  And he had called up the judge and told him, "Are you out of your mind?  Of course he can file whatever he wants to file."  And so, so I met a friend, unbeknownst before.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the scandals that, you know, that had occurred on the court?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a rumor that justices were doing favors for law firms that they had been with before and that some of the justices were getting purpose orders from firms, law firms and former partners and this type of thing.  And that--
Speaker 1: Was that ever proven, some of it, besides just allegations?
Speaker 2: It was, it was proven (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you came, you were part of the wave to sort of clean things up?
Speaker 2: No, I was a wave after that.
Speaker 1: After that, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I mean but to clean things up, sort of?
Speaker 2: Well, the wave before me had--
Speaker 1: Is the--
Speaker 2: --was the clean up.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were some of the issues in those early years that were coming before the court?  Were there any particular types of issues or more than other?  Was there a tremendous caseload or was it a reasonable caseload back then?
Speaker 2: It was a heavy caseload and I suppose the most fluid area then was in the area of criminal law, the death penalty and this type of thing, whether or not the death penalty was cruel and unusual in certain instances.  For instance, should rape carry the death penalty?  Was it being applied fairly and Miranda [v. Arizona] was coming--it had come out.  And whether the, the police were properly advising people and this type of thing.  In the constitutional field, they were, you know, moving along there.  But I think the action probably was in the criminal area.
Speaker 1: So that was an area you knew very well.  But this was still a--you came on a very conserva--you came on a conservative court though.  Your reputation wasn't that, though, right?
Speaker 2: My reputation was not, un-un.
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't.  So did that take some adjustment, with, you know, sort of finding a medium with your peers--
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: Well, no, I recognized right up front that the governor [Bob Graham] knew who I was before he appointed me to the court.  And I did not think that I needed to change anything that I was.  And so when I came on the court, I was, I didn't change my philosophy because of the court's philosophy or anything else.  And so I never felt any pressure.  But, and if I felt like taking a position, I took that position, and I still do.
Speaker 1: Were there any, you know, you talked earlier about, you know, a lot of struggle over, angst, you know, over weighing and balancing your, you know, decisions or coming to a decision.  Were there any cases that you remember where that was particularly evident or that you had, you know, you sort of really wrestled over what decision to weigh in on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You would--one decision we had, well, the decision that was supposed to defrock me, in fact, it was whether or not a minor needed to have her parents' consent to get an abortion.  I authored that and put my name to it just before I ran (laughter).  And unfortunately, it fell just before I was running state-wide or maybe that's why I got a challenge.  I don't know.  But, here again, that's, that's a very troubling issue at a--at some level, you say well, I would want to know if my daughter was thinking about getting an abortion.  I think I ought to have some input.  She's still a minor and to tell parents that you don't have any input, that, that's pretty, that can be pretty serious and traumatic to some parents.  But yet, you have a Constitution saying that there is a right of privacy in, in Florida and it doesn't say there's a right of privacy except for minor females.  So here again, you get into a balancing.  So that's one of, one case I can think of right off the bat.
Speaker 1: You came in on the side of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Of the minor.
Speaker 1: Of the minor, right.  That was, wasn't that a seminal case in some respects?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: T.W., a Minor.  Right.  In fact, it brought in [Jerry] Falwell from Virginia and the group that tried to unseat, that did unseat Rose Byrd out in California.  They all weighed in against me.  And, you know, said they were going to defrock me, as it were.
Story_ID: 13066
Speaker 1: When that case, the abortion rights case, when that happened, you said you were just about getting ready to run for--was that merit retention?  No.  Was it merit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, merit retention is what we call it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's it.  It's a merit retention.  And it's a very peculiar ballot.  The ballot for the justices and the judges on the District Court of Appeal simply said, should this judge or should this justice be retained?  And the voter votes yes, no.  And if you get more "yes" votes, then you're retained.  If you get more "no" votes, then you're not retained.
Speaker 1: So did that system come about because of the scandal that had happened before with the Florida Supreme Court or it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, we were just searching around for the best way to elect judges.  And studies showed that you got your better justices in that fashion.  Theoretically, it was to take the politics out of it.  It can be argued that it didn't--it was not totally successful in doing that, but on balance, I still think it's probably the best way.
Speaker 1: You do think it's a good system because it seems to me--so you're, there're--cause a lot of times people don't necessarily know justice, you know, justices and what they do or the name, I mean or know a record of their opinions.
Speaker 2: That's the problem with it.  That, that is, you put your finger right on the problem that your name appears and it's very little you can really say.  You're subject to attack.  For instance, if a newspaper, a very prominent newspaper in the state jumped on you a few days before the election, they could defeat you because it's very little that you can say in rebuttal.  You're certainly limited in things you can talk about.  You can't say, I'm gonna be fore the police or--it's very limited.  And that's being debated right now at the Supreme Court level, the Federal Supreme Court level of how much should a judge be able to talk about his philosophy and what he believes and what he intends to do when he gets in office.  See, you can't promise people now, well, if you put me in office, I'm going to do so and so and so and so.  So, you're very vulnerable in that regard.
Speaker 1: No, it just strikes me as a--I understand the theory, but it strikes me as a strange system.
Speaker 2: Well, it is for the reason that you say.  That, I guess that's the Achilles heel that people don't know anything about you.  In fact, they've been out here in front of the courthouse picketing us, and I come out and walk through, and they don't even know.  And they try (laughter) to get me to join the picket.
Story_ID: 13067
Speaker 1: The abortion case, what was the name of that case?
Speaker 2: T.W., a Minor.
Speaker 1: And did that case, did that case get appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it went up to the Supreme Court.  I think it stopped right here.
Speaker 1: But here, okay, so--cause there was a lot of discussion around the country about that very issue.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, but did you--you're saying that happened right before the election, you put your name on the ballot.  So what did you have to do to sort of combat that or could you do anything, I mean to--
Speaker 2: Well, I had--it threw me into a state-wide campaign because we cannot campaign unless we're challenged.  So, you know, it's, it's a very peculiar animal.  So, of course, once they came out and said, they were going to defeat me, then I had a challenge.  So I had to put together a campaign, machinery and get me a campaign treasurer, and then go around and collect money to campaign and this type of thing.  Here again, you get a very uncomfortable situation.  You have, you can't--they put these teas and socials and so forth on for you, your campaign treasurer.  And you can't, of course, ask lawyers for money that are gonna come before you so, you can't be out there asking for money.  So you're in, you know, eating cookies and tea and punch and making small talk in one office while your campaign treasurer is over in the office twisting arms.  And that's very hypocritical.  And it makes you very uncomfortable to have to go around and--but the reality of it is, it takes a lot of money to campaign statewide, in fact, about $300,000 worth for me (chuckle).  That money had to be collected from someplace.  And that's what you carry, that what your, you put your campaign machinery to do.  And that's what's done in statewide campaigns, judicial and otherwise.  But it makes for a very uncomfortable situation because while you can't mention money or say anything about it, you know what's going on.  And you, you know, you try to--for instance, I avoided looking at my contributors' campaign sheets.  I didn't want to know who gave me $500 as opposed to $25.  I didn't want to know what firms gave it.  So I just let my campaign treasurer handle it, and I never looked at them.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah.  Now, what year was this, that that happened?
Speaker 2: I don't know what year I ran--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't know.  Late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Jean, Jean will tell you when we go back in there, the book, but I can't remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you find--did you find though that there was a positive side of the campaign.  Obviously, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's, I met a lot of people.  I found out what people were concerned about.  I, I found out that I had a lot more friends than I thought; that there were people around the state who followed my opinions.  They just--you have court watchers, but I run in--go into town, and people would say, you know, I've been following your opinions for blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And you never think of this really yourself, that there's somebody out there wondering what your next opinion is gonna be and what's it gonna say.  So it makes you try to do it a little better and not make any mistakes.  And then you have some of the problems about, well, it just takes so much time for y'all to render an opinion.  And, you know, it's true.  So you try to do better when you come back up here.  You try to, you know, that this is not theory we're talking about.  This is affecting lives and, you can come out with a great opinion a year after that's meaningless to that person.  It helps people, other people behind them.  So it, it's hindering so, you know, it's very--I think everybody needs to do it once or twice (laughter).  Although we don't jump at it, it's good for the soul.
Speaker 1: But that was all before you became Chief Justice, right?  Was it before, right?
Speaker 2: It was before I became Chief, right.
Speaker 1: Well that probably helped in that way.
Story_ID: 13068
Speaker 1: Florida is death state.  It's one of the states in the Death Belt.  And we go to the polls and vote that way.  If there is a--every chance we get.  If there's an opportunity to do away with it, we will vote to continue the death penalty, about 90 or 89 percent or something.  And that is a legislative decision.  That's not a court decision.  We have to operate within that paradigm.  The legislature represents the people, and this is what the people are saying.  We want the death penalty here in Florida.  Now, nationwide that is being challenged, the death penalty, and more and more people are looking at the unfairness of it.  And those of us who are in that continuum know that it's unfair in many respects and that you'll end up with people, innocent people on death row.  And it's irreversible.  Once they're electrocuted, you can't come back and say, oops, I made a mistake.  And so--and it's more expensive to execute people than it is to imprison them for the rest of their lives.  Um-hum, you didn't know that. Yes, uh-huh.  Every study that's ever been run will tell you that by the time a death row inmate exhausts all his appeals, it is much more expensive than keeping him in prison for the rest of his life.  So what is the justification for it?  It's just pure vengeance on the part of society at this point, and maybe society is entitled to avenge itself.  I don't know.  But--and that's as far as I ought to go.  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay, talk about the case though, talk about that case and why you came out that way.  And, you know, even the putting the pictures in the--
Speaker 1: Well, it was my feeling that if the public really knew how gruesome this was, that they could make a more informed choice if it's before them again.  It's very easy to not see somebody executed or not see the results of a botched execution and say, yes, we're in favor of the death penalty.  If a person kills somebody, then they ought to be killed.  It's very easy to say that, but then could you pull the lever, for instance.  I think a lot of these people who are saying they're so for the death penalty, couldn't pull the lever.  Could you vote for the death penalty if you knew what the person went through; if you knew that flames were coming out of his head and veins were popping and all this type of thing.  If you want to vote for the death penalty, vote for it.  Fine.  That's your privilege, but know what you're voting for.  And I'm afraid--and it was my feeling that a lot of people really didn't know what they were voting for other than they were just out to get--we want to the death penalty.  And that's it.  So okay, here are the results of what you're voting for.
Speaker 2: Now, did you see a death by electric chair?  Is that where your feelings came from or were yours from--did you--
Speaker 1: No, these pictures were--
Speaker 2: It was the pictures then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these pictures were in the record.  They were part of a record.
Speaker 2: And in this state, you don't have death by legal injection?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Do you have death by legal injection--lethal injection?
Speaker 1: Yes, that--we have that.  Um-hum.  That's what the legislature finally went to.
Story_ID: 13069
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you because just before, you served as a Supreme, you know, the chief judge--
Speaker 2: Chief justice, right.
Speaker 1: Chief justice, and that was the first time that the Florida State Supreme Court had had a black chief justice, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, chief justice, yes, yeah, they had a justice before, a black justice, but the first black chief.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering because the chief justice, there's a lot of administrative responsibilities to go along with it and to sort of set the tone--you also sort of track, set the tone, right, for the--
Speaker 2: Well, in some respects, yes.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering if you could talk about your--cause there's a two-year limit, and I'm wanting to know what that experience was like for you, and what you felt that you accomplished in that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, first off, I don't think two years is long enough for a chief justice to make too much of an impact one way or the other.  Fortunately, most of us stay on the court collegially as a unit long enough that we can make court decisions that the chief justice as the administrative officer of the court will carry out.  But that's a trade-off so that we would like to see everybody that serves on the Supreme Court at some point, be chief.  And if you've got chiefs that come on and stay for 5 and 10 years, you will have people come on the court and never be chief.  And so that's the practical trade-off, but it handicaps you nationally.  You can't really hold any significant office at the national level of chief justices because you're not there long enough.  So you can hold some honorary or some short-term office.  But--so there's a downside to serving that two years.  Mine was a very pleasant experience.  I, I knew most of the chief judges around the state.  And they all worked with me.  So--and then you knew certain, like anything else, certain chief justices--certain chief judges that other chief judges looked to when decision are to be made.  And most of those befriended me and assisted in the things that I wanted to get over and that I wanted to be accomplished.  So mine was a very pleasant and I guess it was as eventful as two years could be under the circumstances.  I enjoyed it, every moment of it.
Story_ID: 13070
Speaker 1: Let's get to the 2000 election because that's really--Florida, Florida takes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It put us on the map (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But California had been known for, you know, with its decisions coming out that set the tone for the country.  Florida was like (laughter) what is going on there?  Can you talk about that whole process cause I--
Speaker 2: Well, I can talk about some of it in very broad categories.
Speaker 1: We know the election happened.
Speaker 2: Normally, how an election is carried out in a state is left to that state.  And it is extremely unusual for a Federal court to get involved in that.  But when you have Federal offices that are impacted by the election, then a Federal court can get involved if it chooses and if the issues are significant enough.  So what you had here in Florida was a very close election.  Florida was a state that was going--it was obvious by this time that Florida was the state that was going to decide the next presidency of the United States.  So when these chads and things started falling out, and it was clear that there were some irregularities going on and certain votes weren't being counted, and whether intentionally or otherwise, and we were called upon then, the Florida Supreme Court was called upon to interpret our Constitution relative to what the, what does the court do in these instances.  We followed what we perceived to be the constitutional mandate and established case law in that area.  Normally, that would have been the end of it.  The Supreme Court of a state has spoken.  That's it.  Well, it was bounced over to the Federal court and much to our surprise, the Federal court took it and said that they didn't understand our opinion.  They didn't know what we were talking about and we didn't know what they were talking about, which is extremely unusual also.  But in any event, it was at that point that, I think everybody realized that something unique in the history of this country was happening.  And I don't know whether the--I guess that subsequent to the election, it's been rumored that several of the Justices on the Supreme Court said that they had to do something because it was clear that we were politically motivated on this Court.  And nothing could be further from the truth.  Really, I had no idea of how my peers are inclined.  I don't even know how they're registered, but (laughter) I know now because it's all--it came out in the paper.  And everybody is looking at everybody's registration.  But never once have I felt--and I know I speak for myself, a political motivation was the furthest thing from my mind.  Judging is a lot of problem solving.  And that's the way we approached this.  It was a problem, and we are used to approaching very complex problems, shifting things and sorting things out and distilling it to the point of the legal issues, and then resolving those.  There's a lot of underbrush you have to get out of the way, and that's what we did.  That's was the approach that we used here.  That's the approach that every judge in the country or every court in the country uses as far as I know.  But once the Supreme Court is involved--and so we tried to go back to cases that had been decided in that area and use those cases, which had been sound and established law up to that point.  But once the Supreme Court of the United States got in, they said that it was too late for all this voting and re-voting and this type of thing and that it was too bad if--we tried to use that poll star that every vote ought to count.  And they said, well, that's too bad if every vote doesn't count.  There has to be finality to this thing.  There has to be a safe harbor and all these type of things and that we will decide.  And they took it, and they decided it.  So that, it, it's not quite that simple, but I think that's about all I can say about it at this point.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm thinking maybe you can say a few more things.  Let me just ask you them?  This, frankly, there had been a lot of pressure up to that point, here in the State, just--because it's highly, this is highly contested.  The whole country is looking at what's happening.  There are, there's evidence of these irregularities.  I mean I know even in Chicago people were talking, you know, oh, yes, I went to polls and this was happening or the machine didn't work.  You know, some of those things.  But here--what I see is that there had been a lot of pressure on this unit here, more than what, I don't think ever had it really existed.  You had had, you know, pressure with the abortion rights cases, but this was a whole different thing.  You know, you have two people running for president and no one knows, you know, one's saying there is no presidential candidate--
Speaker 2: But all these things that have, at this point, or had at that point, become monumental, had been in the mix all along.  Chads had been hanging all along, machines had been breaking down all along.  And it was only because of the closeness of the election that these things surfaced and became important.
Story_ID: 13071
Speaker 1: It's rare that whether you're a liberal or conservative is gonna make a lot of difference, but where it does make a difference, it's generally in very critical areas.  And it's very profound.  It affects a lot of things and a lot of people.
Speaker 2: So what I want, you said that these irregularities had been happening all along.  Had there been cases that had, you know, where actually, you know, when you say we went back and looked at the precedent, I think you were talking about in a broader context, but had there been, you know, cases brought up in, you know, the last twenty years that dealt with any of these things, that were like any different than this--or had they all come out of like the civil rights?
Speaker 1: No, they, they--you had not had this type of challenge.  You had not had this particular type of challenge.  What I was referring to is that machines had been breaking down before--
Speaker 2: But--why do you know that?  Just because it, had it come out recently?  Had there been--
Speaker 1: Well, I know for one thing, when I was running for office once, before I got to the Supreme Court, a senator called me and asked me did I know that the machines, people couldn't vote for him and couldn't vote for me in a certain district, that the machines were locked up over there.  And I said, no.  Lynwood [F.] Arnold was the senator.  And we met over there about the same time and sure enough, this was in a black area.  Machines had broken down, and people were standing out there in line trying to vote for us.  So that's--it's anecdotal, but that's how I know that this has been happening.
Speaker 2: The other thing that I think must have been disappointing was that, under extreme pressure, the Florida State Supreme Court as a body comes up with the decision that--and under a lot of extreme political pressure or outside pressure, I would say or intense scrutiny, let's put it that way, you come up with the decision that, I think as a body, you feel is very sound on the law?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Right.  What precedent were you actually--what precedent existed out there?  You know, you said you looked back at previous case law.  Was there anything really on point?  Or was it sort of--
Speaker 1: They're--on these facts, there was nothing on point, but there are certain legal principals that had been established that we were following, that case law had set forth, that had been set forth in case law.  And, but these facts were unique where people were saying, they've got roadblocks set up here and won't let us vote.  And certain votes are being counted and the other votes aren't being counted.  And we've got these hanging chads.  You never heard of a hanging chad before then.  And, you know, and none of us knew what a hanging chad was.  So this was new in that cause, you know, never had case law of hanging chads before.
Speaker 2: So, but the case, the precedent, did it come out of the '60s [1960s] mainly or not?
Speaker 1: No, it didn't come out of the--
Speaker 2: It didn't come out--
Speaker 1: --it just had strictly to do with cases where there was some irregularity in an election, but the issue was whether or not you threw out the whole election, whether it was material enough to throw out the entire election.  And there was some established law along those lines.
Speaker 2: And so my question is that, under intense scrutiny, this body comes up with something that, I mean I don't know--I don't guess you can even talk about the internal dynamics, but you can't, right?  No, you can't, okay.  So this body comes up with something that looks on legal ground, as solid, under, you know, Florida law.  And then as a jurist, it would appear that that would be--you know, and under very difficult circumstances.  And then it would appear that here the Supreme Court gets involved, and not only like, unrightly sort of takes away--you know, really pulls the rug out underneath your feet in many ways.  And that would, if I, you know, if I were sitting where you were, it would seem that that would be very deflating and almost want you to question the judicial system at the highest level, in respect, that you can't--right?
Speaker 1: As a judge and certainly as a judge who's been on the bench for, you know, twenty or thirty years, you can't question the system as such.  You can question individuals.  You can question people, whether the people that now occupy the office, whether you think they have some agenda, as it were.  You can question that, but I, I can't--I wouldn't question the institution.  You know, you either have a court system or you don't have a court system under the Constitution.  And hopefully, that court system is peopled by individuals that have no agenda or are going to follow the law.  That's, that's what you hope would happen.
Speaker 2: So from your standpoint, what were questioning or can you comment on that?
Speaker 1: Well, I was just surprised that the Supreme Court took it since it was the highest court of a state interpreting its Constitution.  And there was more precedent for the Supreme Court of the United States not to get involved than there was for it to get involved.  All the--I wouldn't say all, but the great body of precedent out there was that, it favored the court not getting involved, the federal court not getting involved in that.  So I was rather surprised when they did.  And then I was further surprised when instead of just coming down and saying, Supreme Court of Florida, you are wrong for this reason and give us some reason why we were wrong.  And I think they would have hard-pressed to really do that.  They take the position that, we don't understand the opinion and send it back.  Make us understand the opinion.  How can we make you understand the opinion.  It's--we're all seasoned judges, been writing opinions for years and we'd written this about as clear--we recognized, we recognized the importance of it.  We tried to write a fair, a clear opinion.  What do, what do you think, we tried to write a garbled opinion?  So what do you want us to do?  And then when it goes back up, you find out how really split they are.  (Laughter)  And then you, we started seeing sort of a pattern or sort of--as a court watcher, you know, you begin to get this feeling, I know how this is gonna go down.  I know where the votes are going to go and which direction.  And you never want to feel that way about a court.  You never want to feel that way.  And I guess that's the most disturbing part of it as far as I'm concerned personally.  I'm not personally offended and I've got the heart of an alligator.  So I'm not personally offended by--or if the court says, I don't understand your opinion or you're wrong.  You know, tell me why I'm wrong, especially in something of this magnitude.  So I still have great faith in the system, but I'm not a great admirer, perhaps of some individuals on the court.
Story_ID: 13072
Speaker 1: Do you see any long-term harm that that case has caused?
Speaker 2: I think possibly the law is so, it's destabilized the law to the point that I think the legal scholars and judges have a hard time now knowing exactly what the law is.  And, and we all have our personal opinions of why certain justices ruled as they did, and the same thing can be said about our opinions.  People, judges and people throughout the state have their personal opinion of why we ruled in a certain way.  So that's all I can say about it.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that there's been sort of a shifting of the paradigm, you know, in a--
Speaker 2: I think it has.  I think the parameters are not as clear as they were before 2000.  And I think it's some question out there now how involved the Supreme Court of the United States can get into an election and what deference it should pay to the Supreme Court of a state.  And if the rumors and things that I've heard is that they had to get involved because we were politically inclined a certain way.  That's not giving much deference to a state Supreme Court to say that, and all the Supreme Court of the State of Florida are motivated by things other than legal principle, that they want to see a certain president in office.  So they're going to skew the law in a certain way.  That's unprecedented for the Supreme Court of the United States to say that about a top state court.
Speaker 1: And then there's other interesting implications about just the balance of power between federal and state--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and what you take it to.  Now, but you also talk though about the positive things that have come as a result, and I'd like you just to--
Speaker 2: Well, I think certain things that have gone on for, I guess ever since they've had the first voting machine, ever since people have been voting and have existed and been sort of blinked away because they really did not make a critical difference.  Machines had been breaking down.  They had been breaking down more so in certain areas than in other areas.  And I suppose these chads had been punched before, just like they were punched in the 2000 election, and nobody's paid that much attention to them.  And I imagine thousands of them have not been counted before, had been thrown out, just like they did in this one.  But it didn't make any difference.  It wasn't a presidential election or the elections weren't close enough for them to be challenged.  But as a result of the 2000 election, Florida does not want to see itself in the spotlight again.  So we have now purchased, as I understand it, new voting machines and we're going into new systems.  And certainly, we are more conscious of what can happen, and so I don't think you're gonna find police or road patrolmen doing auto checks, you know, right down the street from a polling place.  So I think a lot of that stuff has been flushed out as a result of this election.
Story_ID: 13073
Speaker 1: You're facing retirement.  It's just, it's right there in your face--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And when you look back over your legal and judicial career, what would say you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, the fact that I've been on the bench for this number of years, and I think most people in the State of Florida, if you ask them, they will tell you that, whether they agree with me or not, they think I'm an honest judge.  They feel that I am knowledgeable of the law and that I'm respected as a justice.  And I don't think you could ask any more than that to end your career with people agreeing or not agreeing with you, still respecting you and still the consensus being that you don't shade the difference.  You call them like you see them and that you do the best you can with each case.  You solve as best you can, and that's all that can be expected of you.
Speaker 1: You know, I have been struck by the fact that, when you talk about your early, you know, yourself as a youth, that there was more of a happy-go-lucky, you know, maybe not, you know, quite sense of direction, you know, that type of thing.
Speaker 2: I didn't focus for a long time.
Speaker 1: You didn't focus for a (laughter) Okay, I was trying to say, but what I want to say is that you, from a stand--from the time that you sort of got involved in your legal career and your long time as a judge, I'm just wondering if you have a comment on that, how you have changed and matured as a person, you know, and how the, you know, how this--how many years?  It's been a long time--you've said, how that has changed you and made you a different person than--
Speaker 2: Well, you begin to recognize how fortunate you are to be in a position where you can influence the lives of people.  All of us are not that privileged, and some of it you see directly as a result of your opinions and things of that nature.  But there's another side also.  So often I speak at schools and places like that, and kids will come up to me and say, they know who I am and I know what you do.  And you realize that there are a, there's a group out there that--of young people that you're having some impact on and it's a positive impact.  So I guess that matures you to the point that you recognize that, life being what it is, and finite as it is, you have to use what you have to the best of your advantage to get as much mileage out of it and to do as much good as you can.  And so that makes you a little more serious than I was in my younger days.
Story_ID: 13074
Speaker 1: A lot of cases that, not all, but a lot of the cases that have come before you have been cases that--or issues that involved the, you know, black or minority issues.  And, you know, and I take two things, you know, whether it's the voting right issues here that we had, you know, with the 2000 election or the death penalty cases for a lot of the people, you know, on death row may be black.  And I--what I'm wondering is, when you look at the black community, and, you know, and I looked at the fact that a lot of, when you started you were very actively involved in the Civil Rights Movement, but when you look at the black community and this span of, you know, almost forty years has occurred, what do you, when you look, are you--do you have like hopes and concerns; do you have disappointments as it relates to, you know, where you think things have progressed? And where you want them to go?
Speaker 2: I'm extremely concerned about where we, as a people, are going because I think we're sort of polarizing.  You have a group of young blacks now that are doing, and they're going to do very well.  These kids are coming out of Morehouse [College], Princeton [University], Ivy League--you know, Harvard [University].  They're gonna make it.  And they're upward, they have the upward mobility. They're tied into what's going on, much more so than we were at our age then.  But there's another group that is mired in--and here again, I guess it boils down to family and family values and a value system and where you get your value system from.  And you've got a group over here that I'm afraid might not be even thinking in terms of upward mobility of getting out of what they're in.  And it's the only thing they know, and nobody is giving them a value system.  We have kids coming out of these homes.  Mom and dad is not telling them what--in fact, mom and dad are scared of them.  And these kids are jacking cars, robbing, dealing drugs, and it's passing from one generation to the other.  And right here there's--I can think of a couple of families up here in the Panhandle that just about every third or fourth time you pick up the paper, it's somebody being murdered or killed or what have you, this family name appears.  And I'm afraid there are a lot of people caught in that type of thing, that there's not the proper motivation to get out of it.  So they'll be satisfied with it.  I guess that's the most disturbing thing; that they don't seem to want to fight their way out of it.  They seem to be comfortable dealing drugs, jacking cars, breaking in.  And just pick up your paper any day and see what you see.  Look at the pictures that you see.  And this is something we've got to do something about.  I think churches will have to get more involved than they are.  I think the schools are gonna have to get more involved than they are.  And it's not just getting involved with the kids.  You're gonna have to get involved with that family.  You have to bring family into the picture some way because you can say all of the things you want to at school.  And if the kid goes home to their family, and they're going out, the brothers and sisters are going out to jack some cars and have some fun tonight, it doesn't mean anything.  And I just--and I'm not sure what to do about that.  It's very, very disturbing to me that--to see that kind of polarizing and dividing.  And, at one time you used to think that the talented 10 percent was gonna pull up the others.  That's not gonna happen because I talk to my son [Sean M. Shaw].  He just graduated from Princeton.  He is not the least bit concerned about that other group over there.  And this is very tragic.  And I tell him, you, you owe an obligation.  You've got to--he says, what can I do?  And I'm hard-pressed to tell him what he can do at that point.  He said, you know, I'm trying to make it myself.  But that can't be the answer.  That can't be the answer, that there is a throw-away group over here, that nobody can do anything about.  But as I say, there's another group over here.  And that group is becoming larger, I convinced.  I think it's bigger than the talented 10 now, doing very--and they're gonna do very well.  They're well-trained, well-motivated and got their heads screwed on good and they know where they're going.  And they're getting involved in things, that, you know, will lead them to success.  But I'm concerned that they aren't concerned about this other group over there.
Story_ID: 13075
Speaker 1: Do you feel that the, like black attorneys and black judges, what do you think their role is in--
Speaker 2: I don't have any better answer than you do probably because, you know, I try to be a good role model myself.  And, but I am, I'm frustrated.  I'm just totally frustrated.  I, I can be walking down the street myself, and see a bunch of these black guys with their hair all picked out, and cross the street.  Now, you know, something's wrong.  Some wrong when, you know,--and, you know, it's the truth.  And, but, but here again, the white community cannot distinguish between that and my kids and your kids.  There can be a group of them standing together, and it's hard to discern that this is not the same, and, you know, group.  So consequently, they get hassled a lot.  Sean's little group, he hung around with.  And these kids are all doctors' and lawyers' sons.  And they get stopped every time they go to the mall.
Story_ID: 13076
Speaker 1: Are there changes that you would like to see in the legal system?
Speaker 2: I would like to see more thought put into the fairness of the death penalty.  I would like to see more black lawyers get into law firms dealing with Fortune 500 companies and stay there.  And I've seen some very unfortunate situations where black lawyers have gotten into these firms, worked them, stayed in there years, worked themselves up to be partners, and then found out that, wait a minute, the pressures have now changed.  The other partners say, wait a minute.  You're a partner now.  You're supposed to be bringing in as many Fortune 500 companies as we bring in.  But the brother is not out there playing with these presidents of these companies on the golf course and is not having lunch at the spa with them.  So he's got all these pressure to bring all these big companies in and how is he to do it?  And sooner or later, it gets to be an uncomfortable situation, and the next thing you know, he's left the firm after making partner or left.  So I think that needs to be realistically addressed.  And I think I'd like to see more lawyers there.  I'd like to see more lawyers aspire to be judges.  I think they can have a positive impact on the system.
Story_ID: 13077
Speaker 1: Has the selection confirmation process for the U.S. Supreme Court Justice become more politicized in the--what did you write--
Speaker 2: To the detriment of the judicial system and what reforms might be helpful.
Speaker 1: Has the system become more politicized?  Do I feel that it has become more politicized as a result of it?  I think there's a general perception that it has.  And that's an unfortunate, you know, fall-out from it.  I think people have lost a certain degree of respect for the court as a result of that feeling.
Speaker 2: Well, we end with the legacy question, but can I ask you just one more question before that?  With lawyers in the legal profession, when you look, you know, and you say these are the changes I'd like to see, do you think--you know, and the number of people that are now going into, you know, entering into law school, and I'm talking about blacks--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Do you see, you know, given what you see happening, some of the lack of progress that has been made in numbers, do you see that some of these things--because some things play upon the, you know, the other.  You know, if you have a more diverse environment, sometimes you get, maybe, you--sometimes you may get better laws and more equal laws.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And now there're not as many people entering into--I think there's been a lessening number in terms of minorities entering law school--
Speaker 1: There has been.
Speaker 2: What do you see the future really being given, less people entering in and not as much progress made in some areas, how do you--what do you see actually--I mean you talk about I'd like to see the--or these are the things that I'm disappointed, I'd like to see change, but--
Speaker 1: Well, there--it's because of the assault on affirmative action that you see fewer kids accepted in law school and, and medical school and this type of thing now, I believe.  And if you ask me is that a good thing or a bad thing?  I think it's a bad thing.  I don't see affirmative action necessarily as a crutch.  I think it's giving some kids that would not have a chance, a chance.  And whatever does that is a good thing as far as I'm concerned.  Just think of the minds that have, the good minds out there that are being wasted.  And if affirmative action gets them in school, fine.  It's a good thing, it's positive.  Whatever gets them in school, gets them off the street; gets them in school, fine with me.  And a lot of this is posturing anyway because they've had so many of these--every now and then some businessman will come out, take up a poor school and say, look, I'm gonna turn this school around, just one businessman.  He'll come to the school and say, look, you kids that stay in school and graduate, I'm gonna send you to college, and you've got a job when you get out of college.  Dramatic change, dramatic change where up until that point, everybody was saying that it couldn't be done.  And these kids were just ghetto kids.  And they've got too much going against them.  You just can't pull them through.  So it can be done.  And it's just commitment.  We've got to have a national commitment and for some reason, that's not coming up high on the screen in this country.  And that's, here again, very sad because the future, that's the future of this country that you're playing down.  So, that's a long answer to what do I think about affirmative action, I guess.
Story_ID: 13078
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: He was a good person.  He did the best he could with what he had, and he had some positive impact on people that he came in contact with.  And he never did anybody any dirt, never harmed anybody intentionally.  That's about all.
Story_ID: 13079
Speaker 1: The tradition that was established with your parents [Leander J. Shaw, Sr., and Margaret Anderson Shaw], you spoke well about the nurturing environment you came out of.  And how do you think your career in life has stood your parents proud?
Speaker 2: I think they'd be proud of me.  I, I think, yeah, they didn't get their doctor, but they might be disappointed there (laughter).  I think as a consolation prize, they would accept that I, what has happened.  And as I say, it's, it's unfortunate that more kids--well, I guess life's just unfair.  So, and I almost feel guilty some time, too privileged because I almost sometimes feel that I was spoon-fed, what happened to, and where I got; that I should have had to struggle more for it.  See, I've never struggled.  You know, I've tried to do good and I've taken advantage and if doors were opened, I walked in.  I've worked hard.  I, you know, I think I'm--I've put the effort in, but as far as any sacrifice and this type of thing, I never had to do it.  And, as I say, sometimes I almost feel guilty that, and feel like things were sort of handed to me.  And then I think of others, so many other kids out there who are much more deserving than I am and probably, they've got a better mind than I have and smarter than I am and more deserving and everything else, that didn't have that type of chance.  And you just wonder, what can you do to, to give them that chance.  So it's very humbling when you think of that way (chuckle).
