Story_ID: 19934
Speaker 1: ...Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and observing is Ivan Katz and J. J. Pryor.  And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Haywood Patrick Swygert.  H-A-Y-W-O-O-D, Patrick, P-A-T-R-I-C-K, S-W-Y-G-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date.
Speaker 2: Well, my date of birth is March 17th, 1943.  And today is June the 2nd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have the address that we're at.
Speaker 2: Well, we're at 2400 6th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., Howard University.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm president of Howard University.
Story_ID: 19935
Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your parents.  And I'd like to start with your mother, is Gustine--?
Speaker 2: Gustina [Huzzy].
Speaker 1: Gustina, okay.  And so I'd like you to tell me about her and, you know, her background and her growing up.
Speaker 2: My mother was from Trenton, New Jersey.  She settled in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and attended public schools in Philadelphia.  She got to the eleventh grade and developed a very serious illness, pneumonia, really, and dropped out of school in the eleventh grade and spent her entire life as a wife and as a housewife.
Speaker 1: And did she talk much about her growing up, sir?
Speaker 2: Not very much, no.  My mother was a child of mixed parents as they used to say.  And she knew very little about her father, knew a great deal more about her mother, but did not know a great deal, I don't think, about her background in terms of her family history as such.
Speaker 1: How would you describe her personality though?
Speaker 2: My mother, like many women of her generation, was in a sense born before her time.  Her time should be today, 2003.  She was a very, very clever, very smart, very tough, tough-minded woman, who'd be a tremendous litigator and attorney today.  I always think of my mother as an attorney, very articulate, very well read, and--but she, again, like many women of her generation, she had to contend herself, to the extent that she was content, that's only for her to know, being a housewife and raising children.
Story_ID: 19936
Speaker 1: Now, your father, can you give his name and talk about him?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father's name was Leroy [Huzzy].  And he was from Mount Olive, North Carolina.  My father went all the way to the third grade, left North Carolina, came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He was a very big young man.  He didn't leave North Carolina after the third grade.  He was in North Carolina until his early teens, came to Philadelphia, and worked down at the piers, at the docks, as a longshoreman.  And from there he did a number of other things.  He--everything from being a bouncer, eventually, a police officer, and then got a really terrific job in March of 1943, in fact, March 17th, 1943, my birthday, he got a job operating a crane at a steel fabricating company called Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton, that build Baldwin--the old Baldwin [Locomotive Works] company of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania was known for building steam engines.  It then became Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton.  My father, because of the shortage of white workers in World War II, became a crane operator, the first black at this particular plant.  And that was really a great job for the time.  And he worked in, that kind of environment until he passed at age forty-nine.
Speaker 1: So this way, I mean your birth date was a big day of celebration.  He not only got a son.  He got a job.
Speaker 2: Well I think more importantly he got a job.  You can get a son anytime.  But those jobs were very hard to come by.  And this was the middle of World War II.  And so it was quite a, quite a leg up, if you will, for him, and for the family.  It was just a terrific job.  I think the son was an add-on, but I think he, in retrospect, it was the job, I think, was arguably, was far more important.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your father, what he was like?
Speaker 2: My father was a very big man physically, and had a very big presence.  My father would walk into a room, and you would know he was in the room.  He was a very hard man.  My father was a very, very tough man.  Again, of a generation, much as my mother [Gustina Huzzy] was of her generation, my father was of a generation where black men, working men showed very little emotion.  Emotion was verboten. I never recall seeing my father cry.  I never recall seeing my father being particularly emotional, except angry.  And that he was a lot.  My father was also, what in his day was called a race man.  A race man in that sense was someone who really was about the race and about the community.  He felt very strongly about that.  He was not nearly the, intellectual as my mother really was.  I mean she really was an intellectual.  She read, not simply for pleasure, but she read for learning as well.  My father did not.  My mother taught my father how to read.  And he read the newspaper, but, of course, as a race man, he did not trust any white publications.  So he read the Philadelphia--'Pittsburgh Courier', the, 'Philadelphia Tribune', the 'Afro-American', and then he would read the 'Philadelphia Daily News' and the 'Philadelphia Inquirer' and the 'Philadelphia Bulletin.'  But my father, over the course of one week, probably read six or seven newspapers, different newspapers.  I know it sounds hard to believe in, the world of video and in diminution in terms of readership of, mass, mass daily publications.  But he did that.  And that was his source of information.  My mother read books and read the papers as well.  But he was, he was, quite typical of the men who he worked with.  They--there was a lot about them that was the same.  They were, what we would today call stolid personalities.  Most were race men, very, very much in favor of the race and they would put it, the uplift of the race, hardworking.  Did not have really the pretensions that his son has as a college president and a college graduate.  And he did the opposite of what I do.  My father dressed up on Saturday and Sunday.  Saturday and Sunday I tend to dress down.  I'm not so sure which is the best way.  He certainly looked a lot, looked a lot better in his out outfits, I think, than I do in mine.
Story_ID: 19937
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My parents met in the community and just, nothing arranged or pre-arranged.  I think, in fact, at the time my mother [Gustina Huzzy] met my father [Leroy Huzzy], I think my father was a bouncer.  She did not meet him in the bar, let me be quick to add.  She just met him in the community.  That's just how you met people.  They didn't meet in church.  It wasn't arranged through aunts or uncles.  I think they just met.  I mean you just meet people when you're going around, about, and you see someone who's attractive or someone who you're interested in.  And you go from there.
Story_ID: 19938
Speaker 1: Now, your, siblings, in birth order?  Names and--?
Speaker 2: Well, that would be difficult for me to do as much as I have three sisters--I had three sisters, and, ten brothers.  But I could if, time permitted, I could go through all of them.
Speaker 1: Where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the seventh son.  And not any luck at all has ever attached to me.  The notion about the seventh son being particularly fortunate, not so.
Speaker 1: So the whole--the family was--.
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: Fourteen!
Speaker 2: As I said, my mother [Gustina Huzzy] spent most of her time as a housewife and a mother.
Speaker 1: That gives new perspective (laughter) on it, that's true.
Story_ID: 19939
Speaker 1: So tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest sharp memory, sharp memory, was of greeting a sister, my oldest sister, who is now deceased.  But I recall my oldest sister returning home--she'd been in Florida, returning home, and my mother [Gustina Huzzy] introducing me to my oldest sister, who I did not know.  The age gap was very substantial and she left when I was very young.  And I said to myself, who is this very elegant white woman in the living room whose being introduced as my sister because my, sister, like my mother and like other members of the family, had that complexion and that appearance.  And I was just--I couldn't, couldn't quite get all this together.  And, of course, over time, I got to know her.  Well, that was probably my, first sharp memory.
Speaker 1: Do you know how old you were at the time?
Speaker 2: I would have been, I would say, oh, three, four years of age, I guess.  But I, I recall, very clear, I was, I was really startled as much as anything.  I, always thought that I wasn't so much surprised in the sense that it was a white woman in the house because I thought my mother was white.  I only discovered later that she was black because you didn't have that conversation in the house.
Speaker 1: Then you were aware of color that early in life?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Story_ID: 19940
Speaker 1: Tell me also just about family life.  It must have been a lot of kids running around or people.  Was that--but just, if you could describe family life and just share some anecdotes of that and the block you lived on, neighbors, that type of thing.
Speaker 2: Let me, let me say something about the block I lived on.  And then segue, if I may, to my house and the family life.  I lived in the 1300 block of Kater Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  In my office here at the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], there's a brick on one of the windowsills in my office.  That brick is from my old home, the home where I was born, 1338 Kater.  A few years ago, I drove up Kater Street and discovered to my horror that my home had been demolished.  I stopped the car, it's a narrow street.  I stopped the car and gathered up a number of bricks and put them in my trunk.  One of those bricks is in my office.  And I look at that brick from time to time because folk will say to me, "Well gee, you've come a long way from Kater Street."  And I look at that brick, and I say, "No, not really.  It's right there.  There's Kater Street."  And it sort of keeps me, at least, focused.  It was a very close-knit community.  It was as close to a Philadelphia version of Catfish Row [locale in 'Porgy and Bess'] perhaps, as you can imagine.  It was an old street, a very old street.  And folk might find this very hard to believe, but when I was born in 1943, in Philadelphia, at 1338 Kater Street, we had no indoor plumbing.  The plumbing was outdoors.  This is the middle of Philadelphia, literally four blocks from Center City, Philadelphia.  There was a well at the bottom of the street, a literal--a well, like in a country well, you know, where water, you drop a bucket and that sort of thing.  Now, we had indoor water, but we had no indoor plumbing.  And when I was born, there was a big potbelly stove in the living room.  And later, when I got to be about four or five, we got forced air, a coal, a coal furnace in the basement that my father [Leroy Huzzy] helped dig out part of the basement to accommodate this furnace.  So it was a very, very modest, modest existence.  It was close in.  Everyone, you literally knew everyone.  You had to know everyone.  You were on top of everyone.  Because of the size of my family and the age differential, folks were always coming and going.  We were in never the home--the house couldn't possibly have accommodated us, at the same time.  But we were all coming and going.  Someone was going off to the military, someone was going off to work, someone was doing something.  And you, you just, you slept in the bed with your brother or two brothers.  And that was just, that was just the natural order of things.  I mean you didn't think about having your own bed or more or less your own room, for Pete sakes.  No one had their own room in my house.  And that was just the way, that's just the way we, lived.  And that was, again, that was just how things were.  And it was--I'm not going to try and romanticize it.  Folk talk about, boy, the good ole days when everyone knew each other and were close and the rest of it.  I don't pine for those days.  It was very difficult, very rough.  My parents [Leroy and Gustina Huzzy] had a difficult time.  They were hard-working people of very, very modest means, modest means.  And I think if, both or either were with us today, they wouldn't pine for those days either.
Story_ID: 19941
Speaker 1: Now, I want you to take yourself back to Kater Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I'd like you to tell me what sights, smells and sound remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when I think of--Kater Street is, between two larger streets in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one called Bainbridge Street, the other South Street.  South Street is far better known.  South Street is a commercial street.  It was a commercial street when I was a youngster and is a commercial street today.  In fact, there's been a--kind of revitalization of South Street.  The sounds were just a mixture of, noises, cars and trolleys and hucksters coming through the neighborhood with horse-drawn ice wagons, because we bought ice off the wagon.  And those were the, sort of the, the kind of city sounds and city sights.  And there was always something exciting going on, on South Street.  In terms of, in terms of images, I was living in, a rather modest--poor would be, would be too generous a characterization.  I mean we were poor, circumstance, with all those children and, and the rest of it.  But it was an odd circumstance because around the corner from us were two of the fanciest, most well-known night clubs in Philadelphia, one called the Pep Bar [Pep's Musical Bar] and the other called the Showboat.  Now, just last week, Friday, in fact, of this past week, I spent Friday afternoon with Kenny Gamble of Gamble and Huff and, world-renowned songwriter, producer today.  Well, Kenny and I grew up in the same neighborhood.  And, of course, he's doing wonderful things in Philadelphia.  And I'm joining him in doing one or two things I'm happy to say.  But Kenny and I talked about South Street and what it was like.  Well, on the corner of Broad [Street] and South Street, which is a half a block from where I lived, was the Pep Bar.  And the Pep Bar was in--known in Philadelphia as show bars, which, means that they have live entertainment, first-class, live entertainment and a bar, just a bar, bar.  But they were fancy, rather fancy places, not quite a nightclub.  Although you could argue they were nightclubs as well, but in Philadelphia, they were show bars.  As a youngster, shining shoes outside the Pep Bar.  For that door to open, you'd be--the bouncer and the doorman would try to chase you.  And eventually, they'd give up in the middle of the night.  But to be outside with your shoeshine box, and to see those Packards and those Lincolns drive up, and these fancy guys would step out with these beautiful women and step into that club.  And for just a moment, the door would open.  And that moment that the doorman opened that club door, you'd hear that band of Count Basie or Duke Ellington, just roaring out on the street.  And you would smell that wonderful cologne and that wonderful perfume and that top-shelf liquor.  And you'd see these folk just glide in, and you'd say to yourself, one day, one day, I'm gonna pull up in a Packard or a Lincoln, and I'm gonna glide in.  Unfortunately, when that day came, the Pep Bar no longer existed, but there you are.  That was a wonderful education, and a wonderful experience.  And I wouldn't trade--now, that, I wouldn't trade for anything.
Story_ID: 19942
Speaker 1: What were you like as a little boy?  I mean were you--?
Speaker 2: Gee, it's, it's hard to say.
Speaker 1: Were you quiet?  Were you well mannered?  Were you rambunctious?  Were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: Well I think you'd have to speak to folk who were there at the time, those who--anyone who's still around, was there at the time.  I think, like some children born and raised in a household with lots and lots of people, quiet, space was very, very important to me.  You know, we have this image of large families of everyone pulling together and everyone coming together, and everyone can't get enough of each other.  At least in my experience, that wasn't so.  We all wanted distance from one another.  We all wanted space.  And that was really important because you didn't have any.  So if anything, I was probably quiet, in the sense that alone or being, wanting to be away.  But I was really rambunctious as well, got into as much mischief as the next youngster, perhaps even more.  Early on, they tell me that I always wanted to be out front and doing something.  I was president of my junior high school [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], president of the high school.  I came to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I was president of the dormitory council, doing that sort of thing.  As I reflect back on it, obviously, I was trying to say or do something.  I'm not sure what it was.  Or maybe the candidates against me weren't, weren't so hot.  But in any event, I think I was both alone and also, also engaged.
Story_ID: 19943
Speaker 1: So who influenced you because, you know, a lot of times they say when children are in the middle like that, they have a hard time sort of even, even in life finding their space.  So who influenced you as a young person?
Speaker 2: Well, I think in different ways, again, with the benefit of reflection and time, in different ways, I think my parents, but very differently.  My father [Leroy Huzzy], as I said, was a very, very strong man.  And I appreciated his strength and his, ability to be still.  There are very few people who can be still.  Howard Thurman [author] talked about finding your center, in a spiritual sense.  Well, my father, I'm not so sure he ever associated spirituality with himself, but he had a center.  And he could be still and strong like very few people can be still and strong.  My mother [Gustina Huzzy] was just a very, very bright woman.  And I could talk to her about literally anything.  After I graduated from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and returned to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a law clerk, of course, I thought I was a pretty hot, pretty much of a hotshot, you know.  And if I didn't know everything, I knew most of it.  But my mother could keep up with you.  I mean she could, she was a very, very clever, very articulate woman.  She was not the--I've talked about my mother from time to time, and I've had folk interrupt me and say, "Oh, she must have been such a warm and loving person."  My mother was a lot of things, but I'm not so sure that's quite how you would characterize her.  She had lots of grandchildren, some of whom she actually knew their names, most of whom she really--my mother was busy.  She didn't have time for a lot of that.  She was not into great big family reunions, with a lot of cooking and all that sort of thing.  In other words, she was a pretty good cook, but that wasn't her thing.  But get her into a conversation and get her going, and that's when she really, really came on.  And she was just, just a terrific person to be around, a great storyteller, and could, tell stories with sailors and statesmen, with equal facility, didn't back down from our old man.  And that was, that was tough because he was somebody who--he'd walk in a room and as I said, he'd take most of the oxygen out of the room.  And it took something to, you know, to deal with him, but she did.  So I think I gathered--I tried to take something from, from her.  But with your father, you know, you're always trying to be your dad, and that's tough to do.  And, you know, you find yourself at a point in my circumstance today, I'm older today than my father was when he passed away.  And it's a very difficult notion to, deal with.  I don't think I'm nearly, half his, his strength.  And I know as a, matter of scientific fact, I'll never have my mother's intellect.  So maybe I do fall somewhere in between the two of them.
Story_ID: 19944
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went elementary school in the neighborhood.  It was called Nathaniel Hawthorne Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I had the great, good fortune--that is very rare and unfortunate today, you don't see much of it, my elementary school was in walking distance, about three blocks away.  My junior high school, middle school today, was one additional block or maybe four blocks away.  And I walked to elementary school and junior high school.  And then when I went to high school, I took the Broad Street subway.  And that was a three or four minute subway ride, five minutes maybe.  So I was really neighborhood, neighborhood schools and neighborhood education.
Speaker 1: Any teachers that impressed you like, well, in your elementary school first?
Speaker 2: Well, elementary school, you'd have to start with my principal, Mr. Sill.  Mr. Sill was all of about four feet, five inches tall.  And today, you might call him a martinet.  We thought of him as a terror.  But he was a great disciplinarian.  Law and order, he gave new meaning to law and order, and really a nice guy.  We had a number of terrific teachers in elementary school.  I had a, physical education teacher, we just called a gym teacher, whose name was Mr. Captain, if you can imagine, Mr. Captain.  A music teacher, Miss Robinson and Mr. Jeter, who played the clarinet.  We just had some wonderful teachers in elementary school.  And in middle school--.
Speaker 1: And the name of the middle school?
Speaker 2: The middle school was the Charles E. Bartlett Middle School.  And in middle school I had just some other terrific teachers and teachers who introduced me to, language and introduced me to lots of different, things.  And remember I was in school from elementary school--actually through high school, with basically, the same group of, youngster as well.  So we were, all kind of learning.  And, and you'd be in school with--and in those days, the neighborhoods were not just stable, they were unchanging, and had not changed.  So when I got to elementary school, the seventh son remember, when I got up to junior high school and high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there were teachers who were waiting for me because they had taught brothers, you know.  And they said, "Oh, You're the latest one."  But, it was a wonderful experience.  And then when I got to high school, I had people like Dr. Rankin and Mr. Lombardi who introduced me to opera, Renaldo Lombardi was his name, Mrs. Clarice Young, who introduced me to Howard University [Washington D.C.], just wonderful, wonderful teachers.
Story_ID: 19945
Speaker 1: When did a teacher first say that you knew that they saw something in you and wanted to nurture you along, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think in elementary school [Nathaniel Hawthorne Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], as I reflect upon it, I had teachers who encouraged me to go to, the library and to read.  We didn't have television, although I must say our, modest circumstances, not withstanding, we got the first television on our block.  But it was a meter television.  You used to drop a quarter, and you could watch television until time ran out.  And at the end of the month, at the end of the week, the fellow would come by and open the meter box.  And that would be your payment for the television.  And, of course, we--everyone soon learned to put slugs in.  And then you'd simply have to make up the difference.  But, but we read, you know.  Remember I was in a household where, you know, my mother [Gustina Huzzy] was reading and my father [Leroy Huzzy] was reading every newspaper that was printed at the time.  So you're just constantly reading and then I think in elementary school, teachers, several of the teachers said to me, you know, "Here's a book.  And take this book home and read it."  And then I got to middle school [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and in middle school, I, began to study Italian and I was reading 'Le avventure di Giovanni Passaguai' and then doing so many other kinds of things, and, began to, to speak a little Italian.  And then, a little introduction, to German.  Then I went to high school, and it continued.  When I got to high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], in those days, they had tracks in Philadelphia public schools.  There was the industrial track, the commercial track, so-called academic track or whatever.  And I found myself in the academic track.  And it was, once you were sort of in that track, there was a sense that you might go on to, college.  And I found teachers, black and white, who were very encouraging to me and looked up and, and no one in my family, my immediate family had been to college.  And college was simply now an aspiration that I necessarily had, but I thought I might do it.  And in my senior year, my father passed away.  And with his death benefit from his union, my mother cut it in half and gave me--she kept half and gave me the other half.  And the rest, as they say, is history.  I went off to college.
Speaker 1: Had any of your siblings before you done well academically like that?
Speaker 2: Very much so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then they were saying here comes, you know, the seventh one.  There had been a history--.
Speaker 2: Well, they had done things, sure.  But they did not have the opportunity to go on to college.  There was no Pell grants, Stafford loans, Pell grants, National Defense loans, that sort of thing.  So they went into the military, which is where I thought I was gonna go.  And as it happened, I, I went to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  That was as close as I got, the ROTC here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 19946
Speaker 1: I want to ask--you said you went--ran as, or won as class president in junior high school [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you talk about that election a little bit (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, (laughter) the junior high school election, as I think about it, was really a stitch.  That, year which was my senior year in junior high school, would have been--no, my eighth, I was in the eighth grade.  And then your, senior year is the ninth grade.  Then high school, tenth, eleventh and twelfth  Well, in the eighth grade, a play was mounted in junior high school, 'My Fair Lady.'  And I played, not Professor Higgins, but I played his, sidekick.  And the kids thought the play was such a scream, and I was such a fool that I gained a bit of notoriety by having enough courage to be that silly, I suppose.  Well, that would have been in the fall.  We had our little elections in the spring for the next, year, and beginning that next September.  And I ran against a fellow whose name, if I recall correctly, was, George, George Digionardo.  And I won, I mean how many people voted, maybe twelve people, I don't know.  But somehow or another, I won.  It was fun, it was fun.
Speaker 1: And then you were, you said, you were a class, what in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was class president.
Speaker 1: Class president also, okay.
Speaker 2: I had my patronage to think of at that point.  I had my, I had my people to represent.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You already had them in place.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 19947
Speaker 1: Now, when you said you grew up with Kenny Gamble, what year, I mean what--?
Speaker 2: Well, that would have been, let's see, that would have been in the mid to late '50s [1950s].  Kenny had a group called, Kenny and the Romeos.  And, of course, everyone had a group then.  And one of my classmates in elementary school [Nathaniel Hawthorne Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], junior high [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] school and high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was someone named Ernest Evans, who you would know as Chubby Checker.  Ernest was in the group with us.  Bobby Rydell was in the group, was, part of that and all in South Philadelphia [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Frankie Avalon was all part of that.  Mario Lanza was ahead of me in, high school.  I wasn't in high school with him.  I think he would have finished--he'd finished high school by the time I got there. But we all went to the same school.  And South Philadelphia High School was considered "rock USA" or some such.  But it's funny, you know, you think about it.  Kenny Gamble and Kenny and the Romeos and Chubby Checker and some of these other people, the, group we thought was gonna make it was a group with a great name.  It was called Sunny Day, was the leader singer, Sunny Day and his Knights, corny, but it worked.  And we thought they really were--I'm not sure what happened to the group, but, it was, a fun time.
Speaker 1: So there was a lot of music around.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, enormous, enormous amount of music.  Groups were being formed and coming up.  And, I've always said that if I had had any talent whatsoever, I would have become a musician, but my mother [Gustina Huzzy], her best efforts notwithstanding, I became at one point a member of the Philadelphia Junior Symphony Orchestra.  I, my mother sent me to the Philadelphia Museum College of Art [now The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I did all these things.  I had no talent and became a lawyer.  There you are.
Speaker 1: But you, did you take clarinet at one point?
Speaker 2: No, no, I did, I did a little bit of trombone, but, in, the junior symphony orchestra, I was a timpanist, the kettledrums.
Speaker 1: And you were saying also that you were introduced, that a teacher had introduced you to opera, I think and did you say--?
Speaker 2: Renaldo Lombardi, Mr. Lombardi.  Mr. Lombardi was a great fan of Italian opera.  And he had us singing, "'Un bel di vedremo, levarsi un fil di fumo,'" the aria from 'Madama Butterfly,' Renata Tebaldi when we were in the ninth and tenth grade.  And I've loved opera ever since.  And we didn't appreciate it at the time.  You know, these street urchins, these scruffy kids, but we were getting a quality of education, in a sense, an add-on that, today folk view as, you know, as incredible.  But we, had language.  we had opera, we had music.  We had, more importantly, we had teachers who really, really were engaged and were willing to, do these things.  I was going to the Academy of Music in Philadelphia when I was in middle school.  Now, this is at a time when we had just--well, not much before that time, we'd gotten central heating in my home.  And we were going to the opera.  And it's--one of the things that it's, convinced me of is that if you expose young people to quality, regardless of the particular mode of--regardless of the particular activity, but if it's quality, it will take hold.  You know, there's a reason why some of the early rock and roll is still played and it's in all the commercials and movies and whatever because it's really good.  You know, early Marvin Gaye is really good music.  I mean it's outstanding music.  And if you listen to Sam Cooke and the Soul Stirrers, that is fabulous music and wonderful musicianship.  What troubles me today--now, I'm gonna sound like a real old timer, is not how crude some of the music is today, but whether it's, really good.  I mean whether it's really good.  You talk to professional musicians, they will tell you that at one time and one point in their careers, they wanted to do two things.  They want to play the great classical scores and they want to play some jazz.  Well there's a reason for that.  And the great musicians aspire to greatness, and that's how they want to express, and they tend to express themselves in greatness.  And you, hope the young people are beginning to understand.  But I had teachers who, you know, exposed me to that.  I mean I was listening to [Johann Sebastian] Bach when I was in high school, and not because, you know, music appreciation.  So you leave gym class and you got to music appreciation and you sit there, and you're, you know, sort of sleeping and nodding away or goofing off, you know, because I had, teachers, you know, who tried to, illustrate the symmetry, the counterpoint, you know, the drama, in the music.  And you, you take the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra, Philadelphia Orchestra, and you take it to 13th and Kater Streets, it's gonna get a crowd.  And folk may not know what score is being played, but they're gonna say, "Boy, that sounds great!," you know, and a 110-piece symphony orchestra live is unbelievable.  It's, it really is a mind blower, it's just tremendous.  Just as early James Brown is a mindblower.  I happen to think even later James Brown, isn't too shabby either.  But I mean, you know, quality is, the point.  And that's what I was--and, of course, we didn't know then.  If anyone had told us this, of course, we'd have run--we'd have ran away from it.  But fortunately, they didn't tell us.
Story_ID: 19948
Speaker 1: I mean not a thing sounds poor in your upbringing in many ways, I mean in terms of I always believed that culture, you know, or people being acculturated brings sort of richness, no matter what economics.  But I want to ask you, what were some of your favorite subjects and what were you thinking you wanted to be at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed history, any form of history.  I, was probably one of the very few students in junior high school [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] who actually enjoyed Pennsylvania history, which in those days was a mandatory course, we had actually a mandatory course in William Penn, if you can imagine.  But I enjoyed history.  And I was particularly fortunate in that, to me, history was not only in the class, but history was in the community because my father's [Leroy Huzzy's] friends, included--they were all--not all, but most were World War II veterans or had some experience in World War II and I had brothers in the Korean War.  So I was hearing about these, these huge events from people who had actually lived through them and were very much aware of them.  And so history, particularly military history, was important to me and language.  I always loved language and, languages and was fortunate in that in South Philadelphia especially, Italian was sort of our second language, well, maybe English was our second language to some extent.  And Italian and then German a little later, and German when I was in school.  So languages was something that I, thoroughly enjoyed, and I worked for a time in Reuben's Delicatessen on, South Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I learned a little bit of Yiddish.  But virtually any, language was, interesting to me because a language introduces you, introduced you and took you to another place and a different place.  And history because you, learn so much about, yourself and about your environment.  And, then I became, not as a student because they had no organized study, but I became the fairly keen observer for the, as a, young person, of religion.  Born, raised and baptized a Catholic, St. Theresa's Roman Catholic Church at Broad [Street] and Catharine [Street], and directly across was the Peace Unity Mission [the Universal Peace Mission Movement] run by Father Divine.  Next door to Father Divine on South Broad Street was Tinley Temple Baptist--Tinley Temple Church, one of the great homes of American gospel music.  And around the corner was, the house of [Sweet] Daddy Grace.  Now, within a block and a half, on a Saturday afternoon, you could see all of this going on.  And I said, "Gee, this is great!  I mean this is, you know, really interesting stuff."  And as a young person, again, I just thought this was everyone's experience.  I didn't realize that I was immersed, being immersed in, a kind of cultural milieu that today, we bring in professional people.  We, we bring in folk, multicultural specialists.  We do a whole host of things to replicate what for us street kids in South Philadelphia was just the, just the ordinary course of things.  And the normal or the natural course of things.
Story_ID: 19949
Speaker 1: Now, what were you thinking you wanted to do though in high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  Did you have the dreams or aspirations of what you wanted to be?
Speaker 2: Well, in the words of my, late and sorely missed mother [Gustina Huzzy], my aspiration was to get a job.  And the question then became, what kind of a job?  A steady job.  What kind of a steady job?  A steady job that paid a little bit of money.  I mean really, they were very modest, very modest aspirations.  I didn't have any aspirations about college per se.  I didn't pine over whether I'd go to college or that sort of thing.  I didn't have any aspirations certainly about being an attorney.  And I didn't know what a university professor or president of a university, I didn't know what that was about and couldn't have aspired to be.  That was--no, that was not part of my, world or my environment.  And they were really modest.  I mean I, simply wanted to, wanted to get a job.  And I thought going into the [U.S.] Marine Corps, which is where I was headed when I finished high school, would have been pretty neat as well.  Several of my friends went to the Marine Corps.  And that's where I thought I was going.
Story_ID: 19950
Speaker 1: I came to Howard [University, Washington D.C.] in 1961 and shortly thereafter became a waiter on campus.  And we used to wait tables in what was known as the Trustee's Dining Room at that time.  Each Sunday after chapel, in the old days, the president would have supper for the chapel speaker, whoever was the speaker that Sunday.  And I recall one Sunday Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke at chapel and President [James M.] Nabrit [attorney, educator] had a dinner reception for him afterwards.  And before the dinner began, the president lined up all of the youngsters, all of my buddies and I who were gonna be waiting tables for the, in the Trustee's Dining Room, maybe four or five of us.  And I recall the president doing down the line, this is President Nabrit, and he looked at each of us.  And he said, now, "Dr. King is our guest this afternoon."  He said, "I don't want any foolishness out of you people.  Just serve the food, don't say anything.  And get back in the kitchen," and whatever.  You know, you could, say things like that in those days as president of the university.  Well, Dr. King came in, and Dr. King said, "I want to meet the young men who are waiting the tables.  I want to meet the young fellows."  So we all lined up, and Dr. King walked down.  And he got to, got to me, and he said--and the president was right on his shoulder, President Nabrit, the president was sort of glowering at us, you know, "Don't you say anything.  This is Dr. King, just say hello and just keep--."  Well, he got to me and he said, "Now, where are you from?  And I said, "Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]."  He said, "Oh, you're from Philadelphia." He said, "Do you know Reverend Gray?"  And the Reverend Gray he was referring was Reverend William Gray, former [U.S.] Congressman [William H.] Gray [III]'s father.  That's who he was referring to.  So I said, "Oh, why certainly, Bright Hope Baptist Church."  So President Nabrit said, "You don't know Reverend Gray."  "Ah, sure," I said, "yes, sir, I do."  So, Dr. King was intrigued, and he, knew that the president was over on his shoulder, you know.  So Dr. King said to me, he said, "Now, young man," said, "now, you're from Philadelphia."  He said, "Well, you know, I went to Chester Crozier, I went to the, to the seminary [Crozier Theological Seminary] up there."  I said, "Oh, yes, sir, I know that."  And he said, "Now, what's your major?"  Now, I've already taken up--according to President Nabrit's calendar, or clock, I'm way over time.  And Dr. King was supposed to be down the line and seen it and the rest.  So Dr. King said, "Now, now, what's your major?"  And I had run out of things to say.  When he said what's your major, the only thing I could say was, "Graduation."  So (laughter) President Nabrit said, "That's enough, let's go, let's keep going, let's keep going."  So that was, that was that, very modest aspirations, graduation.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That is an adorable story.
Speaker 1: True story.
Story_ID: 19951
Speaker 1: How did the decision come though for Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  You said, one--.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Clarice Young was a homeroom teacher in South Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Her homeroom was next door to my homeroom.  And in the morning, you'd go, what is it, 8:00, 8:30 for a half hour or so.  They'd take attendance and whatever, and then they'd send you off to your, classes.  Well, her homeroom was next door to mine.  And I'd sort of gotten to know her.  I would see her in the corridor and whatever.  And, of course, Mrs. Young knew everybody in the school.  One day she pulled aside, and she said, "Well, now, what are you gonna do in the fall?  I said, "In the fall?"  You know, this would have been in, in January, let's say, perhaps or December.  What are you gonna do next fall?  I was, "Gee, I don't know.  I'll graduate and then maybe go into the--."  No, it must have been, it must have been in November--October or November 1960.  When I graduated from, from school, I came out in December 1960.  In those days, you could graduate the half-year.  So I graduated the half--I came out in--.
Speaker 1: You graduated early?
Speaker 2: Early, yes.  I was out of school almost a year before I went to college.  In any event, so she said to me, "Well, now, what are you gonna do after December or January when school's over?"  I said, well, you know, I said, "I told you, Mrs. Young, going to the [U.S.] Marine Corps or the military or whatever."  She said, "No, you're gonna go to Howard."  I said, "Howard?"  So one, what is a Howard?  And two, why do I want to go there?  You know, what did I do?  She said, "Well, you know what it is.  It's a university."  And it turns out she had an undergrad, an undergraduate degree and her master's from Howard.  And she said, "Now, I want you to write and get an application."  I said, okay, humor Mrs. Young.  I wrote, got an application and sent in my, sent in, filled it out, sent it in.  And much to my surprise, within a matter of a month or two, I got a letter back saying, "Congratulations, you have been admitted to, the first-year class at Howard University."  And I looked at the letter, and I of course, I shook the letter to see if there was a second page because I didn't see anything in it about money.  And then I had to-- it was considering how was I gonna do this.  But she said, not to worry, we'll figure something out.  And, and we'll make something happen.  And my father [Leroy Huzzy] had passed away that September.  And my mother got a death benefit from his union, which I think was all of four hundred dollars.  And I worked that year, and I had those--I had two hundred dollars to start with, and then I worked.  And she took me to the train station that September, that coming September and said, you know, good luck to you, wish you the best.  Don't write home for money.  Don't call and reverse the charges.  We'll see you when you graduate.  And that's pretty much what she said, by the way.  And I did her about four years later after graduation--I saw her from time to time in between as well.
Story_ID: 19952
Speaker 1: Now, when you come, this is your first time really away from your environment?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And so--.
Speaker 2: First time out of South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And what is it like because this is a whole different world here than what you had experienced?
Speaker 2: Well, when you think of Washington, D.C. in those days and Philadelphia, I thought I was going to the Deep South so I expected, you know--I don't know what I expected, but I wasn't too keen about the city, about what I would find in the city.  When I got to campus, I really thought I had passed into another universe because I had never seen so many attractive, beautiful women in my life.  And I said, gee, I mean how long has this been going on. And I want to be here for a long time.  I didn't realize I'd be here for seven years, but--so that was, you know, it's a, to an eighteen year-old kid, that was, that really was my first impression.  The second impression was, it's gonna be tough here.  There're very bright people here, very tough.  And I've got to work and study, and I got to get a job.  So within a few days I had a job.  I was working Bon Bread Baking Company here in Washington, down the street actually from the university.  Actually, I had two jobs in my first week.  I was a desk attendant, and I was working Bon Bread Baking Company.  In fact, many people thought I came to Washington to work.  They didn't know I was in school, including my classmates.  Fortunately, my, some of my instructors knew better.
Speaker 1: So you didn't even have a major at that point or did you have one?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Story_ID: 19953
Speaker 1: Was your first year [at Howard University, Washington D.C.]--did it take you some time getting adjusted and were you--had any lingering issues with your father's death?
Speaker 2: No, my father [Leroy Huzzy] died quite suddenly.  And you don't--I think when you're at a certain age and you lose a parent suddenly, it was this--there was no anticipation, there was no expectation, you're, working in a barbershop.  You, somebody walks around a corner of the barber from where you live, and they just say to you, "Daddy's dead."  And you say, "I beg your pardon?"  They say, "Daddy's dead."  "How's that possible?  I just saw him."  So when that happens, I think, I don't think there was anything that lingers in the sense that I think you're putting it.  I think it's every day.  Every day, it's--and, and even today, it's now forty, it's forty-two years later, and you're still, everyday, it still, whereas, you know, with my mother's [Gustina Huzzy's] passing, it's, it was a different--she, she was very ill for, for a long time.  And it was, it was giving her some peace.  With my father, it was very different.  But so, I didn't have any issue in the sense of, in mourning as such.  It was, it was sort of a perma-state of shock, a perma-state of, expecting someone to walk around the corner and say, that, that was--I didn't mean to say that, or that just didn't happen.  And at sixty, you're still waiting for that.  But when I got to school here at Howard, because of my experience in high school [South Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and leading up to high school, and quite candidly, because I had such a fabulous education, I was, in pretty good shape.  And I had worked in high school, in junior high school [Charles E. Bartlett Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So working and going to school was, there was no, particular issue there.  And it was just, to me, it was just very, very exciting and a lot of fun and a lot of work, a lot of work.
Story_ID: 19954
Speaker 1: How did you grow and sort of change?  You know, I say college is a good place, you know, you grow a lot during those times in finding yourself (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Well, perhaps because my experience in South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was so intense, I didn't have in my view today, the kind of a childhood where I had a year or two or three to sort of find myself.  I was, I was fairly adult when I was eighteen here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I guess one misses that, but I didn't--I don't see, I don't, and I think I'm pretty much the same.  In fact, I think there's another phenomena that takes place.  And I was home, as I said, in, Philadelphia on Friday and was talking to a dear friend.  I think I'm going backwards.  I think I'm becoming more like eighteen and nineteen than I am what other folk might think I am at sixty.  You know what I give to go to the Pep Bar [Pep's Music Bar], that atmosphere, to hear those bands, just one time, just one time.  But where, where can you find that today?  I want to go back to that.  You know, I want to hear Duke Ellington.  I want to hear Count Basie or I want to see Billy Eckstine [singer] coming down a street, you know, with a, white camel coat, a wrap-around coat with that big roll collar.  I mean that to me was, it was just wonderful.  So that's what I wanted, you know, this, this business about being sixty and responsible is for the birds.  Who needs that?
Story_ID: 19955
Speaker 1: Well, who influenced you here [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?  Who did you meet?  You know, who were some of your classmates and--?
Speaker 2: Well, here, when I got to Howard, I mean my classmates, the faculty and the environment, I mean incredibly bright people.  It started with my first roommate Purnell Jones, who now lives in Cleveland, Ohio.  He was originally from Baltimore [Maryland], and a terrific guy and we got along fine.  Then my other, later roommates as well.  But, and then there were older students.  I had the unique distinction, some might say it's infamy, when I was a freshman, living in my residence hall, it was an upper-class residence hall.  There were juniors and seniors basically, and some sophomores.  I was only there because the freshman male dorm was filled up, and they put me in Cook Hall.  And I was elected president of Cook Hall.  And I was elected president, I subsequently found out, because I had a compelling platform.  My platform was a party every Wednesday night.  And that trumped one of my classmates who asked for more study hours or some such, I don't know.  But I met all these older guys, if you will, and--in Cook Hall.  So I thought I was kind mature at eighteen anyway.  Now, I'm around these upperclassmen, boy, I'm really an old timer and really a wise guy in a sense.  And so that was very influential.  And then I fell in with some of the student activists.  The then president of the student association, a tremendous intellectual and a great scholar and a dear friend, Michael Winston, who became academic vice president for Howard University, pitied me and tried to bring me along and introduce me to the other Howard of, intellectualism, as opposed to the Howard of hanging out which, of course, I gravitated quite naturally to the Howard of hanging out and, the rest of it.  Stokely Carmichael, Kwame Ture was someone who I got to know quite well.  Stanley Wise and Courtland Cox and all these guys who were very active and very much engaged in, the struggle, if you will.  And so I kind of fell in with these folk, and that was a tremendous education as well.  And then the faculty, I mean, you know, folk talk about [Dr.] Sterling Brown, well, I remember Sterling Brown.  I was part of the transition generation.  [Dr.] Rayford Logan, Rayford Logan taught me in history.  And it just goes on and on and on and on.  And folk like Dr. William Banner in Philosophy and all these people, you know.  [Dr.] E. Franklin Frazier came in and lectured.  I mean these are people who were my faculty.  And so when folk begin to reminisce and talk about back in the day and whatever, I was back--I am back--I am part of back in the day.  But I say to those folks as well, today, today, having lived through that period, today is a better day.  Today is a better day.  Students are stronger in my view.  They're just as engaged.  They're engaged differently though, because the issues are different.  They're engaged in their own way.  Faculty, outstanding faculty.  We just published an alumni magazine, the latest issues of the alumni magazine, and we highlighted the faculty, fabulous, both senior faculty and equally important, tremendous young people faculty.  But all those, all those were influences.  We celebrated the home going of a dean, a long-serving dean a couple months ago, a couple weeks ago, Dean Carroll Miller.  Dean Miller passed away recently at ninety-three years of age.  And he was wonderful man.  He was as close to Mr. Chips as you're gonna find virtually anywhere.  Walter Pidgeon [sic, Robert Donat played the role of Mr. Chips], notwithstanding.  He was a wonderful, wonderful man.  And I can still hear his voice, and I can hear in his voice the sense of, you will do this because this is expected of you as a Howard man, and you'll be a better person for it.  And you believe it, and you did that.  Well, here are those--how important are those personalities, here or anywhere.
Story_ID: 19956
Speaker 1: Now, what was the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] of the early '60s [1960s] like?  What was the, you know, the campus sort of environment?  What were--?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna say two things.  One, it was not what people would like to characterize it as being, namely, this cauldron of activism and everybody was engaged and demonstrating and protesting and the rest of it.  That's the first thing I want to say.  The second thing I want to say is that some people, some large number of people were, in fact, engaged in protesting and demonstrating and, doing a lot of things to press the agenda for civil rights.  Now, mind you, in 1961, when I came to Howard, it was less than a decade from 1954 when 'Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas'].  Washington was still a segregated city.  So those of us who were, if you will activists, were active.  But many students were, I mean just here, having a good time and doing their thing, whatever that might have been, studying, getting their work done, and going about their business.  But there were a substantial number of folk who were very much involved, and the issues, in a sense, compelled you to be involved.  And, and also, remember in 1961, virtually every attorney who litigated the 'Brown' cases, most of whom were Howard people, were still very much alive and well and in front of us.  They were there in 1965 when I started law school, which was only slightly more than a decade.  So you were involved in it.  It was live, it was--it wasn't history.  It was today.  And so all the--many of us were caught up in it, and happily so.
Story_ID: 19957
Speaker 1: Were you influenced by any particular teachers here [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?  And can you talk about who they were and, you know, and why?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I was influenced by Frank Snowden.  Dr. Snowden was dean of the College of Liberal Arts as it was known then, now the College of the Arts and Sciences, a great Classicist and scholar.  And I worked in the dean's office under the tutelage of Dean Carroll Miller [educator], who was the assistant dean for the College of Liberal Arts and with a tremendous influence on several generations of Howard students.  In fact, at Dean Miller's [funeral] services [2003], three of his former student assistants spoke. One, Harold Logan, who was the first African American dean of a majority medical school in this country, medical school of--Rutgers Medical School [now UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway and New Bruswick, New Jersey].  The second person who spoke, another one of his student assistants was [Mayor] David Dinkins, former mayor of New York [New York], and I spoke.  So we had those kinds of personalities.  And then in terms of teaching, teaching faculty, so many people, Herman Branson is a professor of physics and later became president of Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania.  In the history department, of course, [Dr.] Rayford Logan taught and, and [Dr.] Sterling Brown.  And, and really it just goes on and on and on--so many--I was on campus with, though I never took a course from him, I witnessed his musicianship, and that's Dean [Warner] Lawson of the college of--the old College of Fine Arts, great musician, great choirmaster.  [Dean] Evans Crawford who was dean of the chapel, I mean all of these people just had tremendous, tremendous influence.
Story_ID: 19958
Speaker 1: Now, when did you decide you wanted to go to law school, that's--.
Speaker 2: Well, I--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) 'Cause you said, "I came not knowing." I was just--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought of law school, I would think in my junior year.  I had intended to, to get a Ph.D. in history.  I was a history major, an economics minor.  Some of my friends were going to law school.  The lawyers I met seemed to be really doing just very exciting kinds of things and were very much engaged with the social and political issues that I was concerned about.  And Howard's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] was just an exciting place and so closely wedded and identified to the Civil Rights Movement and struggle that I thought that's the place I needed to be, and applied to law school my junior year, and was accepted, decided to pursue my senior year--rather safe than sorry.  And so I continued my senior year and graduated and then went on to the law school.  And there I met Frank Reeves, Herb Reed, Julian Dugas, George E. C. Hayes, Luke, Luke Moore, Pat, Patricia Roberts Harris, Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Paul Miller, Oliver Otis Morse, Newton Pack, Egon Guttman, I mean it really does go on and on.
Speaker 1: Now, when you applied in junior year--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Julius Parks also, again, Professor Parks, a dear friend.
Speaker 1: But when you applied and got accepted in you junior year, are you saying you could have skipped a year?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I could have, yes, I could have gone into law school at the end of my junior year.
Speaker 1: And then what made you decide not to do that?  You said, "Better safe than sorry."
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother [Gustina Huzzy].  "You're not down there just to be going to school; you're down there to get something that you can do something with."  And that was another way of saying, "You'd better get a piece of paper saying you can do something."  And she didn't quite put it that way, but we came to an understanding that it might be good for me to have a--an undergraduate degree.
Story_ID: 19959
Speaker 1: Just the one other thing about your study of history.  Was there any special area that fascinated you?  I know you said previously--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Marcus Garvey.  When I was a history major at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], each senior was required to do a senior thesis.  And my in my thesis--a book had recently been published called 'Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey [and the Universal Negro Improvement Association'].  And I decided to do my thesis on Marcus Garvey.  And as it happened, the beginning of my senior year, I was back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and got a haircut at Pullman's Barbershop. Owner, operator and chief barber named Mr. Terry, in Pullman's Barbershop.  And in the course of getting my hair cut, you know, you're going back to the neighborhood, and you're getting your hair cut.  And the old timers said, "Now what, what are you learning down there at, at the university, boy?"  And I said, "Well, you know, sir, I'm doing this."  They said, "Oh, yeah, well, let me tell you something about so and so."  Whatever the subject, the old guys could tell you something about it.  Well, I happened to say that I thought I was gonna do a piece on Marcus Garvey.  Well, Mr. Terry, who was cutting my hair, stopped cutting my hair.  And I said, "Uh, oh, I ripped it now.  Here it comes.  He's gonna give a real lecture now."  He put his--his clippers down, went into the back of the shop--now, in every barbership in every black neighborhood, there's a back of the barbershop, where all kinds of things are happening, you know.  You got the insurance policies back there.  You've got Coca-Cola cases.  You've got all kinds of things happening in the back of the barbershop.  Well, he went in the back of the barbershop and came back out with a cleaners--a dry cleaners, not rack, but, you know, a, sort of like you put suits in, kind of a thing, and the word escapes me.  And within this dry cleaners bag, he pulled the bag up, and it was a uniform.  It turns out it was his, it was his Marcus Garvey Army uniform.  He was a Lieutenant in Marcus Garvey's army [offshoot of the United Negro Improvement Association] and showed me his uniform.  And he said, "Now, write about this."  Well, of course, that was the end of hair--I asked him to finish my haircut.  But then we--I had to sit him down.  And we talked about Marcus Garvey and Philadelphia and Mr. Terry and his role as a lieutenant in Marcus Garvey's army.  And it was just, it was absolutely wonderful, absolutely wonderful, yes.
Speaker 1: And your view on Marcus Garvey--'cause I just found out that Dorothy Height was one of his assistants at one time. But what did that--because this goes back to even your father [Leroy Huzzy] and him being a race man.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, yeah, he was a Garveyite.
Speaker 1: He was a Garvey--oh, you never said that.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--was--did your research uncover anything that you were sort of surprised about?
Speaker 2: Well, not my research then, because the sources were rather limited.  But what I suspected and what has now been confirmed, the Black Star Line [steamship company], which was the--the so-called trans-oceanic passenger line--I say so-called because it never really got off the ground--passenger line that Marcus Garvey sought to, to start in order to transport African Americans back and forth from the United States to the--to Africa, to the Caribbean [Sea], to wherever they might want to go. The Black Star Line clearly was sabotaged by the United States--by agents of the United States government.  That--that's clear now.  Many of Marcus Garvey's closest associates were, in fact, paid government informers.  That's now been documented.  They were on the payroll of the--of what became the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the [U.S.] Department of Justice.  Much of his aspirations, therefore, were sabotaged from the inside out, and at that--and then in one sense, he really didn't have a chance once he became a national, national radical, black personality. He was pretty much left alone when he was purely local, but when he became a national personality, and began to preach black self-empowerment, black self-help, notions that today are not only commonplace, but almost considered pass they're so mild and innocent and so obvious, if you will, he was considered a very, very dangerous personality.  And was really destroyed in large measure by his so-called close in lieutenants who were, in turn, literally, not figuratively, literally on the payroll of the United States government.  The confirmation of that was just that, a confirmation of what I suspected as an undergraduate student.  But when you're an undergraduate student, you know, you're in the dormitory, you're sitting on the steps of Douglas Hall, you're shooting the breeze with colleagues, and everything's a conspiracy.  But it turns out there were a lot of conspiracies as it happens, and that was certainly of them.
Speaker 1: Were you, at that point in your life, were you, would you have described yourself as a race man also?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.
Story_ID: 19960
Speaker 1: Now, when you came to your--did you find there was much difference or demands on you as a student as a young law student your first year [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No, the demands were what you would anticipate, what one would expect of any first-year law student that were impossible. Lots of material to read and digest and, and try to have some inkling as to what all this is about, totally unreasonable faculty. Over-achieving classmates, just what you'd find most other places.  And in addition to all that, you needed to have your, in a sense, we didn't have political correctness in those days, but the correct thing to do, and for us, frankly, was the only thing to do, one was aligned with, with the still unfinished agenda for human and civil rights and which we took very seriously, and then I would hope we continue to take seriously.
Speaker 1: Now, were you thinking that you wanted to be a litigator at that point or a trial lawyer?  You weren't even sure--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, but how about a civil rights lawyer?  Were you thinking--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I thought I would be involved some--in some way in civil rights, whether--whether litigating cases or advising individuals or organizations or community groups.  I thought I'd be somehow involved, but it wasn't very clear to me as to how I would be involved.
Speaker 1: So which course did you like the best, and which did you not like at, you know, you liked the least, like even your first year?
Speaker 2: Well, it's an interesting question.  Having talked so much about civil rights, my first year I found, and, and it turns out I had an affinity for the business-related courses, the corporations, securities regulation, which is what I taught myself when I was in law school.  Law school for me, and reading cases, was a continuation of my history work.  And I found the cases fascinating from a history and a--point of view, if you will.  So maybe I approached them differently.  I found law school--it would be too much to say easy, but I didn't find law school as challenging as perhaps some of other colleagues did.  I thought it was just terrific.  I thought the, the Socratic method was terrific.  I thought reading the cases was terrific.  I was obnoxious, in other words, as a first-year law student to my classmates I'm sure, perhaps the faculty as well.
Speaker 1: So you had your hand up all the time (laughs).
Speaker 2: There's a, there's a--Doonesbury [cartoon strip] has a character--had a character and each time the teacher would ask a question, regardless of the nature of the question, this character would say, "I got it, I got it, call on me, call on me."  Well, it turns out the character's name was Haywood, which is my first name.  And I've seen that, and that was kind of me my first year, I guess.
Speaker 1: So was there--you gravitated towards the business courses?
Speaker 2: As it happens, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 19961
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite professors at law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, well, it's hard to point out any one professor.  I mean, they were, they were all,
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You met (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: They were all my, my favorites.  I had my first--my first class in law school, literally my very first class, was taught by a man named Julian Raleigh Dugas, who is now in mid-eigthies and still a member of the law faculty and still teaches at the law school, and has become a dear friend of mine, and was an assistant to [U.S. Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall, George E. C. Hayes and company in 'Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas,' 1954], and, in fact, has in his possession the original receipts for the printing of the briefs in 'Brown v. Board of Education.'  And that's how I started.  I mean I started with this man.  I mean this man was in front of me.  So if you say, favorite, if, you know, the--one might call him a favorite, but then I'd have to say that Jeanus Parks, who gave me an opportunity to be a Ford Foundation Fellow as a law student, was not my favorite.  Or I would have to say that Oliver Otis Morse, known to generations of Howard law students as Red Morse, was not my favorite, though his notes in agency and partnerships and corporate law, took me through three bar examinations in three very different jurisdictions, and is another very dear friend. Herbert Oder Reed, was one of the great Constitutional lawyers and thinkers in this country was not my favorite, or Frank Reeves, after whom a major building, this whole building is named here in Washington [D.C.], 14th and U Streets, was not my favorite.  I mean I would have to exclude all these other people.  And that would not be a good thing to do.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Story_ID: 19962
Speaker 1: What about the Ford Foundation--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Ford Foundation, yes.
Speaker 1: What was--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Ford Foundation provided a substantial grant to Howard's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I would say, it would have been 1963, '64 [1964], and the purpose of the grant was to upgrade the curriculum, to hire new faculty, to purchase more materials for the library.  It was a--it was an institutional-building grant.  And part of the grant was to designate a number of faculty as research faculty, and to give them more resources to complete their resource--research, including monies to hire research assistants.  I was the first Ford Foundation Fellow at Howard's law school.  I was hired by Professor Jeanus Parks, who had a number of research projects.
Speaker 1: And why did you work--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was the first James A. Cobb Fellow [at Howard University School of Law].
Story_ID: 19963
Speaker 1: Where were you working, like during the summers?
Speaker 2: Everywhere.  My first year in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I was a police officer in Washington [D.C.].  As I said before, both in undergraduate school and to some extent law school, people thought I was working.  "You mean he's also in school?" was the question that you'd hear from time to time.  I was a police officer my senior year in college and my first year in law school.
Speaker 1: And then what about after your second year?
Speaker 2: Oh, after that, I worked in law firms, law offices.  I did--I did a little bit of everything.  I mean I did--can't imagine, I mean I just can't imagine.  It's hard for me to recall the number of jobs that I had, including the Library of Congress and a host of other things.
Story_ID: 19964
Speaker 1: But you graduated [from Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] cum laude, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when you graduated, what was your first job out of law school?  You--what was your first--well, you were a law clerk, right?
Speaker 2: I was law clerk to Chief Judge William Henry Hastie of the Third [U.S.] Circuit Court of Appeals, one of the great jurists in this nation's history.  I was just absolutely blessed.  Judge Hastie was a mentor of [U.S. Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall.  And he was, he was a first.  He graduated first in his class from Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], first in his class from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], first African American federal district court judge, first African American governor of the Virgin Islands, first African American federal appeals court judge.  And he was first in being a nice guy.  He was just a tremendous person, gave me an opportunity to clerk for him, and when you clerk for Judge Hastie, try as you might to overcome this, there is a presumption that you're bright and that you have a future.  And as hard as I've worked to dispel that notion, it stuck with me most of my career, the fact that I had that going for me.  And even my conduct, notwithstanding, people still give me that benefit of the doubt knowing that I clerked with Judge Hastie.  So it was, it was a wonderful opportunity to--to spend the time with the Judge.  And he was just a terrific person, had been a professor and dean of Howard's law school himself. And worked with the great Charles Hamilton Houston [educator, civil rights attorney], whose work in large measure has set us all free, yeah.
Speaker 1: You when, because--just so people understand that clerkships are sort of prized possessions coming out of law school.  Everyone doesn't get a clerkship.  But--right--what did you learn during that time, though, with, you know, Judge Hastie?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, yes.
Speaker 1: And what--do you remember any particular cases that you--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, sure, sure.  It was a wide variety of cases, from patent law cases to maritime cases and civil rights cases.  What you learned was you had the opportunity to sit really, really at the right hand of a master, of a brilliant jurist, a wonderful legal scholar and thinker and writer, and to be that, to be up close and to be paid for it.  It was a tremendous opportunity.  And it, it elevated your game, if you will, because you had an opportunity to see the best in the judiciary.  And few people have the opportunity to see that up close and personal, which is what I had the opportunity to do.
Speaker 1: And then you did that for what was it one--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That was one year.
Speaker 1: One year, okay.
Speaker 2: That was at 9th and Chestnut Streets in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the old courthouse, which is walking distance from Kater Street by the way.
Speaker 1: And then you moved from there to--well, can you talk about one case that you, particularly struck during the time that--was there any?
Speaker 2: Well, there was one case that had to do with a maritime dispute that took place in Ozama--in, in Ozama Bay [sic, no such bay exists in Tokyo] in Tokyo [Japan], and I just thought it was just such a romantic case due to the setting.  It was on like an old 1940s black and white movie or something, you know.  But it was a very interesting case, and I wrote my clerk's brief that way.  The Judge--and this is a great lesson I have never, never forgotten--the Judge said, you know, "This is great, this is beautifully written, dramatic, of course, it has nothing to do with this case.  Now, if you can write something plain and simple to the point that I can understand and that counsel can understand, now you're doing what you need to do, that's, that's grounded in the law."  And I took something away from that.  Don't be a dramatist, just get it right, get it straight, and make sure it's grounded in, in fact, law and good sound policy.  And I've tried to, to be that way.  And so I remember the case for that, for that reason.
Story_ID: 19965
Speaker 1: Now, you went from there to working for, was it--who did you work for--?
Speaker 2: I went to Debevoise, Plimpton, Lyons & Gates [law firm] in New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: Now, you should talk about--because this is what year?  This is 1965--?
Speaker 2: This was not, no, no.  This is, no, I finished law school in '68 [1968].  I clerked from '68 [1968] to '69 [1969]--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Okay, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: Went to New York in the latter part of '69 [1969] and was there until 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Debevoise is, you know, really what they call a silking--silk stocking--.
Speaker 2: A white shoe firm, white shoe firm.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) White shoe firm, okay. So--so how, what is that experience like though?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well there was--.
Speaker 1: Because--and how many blacks were at Debevoise?
Speaker 2: I was the only one at the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Had they had any before you?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no, no.  Well, it was interesting.  But now, recall, I had survived South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Howard [University, Washington, D.C.],clerking with Judge [William H.] Hastie.  This was a piece of cake.  And so this was not--I didn't find this to be a particular challenge.  I mean I had been around brilliant people, beginning in elementary school, as it happens.  And I was now around smart lawyers, but I had been around smart people for a very long time.  The people were cordial, supportive.  I made a number of friends who are still friends today.  I think--I think they're--they're rather proud of my history, my experience since the firm.  And I'm proud of that firm as well.  It's an excellent firm, good people there.  It was just a very positive experience.  I mean I have no--no horror stories to tell.  I have no stories of somehow or another walking into a room and people dropping a pencil when they see me.  It was a, it was a good--it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: What did you learn from that experience, cause I think a lot of times, you know, corporate law firms, there's a lot to be learned in terms of skills.  You see things operating at a different level.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right, right.
Speaker 1: So what did you learn there that supplemented what you had learned working for Judge Hastie?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, I can't think of a substantive thing that I learned in the sense of, you know, you learn how to write better or that sort of thing.  What I learned is that I could do that.  And I think for African Americans, it's--that's the most important thing to learn.  You can do this.  It's doable.  You know, it's--it can be done.  It's not impossible.  You can pretty much do anything any other human being can do, if you've got the energy, enough skill, and enough intellectual firepower.  There's no great--no great mystery, I mean, there's no--there's no secret room where all the--the good stuff is hidden if I just access, then I could do that.  No, you work your tail off and you can get it done as well.  Now, the issue is, are you gonna be given the opportunity to do it, and having done it, will you be acknowledged and recognized for doing so.  That's the challenge.  That's the challenge.
Speaker 1: But also, the thing is, is that you had come from an environment where you had been nurtured along, and assumed that you could do it--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But what--you were there two years?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Were there any other African Americans there during that time or hired while you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, shortly after I arrived, another African American, John Dean, actually was his name, not of Watergate infamy--John arrived and when I left, he was the only African American there.  And they've since hired others and some other things, yeah.
Story_ID: 19966
Speaker 1: So you left there [Debevoise, Plimpton, Lyons & Gates law firm] and went to work--.
Speaker 2: I left there and spent the next couple of years with [U.S.] Congressman Charles Bernard Rangel in Washington [D.C.], and met Charlie when he was a young New York State Assemblyman--met him in Manhattan.  And he told me that it was his intention, his aspiration, to challenge one [U.S. Congressman] Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] for his seat in the United States Congress.  And I said to myself, if he's crazy and wacky enough to take this on, I'm crazy and wacky enough to sign up.  And he was successful [1970].  He asked me to come to Washington as his administrative assistant.  And I think if--had he known what an administrative assistant was required to do, he would not have offered me the job, and had I known what an administrative assistant was required to do, I would not have accepted the job.  But in our joint ignorance, you know, off--off we went, and he--as you know, he's become a great Congressman, the fourth--fifth ranking member of the United States Congress, a terrific legislator and a great guy, and he's always been a very, very dear friend of mine.
Speaker 1: President Swygert, are you saying that you were--you start working with him when you first got to New York [New York]?  Is that what you said--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no, no, while in New York, I met him, while I was at Debevoise.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, but during--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And during that time, he ran for office, and I helped him, and--Charlie, he--after the primary in which he defeated Adam Powell, there were a number of court challenges, in state and federal court.  I was part of his defense team, if you will.  And Charlie likes to tell the story that with me, he didn't have much of a lawyer.  And of course, my response is, "I didn't have much of a client either."  He didn't pay me very much, and, of course, I didn't render much service, but we survived and got to Washington together.
Story_ID: 19967
Speaker 1: Now, you met a lot of people during that time too, right, in New York [New York], the whole New York political thing?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah I was very fortunate.  I mean I--I got to know Percy Sutton, and [New York City Mayor] David Dinkins, and Carl McCall, and Basil Paterson, and just a whole host of people.  And then one of my dearest friends, Drew Saunders Days [III], who went on, who's with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, went on to become assistant attorney general for civil rights, then Solicitor General of the United States.  He now holds a chair [Alfred M. Rankin Professor of Law] at Yale [University] Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].  I met Drew in New York, and a great, great friend, and a wonderful, wonderful advocate for civil and human rights in this nation, terrific person.
Story_ID: 19968
Speaker 1: So when you came to Washington [D.C.]--the whole statement about, I didn't know and he didn't know, can you sort of--.
Speaker 2: Well, we were two young guys.  Charlie [U.S. Congressman Charles Rangel] was fresh out of the New York [State] Assembly.  I was just fresh out, I mean I didn't know anything.  But Charlie's a very quick study, and soon enough he was being taken very seriously on Capitol Hill.  And I just studied a lot harder and longer--needed to study a lot harder and longer.  And after a while, I had gotten to know what an administrative assistant really was, was asked to do--the short job description is everything, and got to know the other administrative assistants.  The Congressional Black Caucus was much smaller.  There were eight--only eight or nine of us at that time.  And we just had a great time of it.  And then in 1972, I got a call to return home, went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And from 1972 to 1990, I was incognito as a professor of law at Temple University [Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for eighteen years.  And the last eight of those eighteen years, I was a vice president, and the last three of those eight, I was executive vice president of the university.  Then one afternoon, minding my own business, I was offered the presidency of the State University in New York [SUNY] at Albany [Albany, New York], got there in 1990.  They caught up with me in 1995, found out what I was really about and sent me back to Washington in 1995, when I became president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
