Story_ID: 94462
Speaker 1: My name, as interviewer for the HistoryMakers, is Sandra Ford Johnson.  The videographer's name is Scott Stearn, Stearns, and the observers here today for our interview are Miss Ray Parr Moore and Mr. Larry Crowe.  Ma'am, we would like for you to begin by stating your name and spelling it for us, please.
Speaker 2: My name is Roma Jones Stewart.  R-O-M-A, J-O-N-E-S, S-T-E-W-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: And your name at birth and the spelling, please.
Speaker 2: At birth I was Roma Eunice Jones.  That's, E-U-N-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Any other names?
Speaker 2: That's all.
Speaker 1: And spellings?  Nicknames?
Speaker 2: No nicknames.
Speaker 1: Your birth date please.
Speaker 2: August 10, 1936.
Speaker 1: And that would make you what age?
Speaker 2: 67, I believe.
Speaker 1: You were born in what city, please?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 3rd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And we are located for this interview where?
Speaker 2: In my law office at 39 South LaSalle Street in Chicago.
Story_ID: 94463
Speaker 1: We begin the interview, Ms. Stewart, by asking a few simple warm-up questions that only require short answers.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  I don't know.  I love all food regardless of ethnicity, so I really couldn't say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Salt Lake City.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?  Any favorite words that come to mind?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Story_ID: 94464
Speaker 1: As a part of our HistoryMaker project, we're very interested in your family background, and please tell us the name of your parents; your parents' names?
Speaker 2: My father was Sidney A. Jones, Jr., and my mother was Roma Lawson Jones.
Speaker 1: And the names of your siblings in birth order?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  My sister is four years younger than I am; she's Laurel Jones Boyd.  And my brother is the youngest.  He is Sidney A. Jones, III.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: The furthest back I have gone is about 1740 in Virginia.
Speaker 1: That's quite a ways.  And that's probably further than anyone--than many people have been able to trace their ancestors.  How did you begin that investigation?
Speaker 2: Of this particular ancestor or in general?
Speaker 1: In general.
Speaker 2: Well, in general, I had not much interest in genealogy.  I thought genealogy was for white people, and that we were told we didn't have any genealogy.  But my great-grandmother used to say, "Our people were never slaves."  And I thought she was out of her mind, really, because the books that I had in school taught me that we were all slaves.  So one day in Washington, D.C., I ran by the archives.  And I knew our people had come from North Carolina in 1838.  So I looked in the 1830 census, and to my amazement, I saw not only my ancestors there enumerated as free people, but also hundreds and hundreds of other free blacks.  And I was shocked.  This was in direct contradiction to everything I've been taught all my life.  And after the shock wore off, I became enraged; enraged that all of this had been hidden from me.  So I became almost fanatic to find out more about these people.  And I dug up their marriage records, their--they left estates; they wrote wills and left their property to their children.  I became frantic to find out everything I could find about them.  And there were so much.  It was just amazing.  And then I think historians had access to these same records that I have been looking at, and I'm not even an historian.  So even these historians are incompetent or they've been lying to us, one or the other.  There's no middle ground.  So that was over 25 years ago, and I'm still studying.
Speaker 1: And when you say you pursued your interest by digging up information, exactly can you describe that, and where did you go?  Who helped you or did you seek assistance with everything--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: At first, I did it all alone.  And I found it didn't help me to ask for assistance in the various libraries and archives, because as soon as I would ask for information about free people of color in the colonial period, they would bring me information about slaves during the 1850s; wrong century, wrong civil status.  And finally, after wasting a lot of my time, they would--it would finally become clear to them what I was looking for, and they would say, "Oh, you mean free people in the colonial period.  Well, you're on your own.  We don't know anything about that."  So I would do my research surreptitiously.  I would creep into the Archives (laughs) and not tell anybody what I was doing.  And then, finally I found a few people who did have some information and that just opened a whole new--I found Deborah Newman Hamm (ph) at the Library of Congress, for example.  She was wonderful.  And I got to know Jimmy Walker at the Archives who's an expert on military records.  And I finally joined the Genealogy Society.  That was wonderful.  And then my research just took off after that.  But I traveled a lot.  I went to a lot of little county courthouses, a lot of state archives finding these documents.
Speaker 1: And were they easily accessible?  For instance, state capital, state archives or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.  By in large, they're mostly easily accessible.  Some states have some restrictions on access to birth records, for example.  But I was able to--I've always been able to find the records that I wanted--
Story_ID: 94465
Speaker 1: And as you made discoveries, did you map out a tree or how did you record what you're finding?
Speaker 2: Well, I've--on each line of my family, I get the furthest back individual and I try to trace all of that individual's descendants as far as I can trace them.  And in some cases I have hundreds and hundreds of descendants of one couple.  And so I have many books; many for each of--you know, everybody's got hundreds and hundreds of ancestors, and you think of the ones that you know most about, and then all--like your grandfather, your great-grandfather and all of his descendants, and then your great-grandfather on the other side and all of his descendants.  So that's how I've been going about it.
Speaker 1: And following that same line, Miss Stewart, what significance does that have for children today?  What significance--I would imagine that there is great significance for young people today.  Can you articulate that for us?
Speaker 2: I think young people today want to and should feel that they are rooted somewhere in the universe, that they have some kind of history, that they belong somewhere.  And if you only know your history back one or two generations, you can't possibly know that.  I was lucky that I have a very strong oral tradition in my family.  My mother interviewed my great-great-grandmother and asked her for the names of her ancestors and wrote them down for me.  And then she asked my great-great-grandmother to write a letter to me, because--I remember my great-great-grandmother.  She lived to be almost 100 years old.  And her letter is something that I cherish very much.  But knowing where you came from and the role that your people had in society, for example, I found out that my great-great-grandfather was a plasterer; that he had been a plasterer in Virginia; that his grandfather had been a plasterer, and his great-grandfather had been a plasterer; all three people of color.  They had plastered some of the finest buildings in the South.  And then when he moved to Fort Wayne, Indiana, he plastered some of the finest churches and public buildings in Fort Wayne.  He owned a lot of property in Fort Wayne, Indiana. Someone called me--I wrote an article in a journal about what I had found out about him, and someone called me on the telephone and said there is a placard in the Historical Society in Fort Wayne about your great-great-grandfather.  He was ordered to pay--to come to court to show why he shouldn't be held in contempt for not paying the bond that free people of color were required to pay, a substantial bond, 500 pounds.  That was a fortune in those days.  Because the state of Indiana required free blacks to pay a bond that they would not become a burden on the State.  Well, of course, he wasn't likely to be a burden on the State.  He was a substantial property owner.  But he hired a lawyer and proved that he had lived in the State since before that law came into effect, so it didn't apply to him.  And there is the bond on the wall in the Historical Society today.
Story_ID: 94466
Speaker 1: Isn't that something.  What--were any of your relatives--well, would you describe them as slaves or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Free or both?  Or Mixed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Some were slaves.  I've--and some of this research is very emotional.  I found a piece of paper, a deed, deeding my great-grandmother--my great-great-grandmother and her daughter--this is on my father's side--from one man to his son for $700.  And when I found that document, I had to put my feelings aside in a little box and say, well, I'll deal with them later after I get out this public place.  It was very, very wrenching.  And then just recently I found a document that emancipated another great-great-grandfather in 1790, and it named his parents.  And that's how I was able to find the great-great-grandparents of my great-great-grandparents, who were born in approximately 1740.
Speaker 1: That is phenomenal.  What are their names?
Speaker 2: Jack Early and his wife, Violet, were living in Bedford County, Virginia, during the 1700s.
Story_ID: 94467
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories or legends or songs that are passed down that you've run across?
Speaker 2: Most of the people I'm studying have been dead for so long that no one living has ever heard of them.  And I find them strictly through research, prowling through cemeteries, prowling through little county courthouses and so forth.  So there aren't any stories.  But I did run across one thing in--I was looking for the obituary of the son of a--my great-great-grandfather, and I was expecting to find a small, maybe one-inch article about his death, and instead, there was a huge headline that said, "The Notorious Gus Canada (ph) suddenly expires."  (Laughs)
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I was sitting at the microfilm reader and I was so embarrassed, I looked around to see if anyone was looking at what I was reading there (laughs).  And it said that he owned a bad place on East Columbia Street and that all his ace boom coons came to try to resuscitate him and fed him enormous amounts of whiskey, but that didn't do any good (laughs). And it was kind of interesting.  So I found out that he did have a liquor license, and he had what he called an inn and boarding house, but it must have been a house of ill repute.
Speaker 1: And East Columbia Street is located where?
Speaker 2: In Fort Wayne, Indiana.  Fort Wayne, Indiana, was a wide-open town in the 1870s.  That's where he was in 1870.  And then the whole family, except him, picked up and moved to Michigan.  So they must have been embarrassed about him (laughs).  I don't know.  And then I found another who was a stage coach driver in Virginia.  I've never seen a black stage coach driver in any western movie, but my great-great-granduncle, Robert Early, was a stage driver.  And when you think of what's the most dangerous, the dirtiest and the least well-paid occupation, that's where you'll find black people.  And sure enough, there--that's what he told the census taker, that he was a stage driver.
Speaker 1: And can you imagine where he might have--his journeys might have taken him?
Speaker 2: It's hard to know.  I found out that there were literally hundreds of stage coach companies; hundreds all over the country.  And it could have been any one of a number of companies that he drove for.
Story_ID: 94468
Speaker 1: Would you please describe for us the--as much as you can, the book that you were writing about your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Yes.  This book is about my ancestors who are named Bunn, and it starts with Jeremiah Bunn, who was born about--who was born in 1785 in Virginia; and his wife, Sophia.  They had a large number of children.  They moved to Ohio and then to Michigan.  Now, what's interesting about this family is--one of the interesting things about this family is that many of them of the descendants that are living today are white people.  They have--many members of the family were very light-skinned, and these--many of their children, children's children just passed over into the white race.  And I've been in contact with some of the descendants who had no idea that they had black ancestors.  And that is something the genealogists need to keep in mind.  We just can't look for one race or the other.  Race is a social construct.  It's illusive.  It doesn't fit into any nice categories.  I talked to one person and she said, "Well, we thought his wife was maybe the black person because she was brunette."  I said, "No, no, no.  It was the husband."  She said, "Well, he had blue eyes and sandy hair."  I said, "Well, you suspected the wrong person, didn't you?"  (laughs)  So that's what's interesting about this family.  A lot of them fought in the Civil War.  I am--that's another funny thing about black families.  We have no oral history of the Civil War.  None.  I do have some old photographs of black men in Civil War uniforms, but nobody knows who they are or anything about them.  After I talked to Mr. Walker at the Archives, I sent out--I made a list of all the men in my family, who were between age 15 and 50 during the Civil War, and sent them to the National Archives asking for military records and military pension files.  And I got back 12 hits.  Twelve individuals in my family that I know of so far that fought in the Civil War.  Several of them died in the Civil War.  My great-grandfather died in the--did not die in the Civil War.  That's one reason I'm here (laughs).  But he did fight in the Civil War, and as a result of tracing my ancestry to him, I am a member of the Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Please tell us the spelling of this family's name?
Speaker 2: B-U-N-N.
Speaker 1: And the book is about one family then?
Speaker 2: Just one family.  It's only about the descendants of two people:  Jeremiah Bunn and his wife, Sophia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you please spell their names, too?
Speaker 2: Jeremiah.  J-E-R-E-M-I-A-H; and Sophia, S-O-P-H-I-A.
Story_ID: 94469
Speaker 1: If we were going to explore and find out more about the people that you've referenced, the photographs that you've referenced from the Civil War days, how you suggest that we try to tackle that kind of situation?
Speaker 2: Photographs from the Civil War Ddys?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Or finding out who these people are that were fighters in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, the National Park Service has a website where you can in your ancestor's name and see if he served in the Civil War.  But all they have are the names and the units, the regimes and the company.  To get more detailed information, you must write to the National Archives in Washington, D.C. or visit.  And you can pull actual records; the actual pensions; and there's a great deal of genealogical information in those pension files.  Because when the man dies, his wife, in order to continue getting his pension, has to prove that she was actually married to him, so there will be a marriage record or else some affidavits from people that said, "I've known him for 20 years and I never knew of him to be married to anybody other than her."  That kind of thing.  And in--also, there're other kinds of information that you might find out about him:  A physical description, their state and health, the name of the slave owner.  My great-grandfather, who was in the Civil War, had been a slave and the name of his slave owner was in that document.  And it's interesting   He was never freed by the Emancipation Proclamation.  The Emancipation Proclamation did not free slaves in Kentucky, because did not join the Rebel States.  So [President Abraham] Lincoln issued two Emancipation Proclamations:  One, freeing the slaves, and a second one with all the exceptions to the slaves that were freed.  And he accepted my great-grandfather, who liberated himself by running away the joining the Union Army.
Speaker 1: Are there other states that you recall or know of that were also in that category?
Speaker 2: Well, Lincoln was very, very political in the Emancipation Proclamation.  He accepted some portions of States from the decree; some portions that were not in rebellion against the Union.  So in Louisiana, for example, he named about 12 to 15 parishes that were not--to which the Emancipation Proclamation did not apply.  And in some States he would list some counties to which the Emancipation Proclamation did not apply.  It was a very political document.
Speaker 1: Is this world-publicized in your opinion?  That information that you've just shared with us?
Speaker 2: No.  When I first discovered the second Emancipation Proclamation, I was amazed, because it didn't read the way I remembered it having been read (laughs).  And I went and got the other one and compared the two, and then I realized there were two.  And one simply took away with one hand what had been given with the other hand.
Story_ID: 94470
Speaker 1: We'll proceed, Ms. Stewart, with your early years, your earliest memories describing your mom and your dad individually, and who raised you as a young person.  Can you talk a little about those things?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents were just wonderful people.  They didn't raise me in a sex stereotyped environment because I had dolls and I had trucks; I had Tinker toys and dollhouses and Lincoln Logs; and I played with all kinds of toys.  I wasn't limited in any way.  They liked to take me places.  They took me to many plays and concerts, and we always went up to Michigan in the summer to my grandparents' house for the summer where there were animals to play with--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Where--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --animals we shouldn't have played with, actually, because they're farm animals.  They're not toys, but, of course, as little kids, we liked to--we considered them as toys.  And we had wonderful times up in the country.
Speaker 1: Where was this in Michigan?
Speaker 2: This was in Cass County, Michigan; a very rural county right on the border with Indiana.  My ancestors came there in 1848.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Allen.  They were Green Allen.  My great-great-grandfather's name was Green Allen, and his daughter was Julia Allen, who was my--he was my three-times great-grandfather; and Julia was my great-great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  Who--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Unclear) took us horseback riding.  We had horseback riding lessons every Sunday; every Saturday, music lessons, which were a waste for me, because I can't carry a tune.  But I suffered through them for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Who would you say is the person that really spent the most time in raising you as a person?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother, because my father was busy building a law practice and--probably my mother.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Where's your mother from?
Speaker 2: She was born in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And your father?
Speaker 2: He was born in Sandersville, Georgia.  He came to Chicago instead of Ohio because, when he graduated from college, he was not accepted at Western Reserve University Law School.  They wrote a letter that said, "We do not believe that a Negro can be successful in the practice of law."
Story_ID: 94471
Speaker 1: We'll begin with the spelling of the names that you--family that you referenced, Green and Allen.
Speaker 2: Green, G-R-E-E-N; Allen, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And you were telling us about your father [Sidney Jones, Jr.] and his building of the law practice and so on.  Can you resume with that and expound upon it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He worked very hard.  And it was during the [Great]Depression, just before I was born, that he got married and was trying to build his law practice.  So things were very, very tough for him.
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he started practicing law in about 1933.  It must have been about that time.  And he would--I was born three years later.  So I remember him taking me to work with him when he worked at the Department of Labor, and I was just a little child and I was more interested in the vending machines that vended candy bars.  I'd never seen vending machines vending candy bars before.  And he would take me to places like the Chicago Bar Association.  The Chicago Bar Association had just decided to admit Negroes.  Before then, they had refused, and my father and two others were the first two that were admitted.  So he used to take me to lunch with him in the Chicago Bar Association lunchroom, which is right next door to where we are now, right in this building.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the other person was that was also admitted at that time?
Speaker 2: Earl Dickerson was one, and the other one may have been Edward Towles, but I'm not sure who the third one was.
Speaker 1: What stories did your parents pass on to you about their life in Chicago and coming up--raising a family during those years?
Speaker 2: Well, my father used to joke and say that he would give my mother fifteen cents in the morning to buy the dinner and sometimes he would be able to give her a whole quarter.  Or he would come in and say, "I got a big feed today, fifty cents."  (Laughs)  So he joked--he used to joke a lot about money.  Well, he joked about a lot of things.  He had a fantastic sense of humor.
Story_ID: 94472
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights, sounds and smells that you recall of growing up?
Speaker 2: Going to Buckingham Fountain; going to Riverview; going to the zoo; the circus or the museums.  My dad used to take us to the museums and drop us off in the morning and pick us up in the afternoon.  And we would go through the museums and just look at everything there was to see.
Speaker 1: Did you do these things with your friends or did--or your siblings or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mostly my father or my mother or both of them would take us.
Story_ID: 94473
Speaker 1: What type of child would you say you were or who did you take after in the family?
Speaker 2: (Pause)
Speaker 1: Parents?  Grandparents?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say.  I went to nursery school in the old Rosenwald Building, and I was a very happy-go-lucky child there; I had a wonderful time.  Then I went to public school in--to Kosminski, and I was the only black child in the class and my personality changed dramatically.  I became very withdrawn and very shy.  So I wasn't really like either of my parents from that time, and--because I understood that my teacher did not like me, although my grades were excellent, the best, that there was nothing I could do, no matter how good I was, no matter how quiet I was, no matter how good my grades were, the teacher was never going to like me.  And it did something to my ability to enjoy school.  When I went away to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]--to college--to an all-black college; predominantly black, overwhelmingly black college, the difference in the expectations and the attitudes that my professors had to me hit me like a brick wall.  And then I began to realize what I had suffered all those years in a so-called integrated educational background.  I started to throw up (laughs).  I couldn't keep anything on my stomach for three days.  And then my personality just began to change.  It was like I blossomed somehow.  But that was--those were years that I had basically suppressed until it all--something happened or someone said something to me and I had a flashback.  And so it's difficult for me to talk about those things.
Speaker 1: Between Kosminski, though, and Fisk, there was high school at...
Speaker 2: At Hyde Park.  Well, when I went to Hyde Park, it was still overwhelmingly white.  And although I didn't realize it, I was placed in all of, and mostly in remedial classes.  That's what they did.  They put all the black kids in the remedial classes, and we didn't even know it.  All I knew is that high school was extremely boring, and I didn't pay much attention to anything in class; and as a result, I had very average grades in high school.  I did all of my reading at home.  I knew other kids were reading more interesting things.  I did all of my reading at home.  I did not take high school seriously.  Then I began to wonder if I would get into college with a C plus average (laughs).  But the reading that I had done on my own enabled me to ace all of the--ace--to get very good--to place very highly on all of their entrance exams.  So, finally, I was respected as a student, and it was just wonderful.  It was like a new world opened up to me.  I loved history.  I had hated history before.  My history teacher had been the most boring, cantankerous, inept teacher.  I had a history teacher who was fantastic.  I said, how did they manage to take all the blood and guts out of history and make it into something that is more exciting than anything Hollywood could come up with?  I loved it at Fisk.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  Who was your teacher?
Speaker 2: This was Dr. Edward Pessan.  And I saw him on television several months ago.  Dr. Pessan is teaching someplace or he's a dean or something like that, up in--on the East Coast.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: P-E-S-S-A-N; Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: And you think he's doing what now?
Speaker 2: He was either a dean or maybe a college president at some Eastern School.
Speaker 1: Is he the person then that you would credit with your interest in going back and finding out more about your family?
Speaker 2: No.  I wasn't able to take too much history at Fisk.  It's that one incident of going to the Archives and finding out that there were hundreds and hundreds of free Negroes in the South before the Civil War.  That one incident sparked everything that I've been doing the last twenty-five years.  I mean, at least my avocation.
Story_ID: 94474
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  And tell us a little more about the community where you grew up here; high school, Kosminski and so on; that community.
Speaker 2: When I was in Kosminski, I lived in lived in Hyde Park and--at 53rd and Maryland.  And it was a very interracial community.  There were blacks and whites, Chinese, Indians, Germans, Italians; all kinds of Mexicans.  My best friend of Mexican and my other best friend was Jewish.  And we just had a wonderful time together. You know, I never realized until I was in college that everybody didn't grow up in a community like that.  Things changed when I went to school.  But on the block, things were just wonderful.  There was a black dentist down the street.  There was a black judge.  There were some school teachers.  Just all kinds of people.  There was a Russian immigrant family--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of any of your neighbors?
Speaker 2: Yes.  On the south, there was the Goldmans.  On the north, there was Dr. Gray; Dr. Emory Gray, E-M-O-R-Y, G-R-A-Y.  And downstairs from me was Reno Patterson (ph), who ultimately went to jail under the Smith Act as an alleged communist during the horrible days of McCarthy period.  William Patterson and his wife, Louise, who now lives in New York City, and their little girl MaryLou; and further over--let's see.  The school teachers--I can't think of their names.
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: My father was a stalwart at Coppin (ph) AME Church; African Methodist Episcopal Church.  My mother was an agnostic or maybe a--even an atheist.  So I was raised in a very permissive religious environment.  When I was at Fisk, I went to chapel, which was a Congregationalist chapel, and I liked that very much.
Story_ID: 94475
Speaker 1: And since it sounds as though your environment was very middle-class, could you describe what that meant at that time, the time that you were growing up; I mean, living in a middle-class community?
Speaker 2: (Pause)
Speaker 1: What did it mean for you?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I thought everybody lived the way I did.  And we did music lessons, we had horseback riding lessons, we went to plays, we went to Gilbert and Sullivan operettas.  I memorized all of the songs from the "Pirates of Penzance" and "Iolanthe."  (Laughs)  We went to concerts.  We went--my parents liked to entertain, so they frequently had very, very interesting people by the house.  I met Paul Robeson in my kitchen.  He was in between "Hamlet"--I mean, not "Hamlet"--"Othello," and he had grown a beard.  He was the biggest man I'd ever seen in my life.  He was fantastic.  He insisted that we kids call him by his first name.  Our parents said we always call adults Mister and Misses.  He insisted we call him Paul.  And he had just come from an Indian reservation.  He was very interested in the similarity of children's songs on the Navajo reservation and songs the children sang in China.  So he would sing one of the Chinese songs, and then he would sing one of the Indian songs, and he would get all excited about the similarities in these songs; and we didn't know what he was talking about.  We said, "Why don't you just sing 'Ol' Man River' for us?"  But he was just so intense.  What a fantastic person he was, and it was so wonderful to be in his company.  They would stand in the kitchen and argue for hours about things, such as FEP.  I didn't know what FEP meant.  But I knew it must be really important because they really wanted it.  Of course, that was Fair Employment Practices; a law that would guarantee fair employment for people regardless of race.  And they would talk about genocide.  They would talk about the United Nations.  I heard so much talk, so much political talk, so much talk about the world; about Africa, about Asia, about other countries. I remember my father was so excited when Gandhi made his trip across India and pulled a handful of salt out of the ocean and said, "We will get our own salt.  We won't pay the British salt taxes."  He was so thrilled about that.  He was thrilled--I remembered how he almost cried when Pakistan broke off from India at the time of liberation.  Oh, he said, "That'll be terrible.  That will live to give a legacy of horror forever."  And he was absolutely right, of course.  Oh, goodness.  He--we talked about so many things.  Our dinner table conversation was like a lecture or--no, not a lecture.  Like a roundtable discussion.  We always discussed what was in the papers, what was on the radio; of course, we didn't have television, but we talked--we had opinions about everything.  And my mother used to say, "They always told me I shouldn't speak up when I was a child, but my children are going to say whatever is on their minds."  And we did.  We had opinions.  Oh, did we have opinions.  Some of our opinions were way off in left field, of course.  But they were discussed seriously.  We were never made fun of for our opinions, only occasionally.  On occasions we got a little teasing.  But basically, dinnertime was a time of discussion.  And, you know, people who were not in our family who'd have dinner with us, sometimes they're awed.  They would say, "Wow, what's going on at this dinner table?"  (Laughs)
Speaker 1: Those are wonderful memories, aren't they?
Speaker 2: They are.  They certainly are.
Story_ID: 94476
Speaker 1: Of your teachers, who might you say influenced you the most besides the one that you have mentioned that came later at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: At Fisk?
Speaker 1: No.  I mean, who are the ones that influenced you the most would you say in your younger years?
Speaker 2: Well, the teacher at Hyde Park High School who really believed in me was Miss Brynwasser (ph), my homeroom teacher.  And I had her for biology as well.  And she really taught me how to make an accurate, meticulous biology plate; a drawing, labeled and so forth.  And she encouraged me.  She was just about the only teacher I had at Hyde Park that really encouraged me.  She would take me aside and talk to me.  She was a wonderful teacher.  I really appreciated her.
Story_ID: 94477
Speaker 1: With your later interest in civil rights and so on, was there anyone at that time that influenced your taking a look at the issues of civil rights besides what you've described with your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  At Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], we had colloquiums where people would come from all over the world to talk to us.  I understand they don't do that much in colleges these days or they charge the students for it.  But some of the finest minds in the world came to talk to us every month at Fisk.  And [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King came to talk to us.  He gave a speech at chapel, and then he met with the students later in the International Student Center.  We got to talk to him about the Montgomery bus boycott.  It was amazing.  I was amazed at how short he was.  I thought he would be a bigger person.  He was rather small and very, very reserved; very quiet.  And we talked to him and it had a profound interest--impact on me.  And then Thurgood Marshall came, and he spoke about the battles of the Civil Rights Movement in the courts, and the battles they had had in the courts.  And I began to think, well, maybe I could be a lawyer; maybe I could be a civil rights lawyer and go and work for the NAACP.  And I had never--this was my senior year.  I had never thought of being a lawyer, even though my father was one.  I had thought I would be a teacher, and I was preparing myself to be a teacher.  But then I thought maybe I'll be a psychologist.  And I had applied to several grade schools to be a psychologist.  But after he came, I immediately applied to a couple of law schools.  And it was just past the deadline, but they accepted me anyway, and I entered law school.  And then someone else who had a great deal of influence on me was Anna Arnold Hedgeman from New York City.  She came and talked to us.  She led a fantastic life.  I don't remember too much about it but from the point of view that a woman could do anything that she wants to do.  See, I guess I had been subconsciously typecasting myself by wanting to be a teacher.  And after she said that, I thought, "Well, I can be a lawyer too just like Thurgood Marshall."
Speaker 1: Miss Hedgeman was an attorney?
Speaker 2: No.  She was--it's hard to know what she was.  I guess she--I don't remember exactly what she was, but she was very active politically and socially in New York City and about.
Speaker 1: And tell me two things:  About what year was this, and would you spell her name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Anna, A-N-N-A; Arnold, A-R-N-O-L-D; Hedgeman, H-E-D-G-E-M-A-N.
Story_ID: 94478
Speaker 1: And you mentioned applying to law school.  Where did you apply and where did you wind up attending?
Speaker 2: I went to the--I applied to University of Chicago [Law School] and Northwestern [University School of Law].  I was accepted at both.  My father [Sidney A. Jones] had gone to Northwestern and had been an honor student.  He had been third in his class at Northwestern.  And I was intimidated from going to Northwestern, because everyone was saying are you going to be Order of the Coif like your father.  Coif is an honorary--it's like the Phi Beta Kappa of the legal world.  So I was afraid to go to Northwestern, but--plus he was on the alumni board and all that; so I went to the University of Chicago.  But I dropped out of the University of Chicago in my second year and got married and had a family and traveled around the world; lived in Japan for three years; came back and finished up law school--well, I had to start all over again actually.  I went to Georgetown Law School, and that's where my degree is from.
Speaker 1: What year did you finish Georgetown?
Speaker 2: 1972.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your years at Georgetown Law School?  That must have been interesting in the sense that, were there many women there at that point?  Were there many African-Americans there?
Speaker 2: It was very interesting.  When I went to law school at the University of Chicago, I was the only black woman in the law school.  In my class, there were only five women all together.  There were no black professors.  There was one black teaching assistant, Charlie Quick, Q-U-I-C-K; and I think he was afraid to stick his head out of the door because everything he did, I and any of the other black students would surround him (laughs).  We just wanted to be around him.  And I guess he found a way to study and do his work without having us tag along behind him.
Speaker 1: What year was that that you started at U of C?
Speaker 2: 1957.  1957.  So you see that was a big break.  I started back in Georgetown in 1968.  And Georgetown was very different.  It was--there were a lot of blacks, there were a lot of women; but the attitude towards blacks was more negative than it had been at the University of Chicago.  The assumption was that none of us would ever make it in the practice of law; none of us would ever really graduate or ever do anything.  And I had a heck of a time getting professors to respond to my hand in the air.  I'd raise my hand and it would be ignored.  I remember one time I got up and just talked until everybody else stopped talking and forced that professor to say, "Yes.  You're right."  'Cause I know you have to know how to talk on your feet to be a good lawyer, and if you're not talking on your feet, if you don't get that experience, you're going to be handicapped in the practice of law.  So I complained to the administration, and I think they did something about it.
Speaker 1: So in 1968, are you saying you were--there were how many African-American women in your law class at--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, many.  I couldn't even guess how many.  Maybe 20.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Out of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was a big class.  There were about 800 in the class.
Speaker 1: So you were quite a minority even at that time.
Speaker 2: We all knew each other, sure.  We all knew each other.
Story_ID: 94479
Speaker 1: So it was early on that you developed your career goals and your inclinations toward law school and actually applied and were accepted.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you made a decision to interrupt your study--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to have a family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, can you tell us a little bit about that period of time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I married Ronald Stewart, R-O-N-A-L-D, S-T-E-W-A-R-T.  And he worked for the Urban League of Chicago, which I thought was just wonderful because he was doing good work.  He was doing employment work, which was something I was interested in.  In fact, he got me to do a study of nursing schools in Illinois; which ones discriminated against black nursing students.  And I sent to all the nursing schools for applications and filled them in and sent them in.  And some of them said right on the application form that they didn't accept blacks.  So I wrote up my report.  Then I called the Urban League and asked them if they had a copy of my report and they didn't have any report (laughs).  I would like to see that report that I did so many years ago.  It was kind of depressing work.  But then he joined the Foreign Service and became a career Foreign Service officer, and he was assigned to Burma.  But before I could go to Burma with the children, all the Burmesian government kicked out all the foreign embassies and so forth.  So were assigned to Tokyo.
Speaker 1: When was--what years was this?
Speaker 2: We went to Tokyo in 1964.  My children were age one and three when we went to Tokyo.
Speaker 1: So--oh.  So they were not born there?
Speaker 2: No.  They were born here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: What was the world situation like at that point when you were in Tokyo?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, the Cold War was in great and full blast.  We were still in a hostile situation with the Soviet Union.  The Freedom Rides hadn't quite started yet.  They started when I was living in Japan; and the Civil Rights upheaval.  So I've--I got to see most of that through foreign eyes from a distance.  And in Japan, relationships between the United States and Japan were very good.
Story_ID: 94301
Speaker 1: Yes. We had a very fine Ambassador who had--was very close to the Japanese people--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Mmhm.
Speaker 1: --and I just had a wonderful time in Japan.  I had a lot of friends.  I love the cultural aspects of Japanese life.  I would go to the Kabuki Theatre and then concerts and so forth.  My husband was in charge of the Fulbright Commission, so I got to meet many of the artists; became very good friends with some members of the Japan Philharmonic Orchestra.  After concerts I used to have them by our house for dinner and cook up huge pots of spaghetti and meatballs (laughs), and they would come in their white tie and tails and their long black skirts and eat my spaghetti and tell funny stories about concerts that they had given and so forth.  We had--I took the children to concerts as well; the puppet opera, the Bunraku; shopping.  I just had a wonderful time in Japan.
Speaker 2: And what was the foreigners' perception of the things that were happening with the Civil Rights Movement in the States at that time, if you remember?
Speaker 1: People were always asking me "What's this Black Power thing all about?"  And I didn't know.  I wasn't there.  But I would say, "Well, don't you want blacks to have power?"  (Laughs)  "Shouldn't we have power too?"  I read Stokley's book, of course, and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Give us the title of that book?
Speaker 1: "Black Power."  Stokeley Carmichael.  "Black Power."
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  By Charles Hamilton?
Speaker 1: And people--the other Foreign Service officer seemed to be kind of wary of--they were afraid of Black Power.  But the Japanese never asked questions about those kinds of things.  Never.  Never asked questions about race.  I guess they felt it would be too painful to raise.  But they never, never raised it.
Speaker 2: In the Foreign Service, did the other Foreign Service personnel or families or wives engage you in conversation or inquiry about what was happening in the States with respect to the Civil Rights activities?
Speaker 1: Not very much.  They would just ask me questions about it, and, of course, I only knew what I read in the papers just the way they did.  I guess I felt differently about it.  But they--there weren't many blacks in the Foreign Service when I was there.  There was one other black couple in Tokyo, and Tokyo [Japan] was a very large mission.  Very large.  There were four large apartment buildings that were totally occupied by American diplomats; plus some homes, some houses.  So there were a lot of people.  There was only one other black family, the Scott family.  S-C-O-T-T.  The Scotts, we became very good friends.  Then there was one other family up in Hokkaido up in Kyushu, in the up--you know, Hokkaido, the uppermost island.  But I never saw them except when they were in Tokyo for special occasions.
Speaker 2: What was your transition like in moving from Chicago or from an urban area in the U.S. to a foreign country like Tokyo?
Speaker 1: To a super urban area like Tokyo.  Tokyo is a city like no other.  It reminded me more than anything about--of New York City.  It didn't look anything like New York City, but it had that same kind of bustle.  It was huge.  Huge.  It was--I felt like a country kid in Tokyo.  It was overwhelming.  Tokyo goes on for miles and miles and miles.  It's super congested.  It is one of the megacities of the planet, and it took some getting used to.  Believe me.  It was quite a, quite a thing.
Story_ID: 94302
Speaker 1: Quite a transition and you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Quite a transition.
Speaker 1: --told me also that you learned the language?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I put myself in language school.  Every Foreign Service officer had to take 100 hours of language.  So I got into school with my husband.  And after we got to the 100 hours, everybody would drop out.  So I would wait for the next course to come up, and I would get in that course.  And then when everyone got to 100 hours, they would drop out.  So I enrolled in a private school that was located in a Shindo shrine.  And that's how I learned to like green tea, because it was so cold in the temple when I was waiting for my lesson, I would wrap my hands around some--the only thing that was warm, which was green tea (laughs), and so that tea just to keep from freezing to death.  So that's how I learned to like green tea as well as speak Japanese.
Speaker 1: Would you say that your time--how much time did you spend in Japan?
Speaker 2: Almost three years.
Speaker 1: Would you say that that had a great deal or any influence at all on your--the rest of your adult life?
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The culture?  The company?  The customs?
Speaker 2: It certainly made it much easier for me to move freely among people from different backgrounds and so forth.  I understand very well that basically people are the same.  The want the same things; that women from any culture like to talk about their husbands and their children; that men like to talk about their businesses and their--and politics.  That's life.  And people have the same basic things that they talk about.  It's not very difficult to understand.
Story_ID: 94303
Speaker 1: Would you like to tell us about your career in law as a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As a lawyer, I started out as a prosecutor.  Well, actually, first I clerked for a judge.  And that was very interesting, because I got to see how judges look at lawyers.  The judge's law clerk sits right under him to the side in the courtroom.  I get to see how he treats other lawyers, what he thinks of them, how he responds to them, how their arguments affect him and the things that don't affect judges whatsoever.  The judge would discuss some of the lawyers in some of the cases with me from time to time.  So that was a wonderful experience.  And from there I got to be a prosecutor.  I tried lots of cases on the run, so to speak.  I was assigned about seven or eight or nine cases for trial each day.  And, of course, I couldn't try them all each day, but I had to be ready for seven to nine cases for trial every day.  So I learned how to prepare witnesses on the fly and how to get all my cases in order.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was 1974 or '5' [1975]; '74' [1974]; '74' [1974] through '75' [1975] when I was a prosecutor.
Speaker 1: And where were you working at this time when you were clerking for the judge?
Speaker 2: This was in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: after you had returned from Tokyo?
Speaker 2: Yes.  After I finished law school; right after law school.  And after that, I went to work for the firm of Hudson, Leftwich and Davenport.  They--oh, no, no.  I skipped something.
Speaker 1: Where were the prosecutors?
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C.  This is in the Corporation Council's office.
Speaker 1: Corporation Council is a part of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The City.
Speaker 1: --District--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The municipality.
Speaker 1: The District government?
Speaker 2: You see, Washington doesn't have a State, so there's no State's Attorney.  So the Corporation Council does all the things that a City Attorney, plus all the things that a State's Attorney would do.  So we did it all, from disorderly conduct to murder.  I prosecuted everything.
Speaker 1: And so you were working in the office of the Corporation Council.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In the District of--Government of the District of Columbia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you also clerked for the judge of the District Court?
Speaker 2: Of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia.  That's equivalent to a State Court.
Speaker 1: And that's where you handled all variety of cases and persons?
Speaker 2: Clerking for the judge?
Speaker 1: No.  When you were a prosecutor.
Speaker 2: Yes.  All variety.  All variety of criminal cases.
Story_ID: 94304
Speaker 1: How did you become a criminal lawyer?  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: They were the only people who would hire me.  It was really funny.  I have to laugh at it today, but I really wanted to work as a public defender.  The public defender thought maybe I wasn't aggressive enough.  Well, actually, he would say yes and he wouldn't say no.  He just kept me stringing.  Well, if I'm going to be aggressive, it's going to be in the courtroom, not in an interview.  But, that's the reason he gave anyway for stringing me along.  The U.S. Attorney--I just couldn't get a job.  So the only one who offered me a job was the Corporation Counsel and I took it.  And I found out that as a prosecutor--that's what I tell young lawyers today who say they want to be public defenders--I say, the prosecutor has all the power.  You want to be a--if you want to help people, you should be a prosecutor, because the prosecutor decides if there is going to be any charges filed or not.  And if so, what are the charges going to be.  And if the charges are filed, are you going to accept a plea or not.  I have dismissed cases where I know the man was guilty, because things had happened in between that didn't make it worthwhile for anybody to give this man a criminal record.  I knew I could get a conviction, but what good would it do?  When I was in juvenile court, there was a boy who had had a perfect record until his father was incarcerated.  And then he had problems.  He was arrested, sent to me for prosecution; but in the interim, he went to live with an older brother and was turning himself around.  So his lawyer came to me and said, "What kind of plea will you take?"  And I said, "Why do you want a plea?  If he's turned his life around and he's a juvenile, you know, what good will it do to prosecute him?  Why don't I just drop this?"  He said, "Oh.  You can do that?"  I said, "Yes.  I can do that."  (Laughs)  So saw it as a public trust that we're--our job wasn't just to get convictions, but to do justice and to benefit society.  And the prosecutor can do that.  So young lawyers shouldn't shun the concept of being a prosecutor.  You can do a lot of good.  And some of the people belong in jail.  Some people are really bad (laughs) and belong in jail.  So--and I have argued for at least a couple of people to be incarcerated.
Story_ID: 94305
Speaker 1: Following your career along after you became a prosecutor of criminal cases, next, what happened?
Speaker 2: Next, I was begged by several lawyers to take a job with the District of Columbia Bar to set up a lawyer referral service; a special lawyer referral service.  The Civil Rights Act had just been amended to apply to federal employers, and nobody knew quite what--how to sue federal employers--the federal government.  So they wanted someone who could set up a referral program who could interview people complaining that they've been discriminated against because of their race in federal employment, and train lawyers to handle these cases.  And so this was really along the lines of what I had wanted to do ultimately in life.  So I took that job.  I had that job for three and a half years.  And I trained and--I recruited and trained hundreds of lawyers, interviewed thousands of people with complaints.  And then I was wooed away from that job by the firm of Hudson, Leftwich and Davenport, which is a black law firm in Washington, D.C.  They had a nationwide class-action case against the Pullman Company.  And they wanted me basically to work on that case and some other Civil Rights cases they had.
Speaker 1: And when was that, please?
Speaker 2: This was in 1976, I suppose.
Story_ID: 94306
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little more about the case [Love v. Pullman Co.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because I think this was one of the--a major Civil Rights action, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, it was a major case.  It went all the way up to the Supreme Court of the United States.  It was thrown out.  It went all the way up to the Supreme Court, and then it was sent back down for trial.  And these were the Pullman porters who basically lived on tips.  They made $35 a month, except when they worked as Porter-in-Charge; then they made $38 a month.  A Porter-in-Charge is someone who does all the work of a porter and all of the work of a conductor.  But because he is black, he can never be a conductor.  After the Civil Rights Act was passed, the first thing Earl Love did, a porter out of Denver, Colorado, was to go to the Colorado Human Rights Commission and file a complaint.  And that, after going all the way up to the Supreme Court and back down again, finally was getting ready for trial; a nationwide class action, meaning all Pullman porters in America were part of that class.  So there was a firm that had been assigned the case out of Denver, but they hadn't been doing very much with the case; so some of the porters came to Hudson, Leftwich and Davenport, about 80 of them.  We represented about 88 of the class members.  And basically, we carried that lawsuit.  We did all of the depositions; we set up an assembly line for preparing Pullman porters for their depositions; we did dozens of them, prepared dozens of them.  We took depositions of conductors.  We took a deposition of a white conductor who said he didn't even want to retire.  They gave him all of his money.  They didn't give any of the Pullman porters any severance, anything.  They said they could get another job with this railroad or that railroad.  It was blatant.  It was the kind of discrimination you don't see any more.  Thank goodness.  Just blatant, vicious, racist.  The Pullman porters said that they had to sleep in the toilet.  They couldn't sleep in a bunk.  They couldn't sleep where the conductors slept.  And they talked about all the indignities.  One of the porters, I was preparing him for his deposition, and he was fudging with his answer.  We wanted them to be so prepared that they would answer any question without hesitation.  And he fudged the question, and I--we use every tactic we can to prepare people for deposition--so I slammed my palm on the floor; I said, "Answer the damn question."  And he said, "No, I won't.  I won't.  I won't tell how we had to sleep under brown blankets.  I won't tell how we had to sleep in the toilets.  I won't tell--I don't want my family knowing what we had to put up with every day.  And that don't means we lose the lawsuit.  I won't tell it.  I won't tell it.  I won't tell it," he said.  And everybody in the room just--was thunderstruck.  Just--I didn't know what to say next, you know.  But you know what?  He had gotten it out of him.  And when he went for his deposition, he told it.  And after a while, they didn't want to take anymore depositions.  The lawyers for the Pullman Company, they said, "That's enough.  We've had enough."
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 94307
Speaker 1: And is there a name of anyone that comes out of all of your legal action that comes to mind in that told of issue of Pullman porters and (sic)--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Judge [Alfred] Arraj, A-R-R-A-J.  The judge in Denver, Colorado, who--the partner Willie Leftwich said mounted the--he said, "He mounted the chair like it was a saddle (laughs).
Speaker 1: How many people do you think--do you just imagine were affected by that court action?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of them had died by then.  They were all retired by then.
Speaker 1: Did their families benefited at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The families did.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: So.  Then it went up on appeal again over attorneys' fees.  It went--oh, it went up on appeals so many times.  First it went up on appeal on the issue of liability, where the Pullman Company was liable; then it went up again on the issue of attorneys' fees.  It just went on and on and on.  And Pullman Company had an office here in Chicago just for the purpose of having a place to deal with this litigation.  Their records are all at the Newberry Library here now.
Speaker 1: Newberry Library is located in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know where?
Speaker 2: On West Walton Street.
Speaker 1: And what was A. Philip Randolph's connection?
Speaker 2: Zero.
Speaker 1: Can you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Union had absolutely nothing to do with the lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.
Speaker 2: Everybody who's even heard of a lawsuit assumes that the Union bought the lawsuit.  They had nothing to do with it.  In fact, the Union sent spies to some of our meetings of the class members.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: No speculation on that.  Okay.  That was interesting information.
Story_ID: 94308
Speaker 1: And so, as you progressed and were involved in this lawsuit, were there any others that stand out for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I represented a man named Maryland Kemp, M-A-R-Y-L-A-N-D; Kemp, K-E-M-P, who was a chemist at the Department of Defense.  He was trying to find ways of detecting buried plastic landmines.  That's all he worked on.  And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: In this country?
Speaker 2: Yes.  For the Department of Defense.  How to detect--because that was one of the biggest problems, and it still is the biggest problem, these buried mines.  They are millions of them throughout the world that are buried.  They're causing horrible devastations to civilians, children, noncombatants.  And as a wartime effort, it was--this was during the Vietnam War--our boys needed to be able to identify the location of buried plastic mines.  And he was having a hard time at work.  We proved that he was discriminated against in his employment based on race.
Speaker 1: Now where did he work?
Speaker 2: The Department of Defense in Washington, D.C.  Actually at Fort Belvoir which is in Virginia.  And we went to court, to federal court over the remedy.  And his case went to the court of appeals two times.  And then we finally went to trial on another matter.  And a colonel in the U.S. Army got on the witness stand and lied and said that someone else had discovered how to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Detect.
Speaker 2: --detect buried plastic mines.  And to this day, no one has discovered that.  So that kind of stands out in my mind.  I handled that case for years.
Story_ID: 94309
Speaker 1: I had another case against the Department of Defense.  Do you mind me telling you these war stories (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Oh, we'd like to hear it.
Speaker 1: He--I represented a woman named Idella Murray, I-D-E-L-L-A, M-U-R-R-A-Y.  And I can tell these stories because it's all public knowledge.  She worked for the mapping section of the Department of Defense.  She set up the entire management system for that agency and operated it.  But when it came time to hire a person to be the chief of the division, they selected a white male who didn't meet the minimal qualifications for the job.  And they had to rehire on contract a retired employee to teach this guy how to do his job.  She had been discriminated against five times.  Five times she had applied for this job and didn't get it.  And we were able to prove in court, after a two-week trial, that five--four of those promotions she had been discriminated against because of her race and sex.  And judge ordered her promoted, back pay and everything.  So that was a very exciting case.  Very exciting.
Speaker 2: And what was the job she was striving for?
Speaker 1: Division chief.  It was a GS-14 or 15 position.
Speaker 2: In what agency?
Speaker 1: The Department of Defense.
Speaker 2: And this was what year?
Speaker 1: 1981.  Maybe '79' [1979].
Speaker 2: Maybe 1979?  As late as that?
Speaker 1: Yes.  There was a dynamic scene in the courtroom I'll never forget as long as I live.  Their reason for hire one of these men into this job was that he was a--they have a word for it in government--that he was a surplus person and had to be hired if he was available for the job.  And someone had put a piece of paper on my client's desk.  It had been all crumpled up.  She must have been nice to the cleaning lady one time.  It was a situation where someone else had been one of these must-hire people; someone you must hire.  And the man that I had on the witness stand had written across it "we can't use it.  Go on."  So after three or four witnesses had testified "Oh, but we had no choice but to hire him, because he was on that stop list then.  We just--we were helpless.  We...."  So I pulled out this piece of paper and showed it to the witness.  And if you've seen a man try to disappear into the woodwork, that was the moment.  I thought the man was going to die on the spot.  And the judge said, "Let me look at that."  He looked at it.  The courtroom, you could have heard a pin drop.  The judge was silent for what seemed like an eternity.  Then he said, "In this country, we like to believe that we are superior to other forms of government, because we have a rule of law.  We have a democratic process that we're proud of.  We..."  He went on and on and on.  And then he said to the witness, "Don't you even try to make it look like it's fair?"  I just--I'll never forget that as long as I live.
Story_ID: 94480
Speaker 1: We are following Miss Stewart's career as an attorney.  And we would like to hear more about your--where and when you came into the title of solicitor general--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --and then you're talking--telling us also about your experiences at HEW [Department of Health, Education, and Welfare].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, may I start with HEW first?
Speaker 1: Certainly.
Speaker 2: That happened first.
Speaker 1: Certainly.
Speaker 2: In 1979, the Secretary of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, who was Patricia Roberts Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S, asked me to be the Director of the Office for Civil Rights at HEW.  That's a very important job.  That is the office that enforces Civil Rights in colleges and educational institutions; hospitals; public welfare systems around the country.  And, the office had been sued for not living up to its congressional mandate.  So I was flattered and surprised to be asked to that.  I had always thought that that would be my career crowning job that maybe some years hence I would get it.  I didn't feel quite ready for it at the time.  But I did accept the job and went into it.  It was an extremely exciting job.  There was always something happening.  There were investigations.  We had to investigate the New York City hospitals because the mayor, Mayor [Ed] Koch, was closing three or four hospitals in Harlem; some of the most desperately needed hospitals in America.  We sent dozens and dozens of investigators there.  We were investigating Title 9 athletics.  We were investigating discrimination in primary schools.  One of the things that I had to do as director was sign documents that withheld $38 million from the Chicago Public School System.  I went over to the justice department to look at the documents that we had--that my office had pulled together for their lawsuit against the City of Chicago and the evidence was overwhelming.  It showed bus routes where black children were bused passed half empty white schools to go into all ready overcrowded black schools.  The evidence was overwhelming.  There were charts, graphs, photographs, statistical data; all kinds of evidence.  So I felt justified in withholding that money from the Chicago Public School System and many other school systems that had deliberate racial segregation.  There were about 1622 employees of the Office of Civil Rights, and they were dispersed among 10 regional offices in Headquarters.  I tried to visit all of their regional offices, but it was impossible.  I visited three or four of them.  And I tried to institute some new policies that would assist in health and human services issues, because during the time I was director was the time that health and human services was being divided into two agencies.  The Department of Education was being taken out and made a separate agency.  And my agency, I was to stay with Health and Human Services.  So we had to figure out ways to divide up staff that had been working together for years.  Many friendships had formed.  We tried to devise the most fair method for the employees and also one that was the most workable for the two agencies that would come up.  And also to devise new policies for Health and Human Services initiatives.  So I had someone from the University of Chicago come and talk to my staff in Washington about some of the problems of discrimination in Health and Human Services, because some of my staff told me, "Well, there aren't any Civil Rights issues in Health and Human Services."  I said, "Well, if you don't believe that, you don't belong in this agency."  (Laughs)  So this woman came and electrified my staff.
Speaker 1: And this was in what year?
Speaker 2: This was in 1980.
Speaker 1: Mmhm.  Mmhm.
Speaker 2: In 1980.  And her name is Dr. Mary Davidson, D-A-V-I-D-S-O-N.  She gave a wonderful talk.
Speaker 1: And what was her affiliation with the university?
Speaker 2: She was with the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: In what capacity?
Speaker 2: In the sociology department.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 94481
Speaker 1: And then the Secretary [of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Patricia Roberts Harris] asked me to represent her at the U.N. Conference on Women in Copenhagen [Denmark].  So I went to Copenhagen for--what, three or four weeks, I think it was, for the conference there.  And that was extremely interesting.  I guess for the first time in my life, I realized that most of the people of the world are people of color.  I guess I had already always known it, but to see the women of Africa and Asia and China and South America; it was just fantastic.  We were divided into committees.  Now, committee, you think of a committee as three or four people in a small room like this one; not in the U.N.  A committee has 3 or 400 people in it.  And the rules of the U.N. are ironclad.  You cannot be recognized unless you follow certain protocols.  So my committee was chaired by a Supreme Court justice from Sudan, and she would sweep into the committee room in her full African regalia, head wraps and robes, looking like a queen.  It was fantastic.  But I couldn't talk to her because I didn't speak French.  And that was the--sitting at the U.N., of course, you had headphones and you hear simultaneous translators, but unless you speak French, you cannot speak to most of the people of color of this world.  That was a terrible shock to me.  [HM] Dorothy Height was there.  She brought a French-speaking person with her to do her interpreting for her.  She was a fantastic individual.
Story_ID: 94482
Speaker 1: So after that, I went back into private practice in Washington [D.C.].  And then my brother was appointed to the bench to be a judge, and I thought, well, this is the time to go back to Chicago [Illinois].  I had always wanted to go back to Chicago, but I had this practice and it was hard to get rid of it.  So I just picked up and came back home to Chicago.  And after I'd been in Chicago a short while, I was talking at a dinner to some lawyers about some of the appeals that I had done, and I was getting very enthusiastic talking about all of these appeals; that my cases were against the Department of Defense and the Navy and the HEW [Department of Health, Education, and Welfare] and so forth.  And about several weeks later, my father [Sidney Jones, Jr.] called me and said, "Someone wants you to call the Attorney General of Illinois."  I said, "What do you mean?  Why don't they call me?"  Well the long shot of it was the attorney general wanted me to be the Solicitor General of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Who was the attorney general at that time?
Speaker 1: Neil Hartigan.  N-E-I-L, H-A-R-T-I-G-A-N.  He's an appellate judge now.  But he wanted me to be the solicitor general.  The Solicitor General of Illinois is responsible for all the appeals that the State of Illinois prosecutes or defends in the state courts, in the federal appeals courts, and in the Supreme Court of the United States.  So I had a staff of about 32 lawyers divided into two divisions:  criminal division and civil division.  And they did all of those appeals.  So trying to establish a uniform policy for the appeals, trying to establish standards, trying to--we had a number of lawyers who do contract work for the States.  They would try the cases, and sometimes they would--if they would lose, they would just file an appeal and nobody would know about it.  So we had to make it clear to, you know, notify all of the lawyers, have some ways of letting them know that they can't just go and do an appeal like that (laughs) without permission.  So that was a very busy, very hectic, very hectic job.
Speaker 2: And what was your term of office?
Speaker 1: I was there a little over three years.
Speaker 2: That was very--sounds very interesting.
Story_ID: 94483
Speaker 1: Then was it during that time that you were admitted to practice at the [U.S.] Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: No.  I was admitted to practice before the Supreme Court in 1977.  At the time, you were eligible for the Supreme Court if you had successfully practiced law for three years.  And I got all my paperwork in, and then I realized that my younger brother, who was practicing law at the time, was going to be eligible in another year.  So I called him and said, "Look, why don't I hold up my admission to the Supreme Court until you're eligible, and then Dad can move both of our admissions at the same time."  So that's what we did.  And it was a wonderful, wonderful thing.  I think in the history of America, there hasn't been a father [Sidney Jones, Jr.] to admit a daughter--move the admission of a daughter and a son.  And since my father and Thurgood Marshall were good friends, Justice Marshall had us in his chambers for tea before the ceremony.  It was very, very nice.
Speaker 1: That sounds wonderful.
Story_ID: 94484
Speaker 1: Miss Stewart, are there any other things that you would like to share with us or anecdotes or amplification on your growing up with your family?  Anything you want to tell us about your family members or other little items?
Speaker 2: Just that my family always encouraged me to be whatever I wanted to be and to stand up to my beliefs.  They taught me how proud they were of me.  Well, my father [Sidney Jones, Jr.] had represented people during the [Joseph] McCarthy era and found that there's no defense if someone is asked to prove you were a loyal American.  How can you prove that you're not a communist?  Those were horrible days.  And he had planted in me a hatred of authoritarianism and mind control, thought control.  When my children were small, I applied for a job as a--this is before I was in law school even--I applied for a job as a part-time school teacher in their district.  And I was accepted, and they asked us to sign a loyal oath; an oath that we wouldn't--that we didn't believe in the overthrow of the government by force or violence; that we didn't believe in striking against the government and so forth.  I refused to sign the oath.  And I went to the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and they assigned a lawyer to me to file a lawsuit.  And not only was the oath held unconstitutional, but the federal statute that required the oath was held unconstitutional.  I was very proud of that.  Now my parents were worried about me because they knew what could happen from the days of McCarthy if someone does something like that.  But I had signed one of the oaths before.  And I had to sign one to get my passport to go abroad.  And I had promised myself, "I will sign this now, because my husband will lose his job if I don't (laughs)."  But I will never sign another one again in my life.  And when they put that in front of me, I just couldn't sign it. So that some good has come out of that.  I'd like to say that I nailed the last nail in the coffin of McCarthyism.
Story_ID: 94485
Speaker 1: But one thing I would like to say is that, you never know what the future is going to bring you.  You never know.  If anyone had told me that I would be the head of a federal agency with a budget of $38 million and 1700 employees, I would have told them they were crazy.  Who?  Little old me?  Never happen.  If anyone had ever told me I would be solicitor general, I would have been afraid of them (laughs).  I would have said, "This person belongs in a mental institution."  But you never know.  So young people need to prepare themselves for whatever the future will bring.  Whatever.  There is no limit to the knowledge and information that you can acquire that will someday stand you in good stead and ways that you could never dream of.  Those ways haven't even been born yet.  So how could anyone prepare themselves to have been a computer specialist, say, 20 years ago?  Nobody knew about those things.  But if you were interested in things, working in something in something you were interested in is the most exciting life you can have.  I can't imagine going to work and hating your job.  But if you do what you love doing and feel that you are making a contribution, making the world a better place, you can't wait to get up in the morning and get into the office.  And another thing I'd like to say is that, you also have to continuously ask yourself, am I really doing the right thing?  Is this the best way to approach this problem?  That's what I'm asking myself today.  Is litigation the best way to handle the problems of racism and poverty and meanness and discrimination?  I'm not sure it is.  But until I can find a better way, I'm going to keep on doing what I'm doing, and when the better way comes, I'll switch over.
Story_ID: 94486
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  Are there any things that you think of now that you would like yet to do to accomplish?  Any new avenues?
Speaker 2: I'd like to get the law to change a little.  The law is very tough on discrimination cases.  I have been able to get the law to change a little in some cases.  I've been able to get courts to say that people can get attorneys' fees for winning certain kinds of cases that they couldn't get before.  I've been able to get the law to change in certain other ways.  But it's getting harder and harder to do that these days.  So that's one thing I would like to do.  Another thing I would like to do is find some of the secrets that the past still holds for me in my historical and family research.  Those secrets are guarded very carefully by the documents and by the guardians of our history.  They have hidden those things from us.  And it's not easy to discover the truth.  So many court houses have burned down, and I'm convinced that some of these courthouses didn't burn down by accident.  They burned down because they held some very valuable secrets.  So those are some of the other things I'd like to accomplish.  If you'd asked me that question 30 years ago, I would have said, I'd like to end discrimination in America.  But I've finally gotten it through my thick head that that's not going to happen in my lifetime.
Story_ID: 94487
Speaker 1: Could you tell us also about the books that you've written about Liberia and Ghana?  You--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wrote a book, a little book about Liberia because I couldn't find one that had the information I wanted.  I was interested in the African-Americans who left this country and emigrated to Liberia, and I wanted to find out something about them.  And it's very little written about them, so I wrote essentially what's a little handbook about what kind of records are available, where the records are physically located, what kind of information you can find in those records.  And then I figured I'd better do a little history of Liberia to put all of that into some kind of perspective.  And I found that everything I knew about Liberian history was not true.  That Liberia was not founded by freed slaves, but by white slave owners who wanted to get rid of all the free black people in America so the institution of slavery would be stronger.  And where did I get that information?  From the Annual reports of what is popularly known as the American Colonization Society.  But they call themselves the American Society for Colonizing the Free People of Color of the United States.  And it wasn't until the country had been in existence about 40 years that people were starting getting the notion of freeing slaves on the condition that they would emigrate to Liberia.  And that's when the big freed slave exodus started.  But before that, there were very, very few freed slaves who went to Liberia.  And so I was surprised how many libraries and archives wanted to purchase that little book.  But anyway, it's gotten around.  And the other one was about Africans in this country.  We've been told that we've lost our African culture; that it was taken from us during slavery.  And yet, we noticed what can only be called Africanisms in black song and dance and the blues and in jazz, in gospel music.  These are Africanisms.  So I was just looking through the Georgia census for 1870, and I noticed someone who was born in Africa.  And I looked around to see if there were any more, and I found another and then another and then another.  So what I decided to do was to do through the entire census for the state of Georgia and pull out the names of everyone who told the census taker that he'd been in Africa, or a black person who had a foreign-born parent.  And I found over 1400 names.  So I published them in a little book.  And I found some other interesting things just going through the census records.  It's amazing.  All the Africans had English names, and all of them--almost none of them could--had identified a location in Africa about over--oh, a few of them said Guinea or Upper Guinea.
Speaker 1: You mean as the birthplace?
Speaker 2: As a birthplace.  But the overwhelmingly majority of them said Africa.  And there were a number who said they were born in Spain; in France; in Sweden; in Mexico.  (Unclear)  What is all this?  So I put them in as an appendix, because I just couldn't leave that.  It was just too interesting to leave it.  Now how--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What do you make of it?
Speaker 2: I don't know what to make of it.  Some people thought--some historians that I've talked to about it speculate that maybe after--you know, during the Civil War, the confederates sent ambassadors abroad.  So they may have brought their servants with them, their slaves with them.  And the slaves had children over there and they were brought back to this country.  That's another study.
Speaker 1: Another avenue, yes, in your study of genealogy.
Story_ID: 94488
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community now and in the future?
Speaker 2: Education and jobs.  The African American community, like most communities, is being undereducated.  The curriculum in the public schools is a disaster.  The curriculum is run by the textbook companies who want to sell the highest, largest number of textbooks.  They've been watered down to the least common denominator.  All of the excitement has been taken out of them, right of them.  You can't have learning without controversy.  You can't have any learning without discussion.  Yet, who does the most talking in the modern classroom?  The teacher.  The students are supposed to sit moot and imbibe all of the knowledge from the teacher's mouth.  That's not the way education takes place.  The textbooks don't tell the real truths about our society.  And that's why we fool ourselves when it comes to matters such as race.  We fool ourselves into thinking that the issues have all been solved.  People come to this office and sit at this desk and cry because of the way they've been treated on the job.  They said, "I thought that was all over with."  I say to them, "Did your mother tell you that life was fair?"  But they said, "I didn't think.  I thought if I educated myself, if I prepared myself, that I would get the rewards."  We have a lot of education to do.  And then when it comes to work, we need to have more black people going into business for themselves and not relying on other people to hire them.  We've got to have that.  In Chicago [Illinois], in many cities across the country, there were thousands of small black businesses that were urban renewed out of existence.  Those businesses never moved.  They never relocated.  They just went out of business, and all of those people that were working there had to get jobs, had to be employed by someone else.  That is something that I think we need to look at.
Story_ID: 94489
Speaker 1: Is there is anything that you have done already that, in hindsight, you would like to have done differently or any regrets?
Speaker 2: No.  First of all, there are things that I--maybe I could have done better or differently.  But who knows what the outcome, the ultimate outcome would have been.  So I try not to worry about those things.  Everything else might have turned into a disaster.
Story_ID: 94490
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, both of my sons tell me that they learned from me to do the right thing, and that I think that's--I've tried to make a difference.  I've tried to make the world a better place.  I can't think of a better legacy than that.  I've tried to make people understand each other a little more.
Speaker 1: What do you--what would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That's the best I can say.  I can't say.
Speaker 1: You've done well. I've enjoyed this interview.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  I have too.
Story_ID: 92116
Speaker 1: This is when I was sworn in to the Supreme Court of the United States in 1977.  Justice Thurgood Marshall had us in to tea.  That's in his chambers.  And present are my entire family:  my son Ken on the left; my mother--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Her name?
Speaker 1: --Roma Jones; my brother, Sidney Jones; that's me next to Mr. Justice Thurgood Marshall; and next to him is my father, Sidney A. Jones, Jr.; there a little bit in the back is my son Scott Stewart; and my sister, Laurel Jones Boyd on the far right.
Speaker 2: And tell us your son's name on this end.
Speaker 1: Oh, Kenneth.  It's Kenneth Stewart on the left.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great.  Next photo.  Now, if you could (unclear) for me.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: I was on the girls' swimming team of the Wabash Avenue YMCA.  And this is the entire swimming team.  We were city national champions in about 1950--oh, that must have been about 1951; something like--or maybe even in the late '40s [1940s].  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Can you point out where you are in the photo?
Speaker 1: I'm on the--in the back on the right.  I'm the only one who's not smiling.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my third birthday party.  And on the floor next to me is my doll, Clara, named after my great-grandmother.  And that's me with my birthday cake.
Speaker 2: Taken where?
Speaker 1: This must have been taken in Savannah, Georgia.  It looks like it was taken in the South.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next, please.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is me when I was about nine or ten years old.  I had long braids, and the photographer wanted me to put them in front so they would show, but I did not like my braids to be in front.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a very old newspaper clipping from 1937, when I was just a baby.  It's five generations.  My great-great-grandmother Julia Allen Early on the far left; next to her is my great-grandmother Clara Kennedy; next to her is my grandmother Winifred Lawson; seated is my mother, Roma Jones; and the infant is me.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: This is Julia Early, aged 93, and four descendants.  That was in the "Cassopolis Vigilant."  That's a local newspaper up in Michigan.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Take it out when you're ready.  Thank you.  Okay.  We're ready.
Speaker 1: Yes.  This is a picture of me and my life in Japan.  I went skiing with some members of the Japan Philharmonic Orchestra.  And this is a bunch of us up in the ski resort huddled around the kotatsu, which is an oven in the floor with a table over it that you sit around with your feet next to the oven and pull a blanket around you.  I am second from the left.  And the people there are, on the far left is Morisan (ph), who plays contrabass; I think that's--I don't recall who that is next to me; the man sitting right in the middle is second violin, Mr. Shusan (ph), we call him; and the one next to him, I can't remember his name, but he played the cello; and that a pianist next to him, whose name I can't remember.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  All right.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my third-grade class.  That's me on the right with the big necklace; on the far right in the back with the big necklace on trying to fit in.  That's my--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This is--I was in third grade, so this must be about 1943.  Maybe about 1943.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: My swimming team had a reunion about three years ago here in Chicago.  And every member of the team attended, as well as our coach who's sitting in the middle on the bottom there with the hat on.  That's me in the back with the black and white dress on.  And those are all of the other members, the same girls that were in that photograph in the swimming suits.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: This picture must have been taken about'	 19--oh, about 1978.  That's my sister, Laurel; my brother, Sidney, and me at our parents' home in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a photograph that was taken by a magazine for me, about me when they wanted to interview me for my genealogical research.  That's taken in the study of my home.  And around me are the pictures of some of my ancestors, including my--right in the foreground is my great-great-grandmother, Julia Early; next to her is her husband, my great-great-grandfather, John Early; right behind them is my father's mother, Mary Howard Jones; and to the right are my great-grandparents together, the Kennedys.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Thank you.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's me, taken sometime during the seventies [1970S].  I think it must have been taken--I don't know when that picture was taken, but it was sometime during the '70s' [1970s].
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a publicity photograph my father had made when he was running for alderman of the sixth ward.  That's my brother sitting on the floor; my mother next to him; my father in the tie; my sister, Laurel in her Girl Scout uniform, and me on the right bending over.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--taken at a reception in Tokyo.  That's me on the right.  In the middle is Mrs. Shimuzu (ph), who was my husband's assistant at the Embassy; a wonderful lady.  And next to her was one of my dear friends, Hidaiko McDonald (ph).  She taught me my first word of Japanese.  She said, "I'm going to teach you your first word of Japanese.  It's Ohio."  And I said, "You're kidding."  (Laughs)
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in Washington, D.C., when my father was there for some kind of conference; my two sons on the right with their Afro hairstyles are looking happy as clams to see their grandfather, who they love dearly.  And I came, I guess, directly from because I have a briefcase in my hands.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture taken of the same time of me and my father.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is another picture of my siblings and me.  My sister, Laurel Boyd; my brother, Sidney Jones; and me.  This was taken about 1980--about 1983.
