Story_ID: 557817
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Jock Michael Smith [HistoryMaker Jock Smith].  J-O-C-K, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth.
Speaker 2: June 10th, 1948.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth.
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Tell me your occupation.
Speaker 2: Trial lawyer.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: My home in Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Today's date.
Speaker 2: The 5th of September of 2007.
Story_ID: 557818
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: And a favorite food, what do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Favorite food would be--wow it's so much, so many different favorite foods.  I would say fish, seafood.  Actually king crab legs is my favorite of all time.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I like to go to New York City [New York, New York] that's where I grew up and go to Las Vegas [Nevada] sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer because that's when the boys of summer are playing baseball.  I'm a baseball junky.
Speaker 1: Tell me your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: Well that's a good question.  There are so many.  John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in his 1960 [sic. 1961] inaugural address didn't only ask not, he said this: "Civility is never a sign of weakness and sincerity is always subject to proof."  And of course the great statement by Frederick Douglass, "Those who profess freedom did depreciate agi- agitation want crops without plowing the ground, rain without, we want rain without thunder and lightning.  Power concedes nothing without a struggle. It never has and never will."  And then there's another one too, a couple of Johnnie Cochran phrases, one he got from his mother Hattie Coch- Cochran [Hattie Bass Cochran], "The only thing remembered after a crisis is your conduct during it." And also Johnnie Cochran one, one: "Service is the price you pay for the space you occupy."  Those are a few.
Story_ID: 557819
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family and let's begin with your mother.  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Betty Lou Nance [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] now, but her maiden name was Bowers, B-O-W-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your mother, where was she born and do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: I don't know the year she was born, but she was born in January 14th in Kansas City, Kansas which is where my folks originated.  My dad [Jacob Smith] also is from Kansas City, Kansas. And she's in her eighties now.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: She shared a few stories, you know, about the fact that she was, see my granddad was a preacher, Reverend Bowers [T.A. Bowers], and he was an A.M.E. Methodist preacher [sic. Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] and so my mother was raised in the A.M.E. church and her mother, my grandmother, Rebecca Bowers, who helped raise me after my father's assassination, was also a strong Bible-toting churchgoing woman.  And so my mother was raised with proper manners, proper diction.  And she also always told me the stories about in Kansas City, the schools of course were segregated, but she always said that the black schools for some reason were better than white schools.  The teachers cared more about the kids.  The education was second to none.  She said so what happened when she got to college, which was unheard of then, went to Kansas State [Kansas State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Kansas State University] in Manhattan [Kansas] that she was ahead of the white kids, that she knew more grammar, that she had better English.  She understood subject and--subject and verb, and that all the white kids who were in college seemed to be surprised as well as the teachers.  She said that's because the teachers from Kansas City made sure that the kids were well educated, well taken care of, so though they thought that they were inferior, though there may have been inferior structures physically, the teaching aspect of it, or the education aspect of it was better and therefore she was always well spoken and well read.  My mother always wrote very well, still does write very well.  She was an artist.  She showed me some of her paintings.  She was an art major in Kansas at Kansas State and graduated in art and therefore she has always just been as I said well educated and someone who, who always seem to have the right words for the right occasion.
Story_ID: 557820
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?  You said you grandmother's name was Rebecca [Rebecca Bowers] and your grandfather do you remember his first name?
Speaker 2: They called him Reverend T.A. Bowers, and I can get the exact name for you in a minute, but they referred to him as T.A. and he was as I said an A.M.E. preacher [sic. Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal].  He died many, many years before I, I was born.  I never got a chance to meet the man, but my understanding is that he was a great preacher and that he took his sermons and his relationship with the Lord very, very seriously.  And was a man who lived what he preached, wasn't a man who was saying one thing and doing another something that we see a lot of today; he was not that way.
Speaker 1: And they too were, were they originally from Kansas?
Speaker 2: That is my understanding.  My mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] told me one time that our family that they, I don't know if they did something similar to what Alex Haley did or not, but my mother had told me something interesting.  She said we actually traced our ancestry back to Kentucky and that we were actually in the blood line of the fam- of the Clay family, the famous Henry Clay.  Henry Clay was a great senator from Kentucky who never became president, but came close, but never actually became president, but he was the author of the Missouri Compromise [Missouri Compromise of 1820].  The Missouri Compromise in the history when they had decided some states would be slave states and some states would be free states.  He is--that's why they refer to him as the great compromiser.  So, what's so ironic is that my blood lines apparently according to my mother run through the Great Compromise and run through the, the Cray- the Clay lineage out of Kentucky I was told.
Story_ID: 557821
Speaker 1: Did you have--you said that your [maternal] grandfather [T.A. Bowers] passed away and you didn't get to know him, but did you know your grandmother [Rebecca Bowers]?
Speaker 2: Very, very well.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: After my father [Jacob Smith] was tragically assassinated in 1957 in his law office, I was eight years old, my grandmother left Kansas City, Kansas, to come to New York City [New York, New York] where we lived to take care of my sister and I, my younger sister, Wilma [Paula Smith], so my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] could return to work and begin to--finish raising the family.  My grandmother was, I'll never forget this, she was blue eyes and silver hair woman who had an awful lot of dignity and, and strong knowledge.  She was always first of all in good spirits.  I never saw my grandmother have a day when she was in a bad mood, never.  She would read her Bible the same time every day.  She would constantly tell me the things that were important for me to remember.  I still remember these phrases:  "Never get too big for your bridges Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith]; the bigger they come, the harder they fall."  "Remember Jock, a fool and his money soon part."  And she said, "Jock, you know why he's a fool?" I said, "No grandmamma." "'Cause he doesn't understand the value of money.  Always understand the value of money."  And I remember she always showed love.  She had me in church, you know, every Sunday morning when she was available to go, reading the Bible every day, always a source of encouragement.  Whatever I took an interest in, my grandmother took an interest in.  I remember when the Mets [New York Mets] started playing baseball in New York in '62 [1962] and I was a big Met fan.  May grandmother watched the games during the day, and when I would come home after school she could tell me everything that happened in the game.  And the conversation would go something like this: "Grandmamma, what happened this afternoon?"  She said, "I don't wanna discuss it."  She said, "We got skunked, I mean nothing."  She said, "Those old ornery devils."  She said, "They didn't get any runs today, nothing." Say, "They ought to be ashamed of themselves, didn't hit a lick. I'm through with them."  Of course, she wasn't through with them, the next day she watched the next game and tell me what would happen with this, with this team.  But, she took an interest in everything that I was interested in.  She had a genuine love for people.  I never heard my grandmother say a bad word about anybody.  I remember talking to my grandmother one time about--in 1960 was the first time I ever campaigned for anybody with president, I ca- campaigned for John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and I asked my grandmother because I was so excited about J.F.K., and I was a young man, I was twelve years old, and I said, "Grandmamma what do you, who are you gonna vote for, who'd you vote for?"  She said, "Well I voted for Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon]."  I said, "Grandma why would you do that?"  She said, "Well they had an interview with John Kennedy on 'Meet the Press' and they asked him about the Negro problem.  He said he didn't know there was one."  She said, "Well I figured if he didn't know there was one, I didn't need to vote for him.  There is one, son."  I said, "Indeed there is, grandmamma.  I understand your reasoning, but I think John Kennedy will make a better president."  And later on Kennedy became president she said, "I think you were right, I was wrong, but you couldn't vote.  Nixon didn't turn out to be too good.  John F. Kennedy was a better choice."  But, I remember having that, that, that, that conversation with her about he said he didn't know there was a Negro problem.  That kind of upset her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now when your [maternal] grandmother and grandfather were living in Kansas City [Kansas] did they own the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: It is my understanding that they did, yes, because when I would travel to Kansas City during the summer I would stay at different homes and like my father's mother Lula Smith I stayed at her home at 2026 North 6th Street and then my aunt's home, the grandmother lived with my aunt.  My mother had a sister named Elaine [Elaine Bowers], and her address I still remember was 2928 Hickam Drive, Kansas City, Kansas. I have some degree of recall ability here. And those homes were owned by the, the, the family, the, the Bowers clan or Smith lineage.  So, as far as I know from the times that I became aware of real estate ownership they did own their own homes yes.
Speaker 1: And, and what, did your grandmother work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.  I believe she was playing the role of a preacher's wife, which was really important to her and she was the first lady in the church and she prayed for the sick and, and, and I mean every day she would pray the same prayer.  I still, it's really interesting you would ask me, because I still remember some of those things she would say in them.  She said, "Lord please help the sick.  Please help the bereaved, those who are shut in and locked out who do not have an opportunity, please make a way for these people, Lord."  And I used to say, "Grandma why are praying for the bereaved?"  She said, "Child because they, they weren't necessarily dealt a good blow like the rest of us.  You, they, they, they didn't have good fortune.  You have to pray for people because God tells us to do that."  And so she was a, a prayer warrior, a homemaker, and you know a, a, a great anchor of, of courage and, and direction in our family.  And no I don't know that grandmamma ever, that I ever heard that she worked.  She may have, but not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much education she might have had?
Speaker 2: I don't believe grandmamma had more than eight or nine, eighth or ninth grade, but she was so well spoken you'd never know it, I mean she was just so well spoken in her words that you would think that she was college trained.
Story_ID: 557822
Speaker 1: Now- your father, tell me his name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: Well, my father was Jacob A. Smith [Jacob Smith] or Abraham, A is for Abraham, Smith.  J-A-C-O-B, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Kansas City, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father was, I, I have so many memories of my father although he was killed when I was eight years old.  First of all he knocked out the first peach basket above the light post where we shoot baskets.  He would take me to his law office, I'd crawl around the office with him.  We'd be at the Calvary Baptist Church in Queens [Jamaica, New York] on Sunday where he served as a deacon and lawyer.  I remember the United Democratic Club [Guy R. Brewer United Democratic Club] he started, which was the first black club in Queens that helped elect the first black elected official in the history of the, of the borough.  When he would come home every day and my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] would ask him, "Smitty, how was your day," he would always say the same thing.  He would take his hat off, his top hat off and put it in the closet and say, "White folks still ahead, but we're gaining."  And every day he said that with a loving spirit.  On Christmas morning, my dad was happier than my sister [Paula Smith] and I were to have us open our gifts.  He'd wake us up at five or six o'clock in the morning and enjoy the gift opening exercise.  He raised me also in the ballpark.  We went, we used to take the train out to Ebbets Field in Brooklyn [New York] to see the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], and he pointed down and said, "That's Jackie Robinson, son he integrated baseball (background noise).  I want you to be like this man.  This is Roy Campanella over here who also integrated baseball." (Background noise)  And then they would, he'd take me over to the Polo Grounds [New York, New York] and we'd see Willie Mays play (background noise) the New York Giants [San Francisco Giants] and Monte Irvin; that was his team.  So I rooted for the Brooklyn Dodgers and he rooted for the New York Giants. (Background noise) So, we had this rivalry--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the rivalry.
Speaker 2: The rivalry between the New York Giants and Brooklyn Dodgers remains even today.  They call and, and, and the--as I said my dad's favorite player was Willie Mays, who by the way is the greatest player I ever saw, and my player, my favorite players was Duke Snider who played for the Dodgers, and I was a great Brooklyn Dodgers fan and I remember going to a game one night and in the ninth inning the Dodgers were trying to come back, he was down a run, and they called for a fly ball to centerfield, Willie Mays came in and make a traditional basket catch, his cap fell off, he said, "Your team just lost, my team just won."  He tried to teach me good sportsmanship to learn how to lose, and lose with grace and dignity.  In 1955, when the Brooklyn Dodgers defeated the, the Yankees [New York Yankees], his brothers, who had a brother, he had a brother named Jean Smith and one named Wilson Smith [Wilson Smith, Jr.].  Wilson came all the way from Portland, Oregon and I think they went to one or two World Series games.  And the last game there was a little black and white TV we had in the house and when the Dodgers beat the Yankees this was the Jackie Robinson, Roy Campanella, and Don Newcombe Dodgers of the integrated Dodgers beat the segregated Yankees.  They only had one black player at the time, Elston Howard and they had just gotten him a year or two before.  They sat in front of a television set and they cried, and my father told me he said, "Son this is one of the most significant days in Negro history.  They have, Jackie, the Brooklyn Dodgers, your team has defeated the great Yankees of Mickey Mantle and Yogi Berra and Whitey Ford and this is a black, this team it was black stars on it, African American."  They called them Negro stars at the time.  "This is the day that will go down in history."  He broke down.  He let me understand at an early age what he taught me the passion of what it was to be an African American and to try to climb the mountaintop that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] always talked about.  My father had a great keen insight for that.
Story_ID: 557823
Speaker 1: He [Smith's father, Jacob Smith] was way ahead of his time. He was a lawyer they say won phenomenal cases.  He was one of the greatest trial lawyers that ever lived they say.  He was congenial around the house.  The last day of his life he had had a cold and been in the bed for a couple of days, and the told my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] he was just going to make one appointment in Manhattan [New York] and then come back.  And I remember saying goodbye to him that morning and he backed his '57 [1957] Ford Fairlane black automobile out of the driveway.  And little did I know I'd never him again.  We were ushered out of school that day, and the tragic news was delivered that he had been assassinated in his office by someone on the other side of a case he was winning against.  I remember on the six o'clock that night and the ten o'clock news.  I remember the fact that people didn't understand this was my father.  The headlines of all the newspapers, this prominent black Negro lawyer they called him.  It was just, it is the event that more than any other event shapes my life as to who I am.  It is the, it is the defining moment of my life, the assassination of my father at such a young age.  Who was such a mentor to me.  Think about Christmas again, think about the ballparks.  No more ballparks, no more Jackie Robinson, no more Willie Mays.  No more crawling around the law office.  No more peach baskets.  No more stick ball games.  They all left and I left with them.  One of the last things I remember about my father were a couple of things.  He took me up to school one time to talk to my counselor.  I was in the third grade and he wanted to know how I was doing, and they had a little chart with each child's name and they have a star next to your name.  You had good conduct that week and good academics.  You had good, if you were good in school, you did well in school and your conduct was, was, was, was A plus they had a star next to your name.  And there were just a few stars next to my name, and my father told me, "I wanna star next to your name from now on.  When I come up here next year, there better be a star next to your name for every week," and there were stars next to my name from that point on until his death.  And after his death, there never were any stars ever again in my--next to my name.  I remember that because of the loss that I had suffered.
Story_ID: 557824
Speaker 1: And there was an incident where we integrated this community over at 19732 Nashville Boulevard in Springfield Gardens [Queens, New York], and he sat me down, explained to me how to be a model citizen.  He said, "Son everything you do is gonna be watched, be looked at, and you're gonna have to be superior to everybody else on this block in order for Negroes to make this integration experiment work; we're a part of that experiment."  And one day a white kid named Dickey [ph.], who I got to be close to, showed me the first set of baseball cards I'd ever seen.  He had Ted Williams card '56 [1956] I wanted badly.  He would let me look at it, but I never could touch it.  I still remember that Ted Williams card.  I ended up getting it as an adult, but what happened I got into a fight with Dickey, and Dickey was getting the best of me and I was running and my father was coming out of the house and as I was going, he called me into the house at that point and he struck me and knocked me down to the ground in the living room area and he pointed down to me he said, "Never be a coward.  Never run, always stand up even if you're losing a fight, don't ever run, don't be a coward."  Those words ring true to me today.  The fights that I fight in court and the, the thing I never run from anybody, I got that from my father.  I also got the importance from my father of being superior to my colleagues because of my race, of the integration we experienced.  I also got from my father the concept of pioneerism in America, the importance of Jackie Robinson, Willie Mays, Roy Campanella, Monte Irvin during that time, the importance of what they call the great experiment, the great experiment of integration of baseball, which was the forerunner, I believe, to Brown vs. the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and a lot of other things that occurred later on in life that affected the social fabric of America.  I am proud to say that I was there to see the beginnings of this.  Jacob, Jacob Abraham Smith [Jacob Smith] allowed me to see the beginnings of this in the right way, and therefore that is why I have the passion and drive that I have, why I will not run from a fight.  My, my father put that into me.  Somebody was saying to me recently my father did more for me in eight years than most fathers do for their kids in fifty or sixty years.  I never really had thought about it that way, but in thinking about it that makes a lot of sense.  My father did more for me in the eight years of life I had with him than most fathers do for their, their sons who are with them fifty, sixty, and seventy years.  That, that'd be my concluding statement that I, I thinks that true that, that my father was so far ahead of his time, I mean he was, he was the first black law firm to have a law office in Manhattan, New York, ever that was not, did not originate in Harlem [New York, New York] was the law office of Watson, Carter, and Smith and on Broadway of all places.  And the place he lost his life was in that very law office that integrated New York [New York] in downtown Broadway and I still remember the office.  I remember the kind of door it had.  I remember it was at the end of the hall.  I remember the sign was in gold letters with the old parchment blocked out kind of windows.  I still remember his office at the end of the hall on the, on the left.  I still remember where his secretary was sitting.  I remember everything.  My memories of what my father put into me remain the reason I get up in the morning now.  One of the reasons I get up in the morning is because Jacob Abraham Smith taught me I had an obligation to African Americans to get up every morning.  I'm not getting up in the morning for me, I get up in the morning for my family, for my church community, for my wife [Yvette Smiley-Smith], and for my people.  My father put this into me, and so that's how, that's, that's the way I am.  He made me that way and so I owe him, you know, more than I ever could, could, could state in an interview like this.  I owe so much to my father.
Story_ID: 557825
Speaker 1: Tell me what school your father [Jacob Smith] attended.
Speaker 2: My father attended Kansas University [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] as an undergraduate and law school, attended Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York] and graduated in 1950.  And the reason I know that is that in my law building there's another relic of history.  I have my father's law degree and that said--and his bar certificate from New York bar and they had a graduation photo taken of everybody who graduated and what they did they made little individual pictures and everybody had their, this is just a head shot with just the, the cap on.  You see the, the remnants of the gown and there was only one other African American in that class.  I looked at that picture every year to make sure that there's my father and one other African American graduated in that 1950 Brooklyn Law School class.
Story_ID: 557826
Speaker 1: You talked a lot about what your father instilled in you, what characteristics did you get from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, one of them is long suffering-ness.  My mother had to not only endure the tragic loss of Smitty [Jacob Smith], her husband, but Jacob to the rest of the world, the lawyer, the civil rights leader, the great church leader, and the great emancipator of, of freedom and rights for African Americans, and mother she was a homemaker at the time, though she had a college education.  And she had to go back to school--back to work, I'm sorry, and my grandmother as I said, Rebecca, came to take care of my sister [Paula Smith], Rebecca Bowers.  I never heard my mother complain.  I never heard my mother express any, at least in my presence, anything other than her will to carry on for her children.  She--so the first thing I learned from my mother more than anything else, was long suffering-ness, that is that you, you when you're dealt a bad blow and things really turn for the worst that she's the embodiment of that Johnnie Cochran quote, "The only thing remembered after a crisis is your conduct during it."  I call that a crisis, a big crisis, and it's affected--it affected then and has affected the quality of our life ever since.  Smitty was gone and she had to pick up the pieces.  She worked with Eastern Air Lines, the old Eastern Air Lines as a reservation clerk for many years, and she would be at work on these different shifts.   She'd be working a morning shift one week, next week she'd be working a night shift.  She would be on the subway at risk.  My grandmother I remember staying up at night worrying about whether Betty Lou [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] could get home safely.  There were no cell phones then.  There was no way to get in touch with anybody.  My mother went out into that cold New York chilly air for her children.  Decency, long suffering-ess, courage, a will to win, a fighting spirit, even in the odds of insurmountable circumstances.  This is what I took and take from my mother and, and she stands as a tower of strength someone who, who--it was very difficult to pick up these pieces, yet she did so with reverence and dignity and fortitude.
Story_ID: 557827
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit because we need to make some corrections since you checked out the book and tell me about T.A. Bowers he was a--
Speaker 2: C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: --C.M.E. preacher married to Rebecca [Rebecca Bowers], and your father's parents Wilson--
Speaker 2: Wilson Smith, Jr. [sic. Wilson Smith, Sr.], and Lula Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any knowledge about them?
Speaker 2: I, I don't have any knowledge about Wilson Smith, Jr.  My grandmother Lula Smith I have some knowledge of simply because when I would come to Kansas City [Kansas] during the summer--see what would happen after my father [Jacob Smith] was killed, my grandmother would come stay with my sister [Paula Smith] and I and keep, keep us while my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] went back to work.  During the three months of the summer, say the summer would come in, my grandmother would go back to live with her, her other daughter, Elaine French [Elaine Bowers], in Kansas City, Kansas, and I would stay there during the summers.  Well two doors down from Elaine, just ironic how this was, two doors down was the old home house my father was raised in at 2026 North 6th Street, and Lula Smith was still in that house.  And she was a very strong willed woman and very forceful woman, very small woman and diminutive in size, but very, but very strong in her beliefs and her principles.  She--there are all kinds of stories about her how she chased her sons out of the pool hall with a pool stick herself and have a switch with her and how she, my Uncle Wilson [Wilson Smith, Jr.], not my granddad, my Uncle Wilson, my father's brother, was a great basketball player at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], said the greatest basketball player that ever played there.  He was drafted by the Boston Celtics, and his name was, his nickname was Lulu.  They named him Lulu after his mother, Lula Smith because of her terror, her, her, her, her ability to discipline her sons and they never talked back with her.  She would come to the pool hall and everybody else would step aside and they would be escorted out.  She would clear the deck so to speak.  She--when I spent quality time with her during these respective summers, she had little eyesight at first, and she had blue eyes as well, and she lost her eyesight.  But, grandmamma was so strong, keep in mind this house had two stories and she still knew how to get up those stairs and she'd go up to her bedroom and sleep at night and she would insist nobody stayed with her. And she did that for years.
Story_ID: 557828
Speaker 1: And she [Smith's paternal grandmother, Lula Smith] just raised these boys the right way, three of them, Jacob [Jacob Smith], Wilson [Wilson Smith, Jr.], and Jean [Jean Smith] and my--Wilson was the oldest, my dad was the middle son, and Jean Smith his younger brother is still living.  She did a great job in raising these young men.  Wilson was gainfully employed for years in Portland, Oregon.  Jean is a skycap with TWA [Trans World Airlines] for many years, retired at one time was at J.F.K. [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], moved to LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California], retired there after many years of service, and of course my father with his great legal careers, so she did a good job with all of them.
Story_ID: 557829
Speaker 1: And your father was in World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father was a Buffalo--second lieutenant is my understanding.  He rose to the rank of captain and then he became a Buffalo Soldier.  I have a diary of his first thirty days in the [U.S.] military that he wrote that's in his own hand and I'm quite proud of.  He, just everything Jacob [Jacob Smith] touched he seemed to do well.  He--the uniform, the actual, not the pants, but the uniform top I have in my office on a mannequin with the Buffalo Soldier's emblem on the sleeve and also the JAG [Judge Advocate General's Corps] emblem for being a lawyer.  So, I think they may have focused his legal and he was you know going into law, so he did serve and served with, you know, with honor.
Story_ID: 557830
Speaker 1: Now your name Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith], J-O-C-K, is there a story about how and why you were named Jock, spelled J-O-C-K?
Speaker 2: You know what I have asked that question a number of times of my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] and never have quite gotten the story on how that actually came about 'cause a lot of people ask me, you know, "Why were you not named after your father [Jacob Smith]," and my mother told me my father didn't want me necessarily named after him.  She, he didn't want me to have to chase whatever he had started I suspect or something.  Maybe the compromise was something interesting, Jock, I mean it starts with a J.  I don't know how they came up with that.  And like you say a lot of people say, "Oh Jock, you know J-A-C-Q-U-E."  "No, no, no, no, no, J-O-C-K," and so that surprises a lot of people.
Story_ID: 557831
Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted to clear up was about where your mother went to school.
Speaker 2: My mother went to, of course, high school and whatnot in Kansas City, Kansas, then went to college at Kansas State University [Kansas State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Kansas State University] in Manhattan, Kansas; that's where she went to school.
Speaker 1: And what was her course of study?
Speaker 2: Art.
Speaker 1: All right, now is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: They were living, both were raised in Kansas City, Kansas, and I don't know exactly how they, they met, but I think that I read some correspondence at one time.  I was reading some letters that my dad had written to my mother while he was in the [U.S. military] service and they were not married at the time and they had dated it's my understanding I think during college, although they were in different schools, but they grew up in the same hometown and they stayed in touch.  And I one of the letters I read my father indicated that you know Betty Lou [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] is the only woman he'd really want to marry.  He was writing I think this letter it might have been to his brother or somehow and some letter I intercepted and I tried to figure out where it is now, but I read this and I found it to be quite interesting what he was saying.  My mother always told me that they were perfectly compatible and they had a real open relationship from the standpoint of the communication that she could always depend on Smitty [Jacob Smith] to tell her the truth or Jay or Jacob.  He was, he carried on a lot, a lot of--a practical joker, and a person in good spirits all the time and, and I think that appealed to, to her, my mother being sort of the serious minded person that she is, having been raised in a very religious background setting and, and her father [T.A. Bowers] being a minister and what- and whatnot I think that was a requirement of hers and I think Jake was the perfect mate for her.
Story_ID: 557832
Speaker 1: Did your father [Jacob Smith] talk much or tell you much about his growing up?
Speaker 2: He did not.  Unfortunately I missed ever having a conversation with my father about his upbringing.  I just never had an opportunity.  Most of my stories about my father's upbringing came from Lula [Lula Smith].  Came from my grandmother when she would help out in caring for me during the summers in '61 [1961].  And, and I gotten a lot of stories from her, but I never got any stories from him unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Are there any that you wanna share that your grandmother might have told you?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember one in particular, one or two.  I remember being chased out of the pool hall a number of times, and I remember that, I remember that she always told him to keep his feet on the ground and not to be, to be levelheaded.  As he got an education, not to come home and think that he was better than she was.  And she spent most of her time anchoring him on the ground.  I was told stories about how great a basketball player he was up at some place called Dunbar high [Dunbar School, Kansas City, Kansas] as I understand it, Dunbar in this, it was Sumner, maybe it was Sumner High [Sumner High School; Sumner Academy of Arts and Science, Kansas City, Kansas], but was Dunbar elementary where he would dribble through the legs of these players and played the game the way he lived, very charismatic, cagy, and he just seemed to always be one step ahead of everybody else.  They say he would look up like he'd fake the ball and the player go up, he'd go around and score, dribble around them.  And I've heard several stories about his, his, his skills on the court and in fact also that he was a very good student, which was really important 'cause you know he was definitely the better student of the three, no question about that.
Story_ID: 557833
Speaker 1: So your mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] and father [Jacob Smith] marry and that's when they move to New York [New York] or did they live in Kansas City [Kansas] first?
Speaker 2: I think what happened is after, and I may have this wrong, but after the war [World War II, WWII] they moved to New York and my dad went to law school, Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York], and they were married at that time.  They were married bef- after he got out of the war is my understanding, and as he was, before he was, right as he was entering Brooklyn Law School and so that's what carried him to New York.  And I understand he also used to wait tables too at a placed called the Forest Hills Inn.  Forest Hills Inn was a black hotel out in Queens [New York] that would employ black waiters and dad had a summer job then.  He learned under my great uncle, great great uncle, Marion Smith [ph.], we called him Uncle Marion or also better known as Kansas City Smitty, and he got my dad a job during the summers at the Forest Hills Inn where my dad would work, you know go to law school during the day and work in the Forest Hills Inn at night.  And that was good training for him in his law school, helping him to support himself through law school, the value of a job.  And it was a very close knit group over there so at the Forest Hills Inn.  And all those gentlemen went on to be, other than my dad went to law school, ended up being great banquet waiters.  Like my stepfather Wade Nance became the great maitre d' waiter at the Plaza Hotel in New York for fifty years until it was closed a few years ago, and all those guys, the Hotel Pierre [The Pierre] in New York, some of them went there, some went to the Waldorf [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York].  I mean all these--what so interesting about that group of black men that were trained in Forest Hills, and they were trained service is important, customer comes first, always be polite, the customer is always right.  That carried each of them men to a great career as banquet waiters, other than my dad who went on to finish law school and become a lawyer, so they had good training.
Story_ID: 557834
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  Faintly we lived, before we moved on Nashville Boulevard, we lived on, about ten minutes away on another part of Queens [New York], I forget the street right now.  My first memory is being in that house.  I don't remember much about it, but I remember being in that house and right around the corner was Ernestine, Bob [Bob Robinson (ph.)] and Ernestine Robinson [ph.] lived around the corner. And they helped raise me during my real early years along with my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance]. They'd look after me, I'd go around and visit with them and I called him Uncle Bob and Aunt Ernie and then all of a sudden we moved into this integrated community back a couple of years or so before we, before my dad [Jacob Smith] passed away.  So, I remember vaguely the other home.  I still know where it's located.  I could actually take you there if I got in a car and got back on, oh god, Merrick Boulevard [Merrick Road] in, in Queens, which is the main street running through the Long Island [New York] along with Linden Boulevard running through another part of Long Island.  I could take you to the house, but I think when we moved out of that house I was maybe five, six years old at the most.
Story_ID: 557835
Speaker 1: And the house where you grew up? Tell me about the neighborhood.  Who were the people who lived in the neighborhood?  What were some of the professions of some of your classmates or friends that lived in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, when we first moved into the neighborhood on Nashville Boulevard [Queens, New York] of course it was all white other than us.  So in, other than a few of the kids I played with, I didn't really get a chance to ever discuss with them what their parents did, but as the neighborhood became to, to become integrated or more integrated a black lawyer moved across the street, Chester Thomas [ph.], next door Charles Talbert [ph.] moved in. Colonel Talbert or Major Talbert as we called him was a great [U.S.] military giant.  He was about 6'6", an African American guy, very stern, and his son and I became the best of friends.  His son's name was Chuck Talbert [ph.] or Charles Talbert.  So, he was and then he was very big in the military.  So there was a lawyer, a lawyer I remember, there was a second lawyer down the, the, the street.  Then there was a major in the United States Army, Mr. Talbert.  And there were people who worked other jobs, people who worked--I remember one gentleman who would be, he worked, his father worked for the New York Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey], took up tokens for the subway and he, and his name was Mr. Culpepper [ph.] and Irvin Culpepper [ph.] became my best friend in life.  Mr. Culpepper would go to work and take up tokens and this was when tokens were you know five, ten, and fifteen cents to ride the New York subway, and he worked that job for, for many, many, many years.  But, they were all African American people who were gainfully employed.  There weren't any stragglers, I mean the community was clean.  There wasn't any drugs.  You could leave your door open at night.  It wasn't any of this foolishness that goes on today, irresponsibility, unwed mothers running around or drug addicts on the corner, music blasting keep everybody up at night.  None of that stuff existed.  There was a calm, clean, well kept, hard working, working class, middle class community.
Story_ID: 557836
Speaker 1: When you think of that time when you're six, seven years old, think about any sounds, sights, or smells that would take you back to that time in your neighborhood, in your home.
Speaker 2: I remember my father [Jacob Smith] one day playing softball with us.  We had a yard on the side of our house that was pretty large.  We had a little ball field.  We made a little ball field out of it.  And he came out one afternoon after work, he still had his shirt and tie on, and he rolled his shirt sleeves up and he hit a ball. I was playing in the outfield. And the ball went out to the left and went into his bedroom and broke the window to his bedroom on his house, in the home and that was about the end of the game that day.  My mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] wasn't too pleased with (makes sounds), "What is going on here, out here?"  And he said, "Well it wasn't, wasn't Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith].  It wasn't one, it was me, I did it.  I hit the ball to the, fouled the ball off," but I remember that.  I remember shooting the peach basket and knocking out the peach basket, basket at night.  I remember crawling around his office.  I remember him cooking.  They had these pressure cookers back then with all the steam coming out of them, and he would cook these chitlins and call them his, he had names for all these so, all these, all these different type of soul food.  Of course the chitlins I think he called them wrinkled steaks.  I think the, the barbecue pigs feet he fixed he called trotters.  No, he called my, he called the pig feet my dear brothers.  And so when he was doing my dear brothers, I mean when he was doing his thing there, I mean and we knew that we were getting ready to have a good time eating and, and so I guess I still have a liking for that soul food today and the old pressure cooker, the black eyed peas and rice.  I remember that.  I remember those smells.  I remember the smell of Christmas tree.  Oh, I could just, it's like yesterday because we spent so many Christmases under that tree opening these gifts that my father was so proud of.  And he would tell us that Santa Claus had, had brought is and been down the chimney and we would, of course my sister [Paula Smith] and I we would, I would particularly listen out at night trying to catch sound of Santa Claus.  I will say that, as we lawyers say upon conclusion of the evidence, Santa Claus was an awfully quiet worker.  I never heard a sight or sound of this man who was so generous once a year.  But, the, (laughter) he was generous in my household.  I mean we, we, we had fire trucks, I mean when black kids didn't have fire trucks.  I mean we had bicycles when black kids didn't have bicycles.  I mean, you know we had the best, and the pinball machines, still remember those sounds.  The baseball pinball machine I broke one night.  My mother and father had gone out to dinner on some affair and my grandmother was--my Great Uncle Marion [Marion Smith (ph.)] was keeping me along with my grandmother and I'd gotten mad 'cause of the, the video, the machine, actually wasn't video then, it was just a pinball machine, got a home run and defeated me and threw it down and broke it and the glass all over the floor and, in anger, and I remember the whole discussion was Uncle Marion said well he wasn't gonna tell what, what happened.  He loved his grandson and was gonna let it pass by.  My grandmother response to it was that she had no choice but to tell what happened.  She had to tell the truth or she'd have some explaining to do.  So, I remember that incident very vividly.  And then I remember the old black and white television, the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], Vin Scully who is still announcing for the Dodgers today, what's this fifty something years later, was the voice of the Brooklyn Dodgers before they moved and after the end of the '57 [1957] season from Brooklyn [New York] to Los Angeles [California].  I still remember it.  I can remember the voice, you know.  "Leading off for the Dodgers is Jim Gilliam batting second and playing shortstop is Pee Wee Reese.  Batting third and playing right field Duke Snider.  Batting fourth and playing third base Jackie Robinson, number forty-two, the Dodgers, the Dodgers."  Nobody could say Roy Campanella, never forget it.  The sound, the so- the, the, the sound of his voice.  I was raised in that culture, and that's what, that's why I have the collection and why I am the way I am because it was karma.  It was theater.  It was, it was all that one could want out of, out of a, out, out of ki- out of a, out of a childhood up until my father's tragic death.
Story_ID: 557837
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: P.S. 15, Public School 15 in Queens [New York], probably about a five minute walk from my home.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers?  Was there a teacher that might have encouraged you that you just had a special fond memory of?
Speaker 2: That didn't actually happen to the eleventh grade where I got encouraged by a teacher, but I do remember the principal of the school was a very tall white lady.  This was an integrated school, predominantly black I remember, but it was a French lady who was very tall named Ms. Dempsey [ph.].  Ms. Dempsey was the prin- and when, when Ms. Dempsey would come into the room the teacher would--everybody had to stand up and we had to stand up and say like this--you'd say--she'd say, "Hello children."  You had to stand up and say, "Hello Mademoiselle Dempsey."  We had to say, "Hello Mademoiselle Dempsey" because she was French, and she was a very tall woman.  You know it was almost like, you know, a saint was walking the halls.  You know I mean if you saw Ms. Dempsey walking the halls, I mean you knew that your best conduct was, was right around the corner.  Any mischief that you were into needed to, to flee as papa would say.  But, the, the--I remember that and I don't remember any of the names of the teachers in that class, the third grade class.  I have a picture in--(unclear) third grade class, which we put in there.  But, I do remember my father [Jacob Smith] having again the conference with the teacher in the third grade, had told him that you know I wouldn't you know, there needed to be, there weren't that many stars next to my name and that, that all improved after that.  And his concern after the conference I remember that.  And Ms. Dempsey would come in and encourage us, but she'd give a little speech and you know you gotta get your grades and you gotta, you, you children have to, you know exercise good conduct and you know, so I do remember from that aspect some encouraging words.
Story_ID: 557838
Speaker 1: During your elementary school years [at P.S. 15, Queens, New York], what type of extracurricular activities besides baseball were you involved in?  Were you involved in the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] or Jack and Jill club [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or any of those types of organizations?
Speaker 2: You know what, I was not too involved.  Well, I was involved with two things primarily.  Little League baseball and the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  Those were the two activities that I was engaged in.  I played--we ended up going to the Presbyterian church right down the street [Presbyterian Church of St. Albans, Queens, New York], which was all white by the way after my father [Jacob Smith] passed away and Chuck, as I mentioned earlier, Chuck Talbert [ph.], Irvin Culpepper [ph.], and [HistoryMaker] Jock Smith better known as the unholy three 'cause we cut so much church.  We went to this white Presbyterian church right down the street and they had a Little League team.  We were the only three black players on the Little League team.  The name of the team was the St. Albans Presbys [ph.], and the uniform was white with blue letters across the front said Presbys for Presbyterian.  I played center, Chuck played right, Irvin pitched.  We were also the only three Africans in the Boy Scout troops.  Forget the number of the troop, but the scout master was named Mr. Zarella [ph.].  I still remember that because of Z.  How could you forget that weird name, Zarella?  And we did pretty good with the Boy Scouts.  We got alone with the other scouts.  There weren't any real racial incidents that I could remember.  There was one incident about an outing that I can't remember all of what went on where our parents got upset with the scout master, but other than that one incident it was basically incident free.  I do not remember any incidents at the Presbys, though were black players we were never ta- we were never treated as black players.  We were treated as Presbys, and we went a game or two away from the championship for the borough.  We lost to Carter Community [Carter Community African Methodist Episcopal Church, Jamaica, New York].  I still remember the game.  I still remember the ball yard where it is over there on Hillside [Hillside Avenue], wow.  I remember popping up--I remember missing the ball in center field that day.  A left hand pitch that we couldn't hit.  Little kid throwing curves, fast balls, everything. I still remember, wow, Carter Community beat us, but we had a good team.  We had a lot of unity.  We had good con- we had good chemistry.  So, I remember the Boy Scout troop was great.  The Little League baseball, even the church was pretty cool.  Of course, Presbyterian was pretty quiet, you know it wasn't like the black church where people were yelling and screaming.  It was real quiet and docile and you know we couldn't say amen and all that.  I remember that, but it was pretty cool because they seem to be concerned about the members and the kids, being raised in the admonition of the Lord.  We had to pass some test I think after the tenth or eleventh grade to join the church.  I think they might have called it convocation, and I forget the name, but it had a fancy name.  You had to actually study the Bible and pass a written test to be admitted to the membership.   It just wasn't--and we, we all passed, passed the test and got admitted as members.
Story_ID: 557839
Speaker 1: I just wanna talk more about the community because you said when you first moved there it was basically white and then blacks started moving in.  So, it's interesting that the school would be predominantly black.
Speaker 2: Yes, the school, the elementary school I went to was predominantly black, but what is interesting about it 'cause we, remember now we had just started integrating in this community.  This was on Nashville Boulevard.  I think it was just a couple of streets that were integrated back during this time, and with the high school I went to Andrew Jackson [Andrew Jackson High School, Queens, New York], which was also ten minutes from the other side of my house, was integrated.  By the time I got to Andrew Jackson, it was 70 percent black and 30 percent white.  And I, and the, the junior high school I went to was hi- was, was called 59 [J.H.S. 59, Springfield Gardens School; I.S. 59, Springfield Gardens School, Queens, New York].  See all of the New York [New York] schools had numbers.  There was P.S. 15 [Queens, New York], then I was at for elementary school then I was at 59 for junior high, and it was, I'm trying to remember, it was predominantly black.  There may have been a few white kids in there, but it was pred- but then I went to high school and it was 30 percent black there.
Speaker 1: Thirty percent white?
Speaker 2: At Andrew Jackson High School, yes in Cambria Heights, Queens [New York].
Story_ID: 557840
Speaker 1: Junior high school P.S. 59 [J.H.S. 59, Springfield Gardens School; I.S. 59, Springfield Gardens School, Queens, New York] were there any significant events that happened during junior high school years?
Speaker 2: Nothing other than a couple of things that come to mind.  One was your dress, your clothing.  I guess the first time peer group pressure really kicked in, in terms of what you were wearing.  See I always tried to dress, you know, neat and clean, have something nice on for people to comment on.  I still remember that was the first I ever heard of Continental shoes with buckles, it had two buckles, and three buckles with a horseshoe heel.  You had to have horseshoe heels see.  And you get these shoes from Thom McAn and they were Continental.  And I remember the Converse All Star basketball shoe.  That came into play then.  That was hot.  You had to have, you had to have it.  You were playing in school during recess you had to have on Converse, you had to.  I remember that.  And then we played a game called punch ball.  Now punch ball is just like baseball, but you'd sit there and you'd throw the ball up and with your clinched fist you'd strike the ball and then take off.  Just like baseball, except there was no pitcher.  And I was a very good punch ball player.  I could hit a lot of doubles and triples and home runs 'cause I just could, I was a good hitter.  And so I remember doing very well at that.  And my grades in school, you know nothing to, you know, write home about.  I wasn't failing.  I wasn't left back, but there wasn't anything special about them because I, you know, still was, you know, trying to recover from my father's [Jacob Smith] death, though it had been years ago, somewhat years ago.  But, I don't remember anything else about it other than the fact that I was good in math and I liked history and didn't have much for the lab.  I remember the chemistry lab I try to go in there man and I blew the place up almost.  I realized then that I wasn't George Washington Carver.  I mean that wasn't in my genes, so that was an early lesson I learned in '59 [1959] Dr. Carver I wasn't him, I was somebody else.  I might have been Booker T. Washington, but I wasn't George Washington Carver (laughter); I do remember that.
Story_ID: 557841
Speaker 1: And then high school, Andrew Jackson High School [Queens, New York], right? Tell me about your high school years.
Speaker 2: Integrated, 70 percent black, 30 percent white.  Some of the mischievous stuff we'd get into four or five inches of snow on the ground everybody bring a snowball in their pocket, put in your jacket, teacher turn around you throw the snowball at the chalk board, splash all over the room.  Teacher would say, "Who did it?" Nobody speak up, real quiet.  Mischievous New York [New York] kids, school children, kicked in.  The eleventh grade--I was doing so poorly in school they had basically put me in industrial classes, took me out of academic classes 'cause I wasn't really doing much of anything other than playing a good game of ball.  I played great Little League baseball I mean, of course I was going to the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball].  And I took a public speaking class in the eleventh grade and I wasn't supposed to allow- be allowed to register for.  Teacher was white and young kid, white kid got up before me and rendered a great speech of 'O Captain! My Captain!' I still remember that, Whitman's [Walt Whitman] 'Oh Captain! My Captain!' this great rendition.  Then it was my time to speak.  I had no notes, had no, I had some mental preparation obviously, but no notes.  Can't tell you what I said that day.  Whatever it was teacher called me in after class.  I thought maybe I had done something wrong.  The teacher told me, "You have a gift."  I said, "A gift to do what?  You must be watching the ball games."  He said, "No Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith], I don't know anything about any baseball.  You have a gift to speak."  And that was the first positive conduct- comment that anybody had made to me in the New York City school system eight years post my father's [Jacob Smith] death.  It kindled the fire.  It began a resurgence.  It was a turning point.  It was a point of turnaround in my life that--I remember my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] had already gone to the school a year before and spoken to one of the counselors about how I was doing.  The counselor's name was Mr. Stein [ph.], and he told my mother I wasn't doing well at all, that I, everybody wasn't capable of doing academic work and I'd make a good garbage worker, I mean garbage collector. That was all. Told my mother to be satisfied with that.  My mother came home and did something she'd never done before she broke down and cried in the middle of the floor.  My grandmother [Rebecca Bowers] was present for this, just the three of us in the room.  "Son I've fought your last battle for you.  You have to get over your father's death, climb up this mountain of life."  That event along with the speech some months later where I was given encouragement were the two cornerstone events that turned my life around where I was able to begin to focus in on what I would do in life and I realized that I wasn't necessarily going to the Major Leagues and that happened in high school.  It happened in Andrew Jackson High School and so what do I remember most the speech.  "You have the gift to speak."  Before that, "You'll make a good garbage worker."  My mother breaking down crying.  Me feeling the need to get up off the ground for her.  I didn't really want to get up for myself, but I'd never seen her in such a devastated state.  She--remember during all this time she had masked her feelings, kept the great loving spirit and working along with my grandmother's loving spirit.  So, I really hadn't seen this side of the, of the equation.  And when I saw it, it prompted something inside of me, and I'll tell you something this stayed with me the rest of my life.  I have never turned back since that time, my thirst for life, to accomplish, to achieve, do the right thing, to excel.  It came out of those two events, the speech and the, the prognostication by someone who had written my epitaph who was named Stein, those names that always haunt African Americans, Stein.  The name just sounds like somebody that would haunt us back then.  "He'll make a good garbage worker."  I think that, those, those, those are the two events that triggered my resurgence.
Story_ID: 557842
Speaker 1: And so at that point you say you turned your life around in your academics.  Is this the point where you decide I'm going to go to college, I'm going to be a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] had assisted me in that. She--there were a lot of colleges that would not accept me because of my grades up to the tenth grade.  I think I did all right in the eleventh and twelfth, but I had so many problems, (unclear) and academically.  And my mother knew Dr. Bowie, Dr. Walter Bowie who was a veterinary medicine professor, was also from Kansas City, Kansas.  My mother and Bowie, Dr. Bowie went to Kansas State University [Kansas State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Kansas State University] together in Manhattan [Kansas].  He came out on a business trip to New York [New York], my mother went down to lunch with him, and came back and said, "Son you know I'm sending you to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]."  I said, "Where? Alabama?  No, I don't want to go to Alabama."  I was very frightened about Bull Connor.  I'd seen the, the police dogs on television.  I had never been across the Mason-Dixon Line.  I hadn't even been to Washington, D.C.  I didn't want any part of Alabama.  And, but there I was through Dr. Bowie--and I had to go to the pre-freshman program too by the way.  I had to actually go--my grades were so bad I had to go to the pre-freshman program to prove that I was worthy of normal admission.  I did, I proved it.  Did well in the pre-freshman program.  Dr. Bowie looked after me, and I enrolled as a freshman in the fall of '66 [1966] to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell Bowie?
Speaker 2: B-O-W-I-E, Walter Bowie.
Story_ID: 557843
Speaker 1: So tell me about your experience going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 2: It was a great experience.  My first day on campus my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] and I were crossing a street and two women spoke to me, said, "Good afternoon."  Nobody spoke in New York [New York], I mean, so southern hospitality visited me quite early.  I said man this is gonna be a lot of fun.  Women folk are speaking to me and I'm nobody, obviously this is, must be a tradition down here.  I said, "Ma I think I'm gonna like this place."  And my first year, freshman year was a year of adjustment, had a 2.4 average, had a C plus average, 2.5, C plus student, but I didn't fail any classes; that was the good news.  From that point on after that I became a straight A student.  I had to anchor myself down.  I enjoyed my college career.  I was a history and philosophy major.  It was also the best time to be an African American student.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] were at their height.  The, the phrase black power was uttered in '66 [1966] by Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] along with a man named Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] that actually uttered the phrase on a march down in Mississippi if you remember.  Well, that was my freshman year of college.  So guess what, as they were uttering this phr- phrase black power, I became empowered by it.  Everybody was wearing a Afro.  Everybody was wearing dashikis.  Quoting all the authors became important. I mean I read everything from Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] to Malcolm [Malcom X] to Garvey [Marcus Garvey], all of Garvey's books all the way to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm X, Carver [George Washington Carver], all the others, Frederick Douglass, read his narrative, read his autobiography and became like a scholar.  Also in my last year I became student body vi- student body vice president.  That means I was over all who was invited to speak to the students.  I was in charge of that.  We brought in Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond.  And I had one on one conversation with all these people, Gwendolyn Brooks, famous African American poet.  All these people I got to interface with these people.  And I still remember their speeches like yesterday.  Adam Powell wearing a short sleeve fitted turtleneck shirt with a great big old medallion, gold medallion around his neck.  What he spoke on that night, sock it to them Adam, let it all hang out.  Keep the faith baby, keep the faith baby.  I still remember it.  I remember Julian Bond's speech.  I'll never forget how he started off his speech.  "I have come here tonight to read to you the accomplishments of [President] Richard Milhous Nixon. I'm finished."  These metaphorical experiences of great leaders had a tremendous impact on me.  My love for metaphors, my love for the language, and for knowledge, to understand why Julian Bond was saying that.  What was Adam Clayton Powell really talking about?  What was Vernon Jordan talking about when he came to us and said I, "I drank good whiskey and I run with pretty women."  I'll never forget that.  I said I wonder how important that is.  I didn't think that was too important.  Why did he say he drank good whiskey?  Well, guess what he was saying was that don't be broke.  You can't live off of dashiki and an Afro.  Well, I try to, I didn't drink too many of this good whiskey, but I did try to take him up on the pretty women part of it.  The, I learned something from him.  I learned something from all of them.  You know Nikki Giovanni, Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti], the famous poet, brought him down.  I still remember his poems.  "Cool-cool, bebop cool.  He was so cool, nicknamed him refrigerator. But after Newark, Detroit, and Watts and company to be black is to be very hot."  I'll never forget those words what brother Lee was talking about, to be black.  After Newark, Detroit, and Watts and company to be black is to be very hot.  This brother he talked about in his poem was so cool we called him refrigerator, stamped, made in U.S.A.  This the kind of Negro we don't need to be.  The Civil Rights Movement, the Black Power movement, the student liberation nonviolent movement.  The Vietnam [Vietnam War] marches I led.  The moratorium marches as student body VP.  All of these brought to bear the best life as a student that anyone could have.  No one could have a better life than me as a college student.  We had white professors teaching us philosophy.  We were talking about Hume [David Hume] one minute, Descartes [Rene Descartes] the next, Hobbes [Thomas Hobbes], the next.  I could quote all the authors they say white and black.  Then I would go to the black history class and learn all about Nat--Styron's 'Nat Turner' ['The Confessions of Nat Turner,' William Styron], John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry [Virginia] of 1859.  And the great emancipation of 1863 who can we--and the Hayes-Tilden Compromise of 1877 [Compromise of 1877] ending the era of black reconstruction in America.  I became a scholar on all these things.  God is good.  I learned these things and became invested in the future of what this meant for our people.
Story_ID: 557844
Speaker 1: Every day on campus was a good day.  I met my first wife [Janice Cheek Smith] there, a lady I married and we stayed married about nine and a half years before we divorced and she was the first woman I ever dated, and didn't date in high school [Andrew Jackson High School, Queens, New York], had no experience of any romantic relationships, had no romantic relationships at all actually until after I married my first wife.  I just was so naive I didn't know anything.  I knew how to play baseball.  I knew how to quote Malcolm X, but I sure didn't know anything about romance and didn't know anything about women folk.  Women folk seem to frighten me a little bit.  They seem to know more than we knew.  They seem to have intuition we didn't have.  They seem to always know what you were up to if it was no good, so that was a combination to beware of.  So, all of that I learned in college, you know, and it was, you know, it, it, it, it taught me a value system of black pride.  James Brown came out with his record during that time 'I'm Black and I'm Proud' ['Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'].  Love of self of your race, appreciation for legacy and history, and knowledge is power; that is if you knew something you became, you could become a powerful individual.  You may be broke financially, you may not live in the biggest house, you may not drive the biggest car, but knowledge was power.  I, I learned that from watching Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], watching [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, watching Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], watching [HistoryMaker] Nikki Gikiviani, Nikki Giovanni and Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and Gwendolyn Brooks and, and the one on ones I had with these people.  Knowledge was power.  One thing I remember in my philosophy class there was--I became a scholar of all of Plato's works, and I became a great fan of Socrates.  In fact, if you go in my law office one of the first statues you see is Socrates sitting on a stoop thinking if you come into my office sometime.  It was this book written by Plato called the 'Gorgias' and what it's about is Socrates travelled throughout Athens [Greece] to determine what the greatest good in life was.  He asked the doctor and the engineer, and the poet and the, and everybody, and he got all the answers you'd expect to get.  Physical pleasure is the greatest knowledge.  Diamonds, jewels, romance with pretty women, oh this has gotta be the greatest good.  Socrates felt empty at the end of this experience throughout Athens.  He said, "I don't think I've gotten the right answer here.  I don't know the answer, something is missing here."  And in the end, he gets this visitation from the Lord.  The Lord tells him, "The greatest good, son, is wisdom, to be a wise man."  And that book probably had more of an impact on me than any book I read in college, the 'Gorgias,' G-O-R-I-S [ sic.] and it's a great book because it teaches you the importance of wisdom, that knowledge is power.  Socrates knew that, that's why he spent his whole life asking questions.  He may not know the answers to all the questions, but he asked people who were wise, and these people empowered him by giving him answers.  So, I became a, a recipient of the Socratic Method in life.  If you notice, I always ask questions.  Spend a little time around me.  I'm not a, I'm not a guy claiming to know it all.  Well how we gonna do the interview?  Where are the camera gonna be?  Oh, you think it's better over here brother, you gonna move the camera.  Well, you're the expert well, well let's check the light out.  I tr- I'm trusting of knowledge and respect for the people's specialties because I was reared in that in college and became and understood how powerful a tool that was.  And only a fool would not listen to a wise man, and so I had a, a great college experience and I owe so much to, to, to, to God and my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] for sending me and for Walter Bowie too who looked after me like a son for my stay in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Story_ID: 557845
Speaker 1: Who were some of, of your classmates--
Speaker 2: In Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, Lionel Richie was a classmate of mine.  Lionel Richie and I were on the, the floor of residence C or D as freshmen.  Also on that same floor was Tom Joyner.  Tom Joyner, Lionel Richie, all the Commodores except one, except for Mr. Orange [Walter "Clyde" Orange], all the rest of those came from Tuskegee.  Ron, Ronald LaPread and Milan Williams, all the original Commodores were playing for a hundred dollars a night during that time.  Those were my classmates.  Tom Joyner was my coordinator of club and group activities, which was also by way of elected, elected position on campus.  And what Tom did as my coordinator, it was a student body vice pres- a president and there was vice president, but I basically ran the government.  The president was a malcontent.  And then Tom was over all of the entertainment.  And Tom brought in The Impressions.  He brought in The Delfonics.  He brought in, oh my god, so many of the great groups of the day.  And Tom told me back then that he was going to make money in this and that he, he said, "Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith] you know I may not have the best grades, but I, I, I got a niche in essence I, I'm gonna be in entertainment."  You're what?  He turned out to be right.  He exceeded all expectations of his professors.  That man I spent time with.  Lionel Richie and I played tennis together even after we, he got out of college.  In fact when their first album 'Machine Gun' with the, the silver color if you may remember when it came out the song I remember on it most than any is "I Feel Sanctified."  Richie and I was still playing tennis, so we were classmates.  Some people, there was a gentleman, let's see, Cecil Leonard who went on to play for the Super Bowl Jets [New York Jets] with Joe Namath, number twenty-eight as defensive back, was one of my classmates who I understand was the coach up at Parker High [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], still may be the football coach, which is the most powerful high school in Alabama as far as black football, was a classmate of mine, and many others.  But, those are the ones that, that, that, that stand out and I remember I was reading, I was giving a speech somewhere once and, and [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers, this great running back with Chicago Bears, wrote a book said 'I Am Third' ['I Am Third: The Inspiration for Brian's Song,' Gale Sayers].  He was talking about his relationship with the Lord first of all and then he was talking about his family, then himself.  I said well you know what folks in Tuskree- Tuskegee modern day contemporary history I am third.  There's Lionel Richie, there's Tom Joyner, and then there's me.  You know I'm used to that tag because in the law firm there was Johnnie Cochran, then there was me.  So, I'm comfortable in my position.  I said I have an excuse for wearing this red jacket today.  When I was a kid, the red jacket, the red always symbolize, symbolized the caboose.  The caboose was always the last car on the train, but I want you to remember something the locomotive wouldn't have been anything without the caboose.  Though I am third, I will acknowledge that Lionel and Tom were more well known than I am.  I am still pulling up the rear with a red jacket on today and I've come to speak to you to tell you that even you can succeed in life as a caboose at the back of the train. (Laughter) Okay (claps hands), sorry.
Story_ID: 557846
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Tell me who was the president of Tuskegee, Tuskegee University [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] then?
Speaker 1: Luther H. Foster, Luther Hilton Foster [Luther Foster, Jr.], who was a great man.  Tuskegee only had like five presidents.  Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington], Robert Russa Moton, Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson], Foster, and Payton [Benjamin Payton].  And he was a very dignified man.  Virginia Union undergrad [sic. Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Harvard Ph.D. in education [sic. University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Looked like a white man literally.  I mean he had those features, but was an African American man.  Very, very skilled and learned in his speech, and when I was student body vice president I got a chance to know him well.  I, I sat on the education executive councils.  We had one student representative, and I was it, and so I got a chance to interface with Bowie [Walter Bowie] and T.S. Williams, dean of the veterinary school and Dr. Luther Foster and they wrote my recommendations to law school [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana].  And I learned so much from these men.  I remember who Dr. Foster was so dignified there'd be a heated argument in educational council, executive council, over an issue.  "Well, I've heard you, from you Dean Bowie and Dean Williams I've heard from you, let's table this one and let's let cooler heads prevail and we will revisit this all right gentlemen in about thirty days and at that time we will resonate within us the best of what we can do, all right" boom.  I said wow I learned something from this guy.  This guy can diffuse anything.  He was gifted.  He was a gifted man, and he knew how to referee meetings, to preside over meetings and to keep the meetings in dignity.  I learned that from Luther Foster.  I learned a lot from Luther Foster, and when I received the Luther, Luther H. Foster award you know in college, which is the highest award a student can receive named after the president, I felt like I had seen a little bit of the mountaintop that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was talking about.  The other thing I remember about Luther Foster is this, I hadn't mentioned this earlier, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], not '69 [1969], '70 [1970], not the year I was VP, the year before I was student body VP, there was, the trustees were locked up by the previous student body government on bread and water.  They had to call the National Guard.  George Washington--George Washington, excuse, wow, sorry--George Wallace had called in the National Guard and I remember tanks at the front of the campus getting ready to enter the campus, and Luther Foster, though the students had locked him up for several days and he didn't have anything eat, he walked out and stopped those tanks.  He said, "No, no student shall be harmed.  We're gonna settle our own business here," and the National Guard retreated.  How many lives did this man save?  The courage of this man, the vision of this man.  Despondent, angry hostile students wanting things like abolition of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], abolition of compulsory chapel--(unclear) you have to go to church.  Abolition of all these things.  Inter-room visitation where you could sleep with your girlfriend at night, I guess that's what we were fighting over.  All these things that seemed so important then, it seems so unimportant and so foolish now. (Laughter) Luther Foster fought to keep us pure.  He fought to keep this thing right, and he stood up to those National Guardsmen.  He stood up.  He stood up to George Wallace.  He stood up to him, stopped those tanks.  So, that's what I remember about the president.  There, there fond memories.  The educational council, the executive council, the tanks. "Table this one 'til cooler heads prevail, let's revisit it later on," I still remember.  I learned something from that.  John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] quote that I gave you earlier, "Civility is never a sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof."  Luther Foster is the embodiment of that.
Story_ID: 557847
Speaker 1: You also talked about marches against the Vietnam War.  Tell me about your draft status.
Speaker 2: Okay that's a, that's a very good question.  In 1969 was the first year of the lottery, and I still remember watching TV that night to see whether my number was gonna come up.  And I'll tell you when June 10th came up, 206.  Let me tell you how far the draft went up to that year 195.  Now, let me add another caveat to that though.  Back during that time what they would do, they would get the students, the local draft board was in Montgomery [Alabama], I guess they had a local draft board at Tuskegee [Alabama], but you had to go take your exam in Montgomery at an [U.S.] Air Force base.  And I remember a bus full of us going down for examination before graduation.  I mean this was a frightening experience now because the Vietnam War was still going on, and one kid was acting just completely crazy.  He threatened to kill the bus driver.  He was just going ballistic 'cause he didn't want to--figured they'd classify him 4-F and they did. (Laughter) He never even got off the bus, so he was successful in his tirades.  I think it was an act really.  But, I had been scratching my arms like the dickens.  I had what they call atopic dermatitis.  I didn't know that's what it was at the time.  And what it is you scratch, you know, the pits of, during the summer you scratch yourself crazy in the pits of your arms and stuff and all over your legs and stuff.  Little did I know that was gonna be my blessing.  When I went down for the examination and they looked at my arms, I think they thought I was a drug addict.  They said, "What, what is this?"  "I, I don't know sir."  They got real quiet and started looking at each other.  These were all white men of course, there weren't any black guys down there then, it's a [U.S.] military office heaven forbid in Alabama.  And so what happened was at the end of the day they told us you know how you were classified they said 4-F based on some kind of disease I had.  So, I was one of the happiest guys coming back on the bus.  I mean most of the others were classified 1-A and was sad and everything.  So, it really didn't matter the fact that they never got to 206.  Atopic dermatitis later diagnosed by a, by a dermatologist saved my life perhaps (laughter).
Story_ID: 557848
Speaker 1: So you actually turned your academics totally around.  Tell me about some of your academic achievements while in college?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated with the highest average in my major.  I got the Luther H. Foster award of course for academic achievement.  I was the first black student, first student period, selected to the national student register in history of that publication from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], 'Who's Who in American College and Universities' [sic. 'Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges'].  Received academic scholarship after my second year based on academic achievement for the last two years for the highest average in my major.  Received just any number of academic awards and awards, you know, named after certain people.
Speaker 1: You received the honor roll certificate three consecutive years?
Speaker 2: I did.  After my freshman year after the year of adjustment when I was able to get myself anchored and, and hadmy feet, you know, planted solidly on the ground, solidly on the ground I was able to do that, yes achieved that.
Story_ID: 557849
Speaker 1: And you also ran track.
Speaker 2: Ran track, played a little baseball.  Ran cross country, which is really grueling, I mean you ran all these miles up these sloping hills and the Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] campus is historically great architectural structure standpoint is very challenging, it's beautiful, but far as running because the hills you always, you know, wanted to quit.  Very difficult to endure during those races because of the elongated nature of the race itself, but you know some of what my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] had, I'd seen in her and my father [Jacob Smith] had taught me and my grandmother [Rebecca Bowers] helped me continue those races onto conclusion.  And baseball, I picked up my baseball career again.  I hadn't played really since Little Leagues, so I'd lost a lot of formative years of development, but I was still able to make the team and play some outfield and do some pitching.
Speaker 1: And fraternities?
Speaker 2: I had pledged Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  I went across the burning sands in May of '68 [1968].  My father had been an Alpha, was an Alpha and the first black fraternity ever, founded in 1906, Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], and you know had Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and many others, you know who I felt were--Thurgood Marshall, Frederick Douglass, who I thought were the kind of people who I wanted to be like, and so that's why I chose that.  The thing, the thing I most remember during my pledge period was the funniest thing that ever happened to me they had me look into a light one night, you're supposed to stare out into the light and they asked me a question, one of the big brothers asked me a question, he said, "Well if two men are in the ocean and they're drowning, one is your father and one is an Alpha and who are you going to save?" I said, "I'm gonna save my father because he was an Alpha man." Wrong answer. The brothers just laughed.  This other guy and this guy tarred and feathered me the rest of the night.  I got him told off in a nice way I guess, which is something you weren't supposed to do in the pledge period be a smart aleck, but I thought he was open for that answer and that's what answer he got and of course it, it won me some friends along the way and later on once I became a brother, I made histo- became a historian and from based on my knowledge of history the historian for the chapter and some of those anecdotal kind of things that I edified during my (laughter) pledge period, I guess.
Story_ID: 557850
Speaker 1: We had the pleasure of interviewing Gwen Patton [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Patton] and the year that you came in as a freshman she was student body president [at Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Tell me what you know about Gwen Patton.
Speaker 2: What I know is very good.  Gwen Patton was an activist.  She always was an activist.  She was a part of, I believe, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and the student movement, and she did an excellent job of speaking up for students.  She wasn't afraid of the administration.  She was not intimidated the fact that she was a woman, which was unusual at that time for a woman to be in that kind of leadership role selected by other students 'cause of the gender deficiencies that society promulgated upon women at the time.  Gwen overcame all of those.  Gwen was an overcomer.  She had vision and tenacity.  And I think her example, her perfect example no doubt helped me, impressed me to you know go in the right direction as far how to approach life and how to approach challenges and how to interface with older people who were our elders in a dignified way, but in a way that still was convincing.
Story_ID: 557851
Speaker 1: You were a history major.  At what point did you decide that you wanted to go to law school?
Speaker 2: I decided I wanted to go to law school very early in my college career.  In fact, when I entered college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] I was pretty certain then I wanted to go to law school.  I wanted to finish what my father [Jacob Smith] had started, what an assassin's bullet had aborted.  Therefore, I took courses that prepared me for that.  History, I felt it was important to learn history and philosophy to be able to rationally figure out problems and to rationally state your position, defend your position.  That's what philosophy taught you, it taught students.  But I wanted to be a lawyer.  I wanted to be a trial lawyer.  My father had been a trial lawyer.  I wanted to go to court and represent people.  I thought maybe I could do that given an opportunity to get--the encouragement I'd gotten from the teacher in eleventh grade [at Andrew Jackson High School, Queens, New York] saying I had the gift to speak all the way through my freshman and sophomore years when my grades picked up sophomore and junior years.  At the end of my junior year, I ran for student body vice president.  I had to go make speeches all over the campus.  I got standing ovations on all my speeches.  Five people were running, I won without a runoff.  So, all this helped formulate who, who I am in my, my early college years.  That's, it was the--Charles Dickens said in 'The Tale of Two Cities' [sic. 'A Tale of Two Cities'] the best of times, and the worst of times.  It clearly was the best of times for me.
Speaker 1: How did you decide what school you would go to, which law school you would go to?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting discussion.  What happened at the end of my junior year I began to--well the beginning of my senior year began to apply for different law schools around the country, and I got various responses from them.  I thought I would go to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut].  I didn't get into Yale primarily, nothing I had done, it's just that students of historically black colleges had been black balled at that time 'cause some students would come from there, these schools and protest the law school and advance the cause of African Americans as being outspoken.  I think some people in these, these Ivy League schools took exception to that and just had almost an unwritten rule they weren't going to admit any students from HCBUs, historically black colleges, at that time.  So, I got into Kansas [University of Kansas School of Law, Lawrence, Kansas], my dad's alma mater and got into Syracuse [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], I believe in several others.  But, when I got into Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana] what was so exciting about that was that I got a telegram, I'll never forget this, a telegram saying you now have been admitted to this law school.  You have been selected for a three year scholarship, all tuition and books paid of twenty-one hundred and something dollars.  Well, you know, if there was any doubt where I was going and that's where I was going after that telegram was received.  The, it reminded me of the old song, the Western Union man send me a telegram, send me a telegram from my baby ['Hey, Western Union Man'].  It wasn't a telegram from my baby, I already had like a lady [Smith's first wife, Janice Cheek Smith] I was gonna marry, but I tell you what the next best thing was a telegram from the law school saying that I have all books and tuition paid for and I knew then, big name Notre Dame, a name that everybody has heard of, most recognized school in the country was gonna pay me to come there for three years.  I said well this is something I need to do and so I accepted.
Story_ID: 557852
Speaker 1: How did you pay for undergrad [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Undergrad my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] paid for actually out of her wages and earnings and except for the second and third year and fourth year when I got scholarships she still had to pay some living expenses, but, so basically at the end of undergrad what money I did owe my mother paid for and she never complained and never told me where it came from.  I just kind of, I walked around more or less with a clean bill of health financially.
Speaker 1: And jobs, what was your first job?
Speaker 2: Well, I had some summer jobs.  Well, I'll tell you one I had that was rough out over in Brooklyn [New York] off of Marcy Avenue.  I'll never forget that subway stop, my goodness (unclear).  Domino Sugar--I had a night job; it was awful.  I had, you had to run five machines at one time and had to have the sugar purified just at the right temperature before we drop out of that.  And I mean just keep you going all night.  They had me on night shift.  All my underwear would be all brown and everything 'cause all the sugar is, you know I guess particles were being thrown in the air and what not and it was awful.  But, it taught me one thing, I needed to go on and finish my education.  I did not need to be working at Domino Sugar.  The first job that I ever had that, a couple of jobs I ever had that made, that bring fond memories was a summer job I had working for the community action agency.  That's when, under the Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration we had the anti-poverty program and I worked out of there for the summer and was a counselor to several students.  One summer I worked out of Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], which was the most impoverished area in New York [New York] along with Harlem at the time.  I got education out there with those students.
Story_ID: 557853
Speaker 1: And then the job I had at the United States Customs Court [U.S. Court of International Trade] right before I, I went to law school [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana] with Judge Watson [James Lopez Watson], first black judge, a U.S. Customs Court federal judge, James Watson, my father's law partner, you know Watson, Carter, and Smith, my dad's closest friend in life, went to law school together at Brooklyn Law [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York], he got me the job as a summer clerk and I had a chance to learn about customs law and to see how powerful judges work and go into his chambers, watch him preside over proceedings and just got access that most black kids did not get, 'cause I was like the only black like summer intern up there, all young white kids who had favor with the system and we didn't have any favor, but I did through Judge Watson and those jobs bring back fond memories.
Speaker 2: Was it unusual to clerk before you went to law school?
Speaker 1: Well, actually I didn't clerk for the judge.  I worked as, it's kind of misleading a little bit.  I was a clerk, but I just kind of filed papers and kind of just, I didn't really file any briefs.  I mean I didn't do anything legal.  I just kind of had, I, I kind of performed administrative tasks.
Speaker 2: And that was the summer of 1970?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 557854
Speaker 1: So, you're off to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana], 1970, tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: It was rough.  The weather was bad.  The environment wasn't friendly and the demands were great.  My first day at law school, in fact, I was standing in line and a Jewish fellow named Mr. Josias [ph.], I'll never forget Mr. Josias' name for other reasons, but Mr. Josias, I don't remember his first name, told me he had bad news for me.  I said, "What's that?"  He said, "Well you know all the black students from the previous year most of them, half, over 50 percent of them failed out of law school," and he acted this was bad news for me.  I said, "That ain't bad news for me, Mr. Josias."  I said, "It may be bad news for you." I said, "My mama's [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] not gonna allow me to come home.  I don't have any place to go.  I plan to be here, and I plan to graduate, so I guess I'll just take your spot."  And I guess I got that arrogance from student body president, you know, black college [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], you know learn how to speak out, not be intimated, black power, you know raise your fist.  All that came to bear in this conversation with Josias.  I thought it was very unfriendly of Josias to visit such a negative subject on me my first day at law school, so I gave him back his own medicine.  I had very little trouble out of people from that point on.  But, the thing I noticed is that when a black student raised their hand, looked like they knew the answer, the professor would never call on them.  And if a black student didn't raise their hand, a lot of times they'd call on you 'cause they didn't think you'd know the answer to try to embarrass you.  So, what I did I started the Black American Law Student [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] chapter at the Notre Dame Law School, the BALSA chapter, and became the founding president.  And we had a protest, held up classes and had sensitivity sessions with professors, which improved a lot of African American students at Notre Dame.  I--there I was I my organizing mood again and somebody asked me one time why I'd done that.  They said, "Why would you do this?  These people are gonna fail you out of here." Though the grades, you know, was supposed to be about number and exams supposed to be anonymous.  You didn't have a name, you just had a number.  They said, "They're gonna get your number and fail you out of here."  I said, "Well here's the way I look at that. They already failed the blacks out of here, I don't have nothing to lose but to fight, so I think I'll fight, go down fighting."  And most of the black students joined the Black Student Union, the BALSA chapter.  There were some seniors and older blacks who did not.  They thought it was crazy.  Came to meeting and told me I was gonna fail out and told me there was not a problem at Notre Dame.  Told me that the black students that failed out really deserved to fail out and they weren't as smart as they were and they were the Talented Tenth I guess that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] had spoken about.  Somehow I didn't believe that to be true, and so I fought for something different and brought something different to bear at Notre Dame.  The--I would ask questions where I know the answers.  I'd go back and talk to the professors.  The first day of law school at criminal law Professor Foschio [Leslie G. Foschio], I still remember him, an old prosecutor out of Buffalo [New York] who was our teacher.  He said, "Look to your right and look to your left, two of you will be gone.  Everybody isn't smart enough to be a lawyer.  This is Notre Dame Law School folks don't be embarrassed if you fail out.  Most of you won't make it."  I, I remember all the fear tactics.  I remember the weeding out people.  Thirty something people quit at the end of the first two to three weeks. Left, went home.  One black student quit for reasons other than that.  He had five children and everywhere he showed up, called the phone, "Yeah we have a place for you to rent," show up, see his black face, said, "No we already rented the place."  He never took a day of class.  He left South Bend [Indiana] because of racism.  He was not able to get housing.  I still remember that.
Story_ID: 557855
Speaker 1: My memories of law school, my first year or two were very difficult.  Didn't win first place competition in the moot court argument the first year.  In my last year, I won in trial court.  So, I won where it was important to me, which was in court.  That's really what I wanted to do and what I really wanted to be.  There's a lot more I could say about law school, but I guess I've, I've summed up--and then on graduation day, Paul R. Moo our famous uniform commercial code professor brought the message that day.  I still remember what Paul R. Moo told us that day.  Love the law, practice law with fidelity.  I remember that, and I always took an oath in my heart that I'd be true to the calling of the law.  I also got to be true to the calling of the '60s [1960s] as a black student having been resurrected in the '60s [1960s], and I had a true calling to my father's [Jacob Smith] legacy and so Paul R. Moo who was a conservative white professor was right.  Love the law, practice law with fidelity.  And I, I tried to the best of my ability, I've always tried to take that to heart, I've always tried to do the best I can for my clients and take the responsibility seriously.  But, I got that from law school.  I got that from the Paul R. Moo and the Edward J. Murphys who was my contracts professor first year who had written the book that we used to study the contracts by.  All these professors, Father Lewers I still remember, great Catholic professor, people who took time with me.  Also I remember another thing about law school which is just kind of an anecdote of sorts.  Muhammad Ali fought Joe Frazier in that great fight in 1971 at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] and Al Ninridge [ph.], a white kid from California, a liberal white kid, blonde head kid, he and I became very close.  We went downtown South Bend [Indiana] to see the fight on closed-circuit television.  Ali lost that night.  Everybody in the theater was happy but us; we left crying.  Went to class the next day and all the white students were laughing and talking about Muhammad Ali had lost.  They were all standing in a corner and I entered the room and it got silent all of a sudden.  It let me know that people at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana] didn't think the way I thought.  They let me know that I was on an island.  Let me know I had to be ready.  I had to fend for myself.  I had to go back to the days of my father when we integrated the community [in Queens, New York].  I had to resonate some qualities that he had bought out in my about having to be the best, to try to be the best in order to survive and sustain myself in that environment.  And with the help of the good Lord, prayers of my grandmother, which were fervid prayers, my mother's fighting Eastern Air Lines reservations, clerk job for hours after hours paying money, these people sustained me, I was able to stay up on top of this mountain and to be able to graduate.  And when I graduated, my grandmother, Rebecca King [Rebecca Bowers], one of the last times I saw her alive, and she told me how proud she was, she was that day.  My other grandmother [Lula Smith] was there that day, I'll never forget it.  It was something, I'd graduated from Notre Dame Law School, one of the top law schools in the country against insurmountable odds, the same kid that just eight or nine years earlier whose mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] had been told by Mr. Stein [ph.] he could do nothing more than tote a bag of garbage.  I think it let me know that, God had immensely blessed me.  Like the Bible says, "To whom much is given, much is expected" [Luke 12:48].  The Lord expected more of me than other men.  He'd resurrected me from the grave, from the dead, and I had a responsibility to carry on in behalf of my people and I, I keep that close to my vest every day, I remember that.
Story_ID: 557856
Speaker 1: Before we go further and, and talk about what happens after graduation, when--you were talking about discrimination.  Coming from New York [New York] and then into the South, can you speak to the differences in racial discrimination and then going to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana].
Speaker 2: You know interestingly enough when I went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] undergrad, Tuskegee Institute it was called at the time, Dr. Walter C. Bowie [Walter Bowie] had, had a car, a driver named Mr. Hodge [ph.].  He was a driver for the veterinary school, and he picked me up every time.  I never had the ungodly experience of riding the Greyhound bus from Montgomery [Alabama] to Tuskegee [Alabama].  I was spared that by Dr. Bowie.  And I spent--I didn't have a car, of course students didn't have cars for the most part during that time, and therefore I didn't have, I didn't have the negative experience of having to encounter a lot of southern white people.  Tuskegee was black, I stayed in the dorm.  When I did come to the airport, I noticed it was southern drawl and may seem to be a bit recalcitrant, but I didn't remain around enough to have to experience the negative of that.  When I got to--I do remember the tanks now and wal- when George Wallace brought the tanks out in my next to last year there I did realize how serious the southern problem was.  They were trying, they were coming on campus to really maim and kill students, no question in my mind about that.  That let me know that things were not well.  Of course all of what I had read anyway and seen on television they were not well and I dared not tread into the capital city, Montgomery.  At Notre Dame, the culture shock was great.  The shield of protection was gone.  There was no Walter Bowie anymore to protect me.  There were no drivers to pick me up at the airports.  The weather was hostile.  The first football game, one of the third, third or fourth football game I ever went to, Notre Dame for the first time ever let a black quarterback in.  He threw a couple of incomplete passes, and a man behind me said, "Yeah get that nigger out of there, get that nigger out of there."  We turned around, we couldn't believe it, a few black students who were there.  We left, never returned to the stadium, never again until years later.  The healing process took twenty years to recover from what he had said.  He didn't realize how many people he'd hurt.  The, the, this is the kind of thing that I was not shielded from at Notre Dame, and it was good I wasn't.  I had to learn that it was gonna be difficult and that if I was gonna be a lawyer to represent the rights of people who had been taken advantage of, to experience some form of discrimination myself firsthand was probably in the cards for the, for the good really because it better prepared me for the real world out there.  I'd read about all this stuff, I mean I'd read all of what Frederick Douglass had said and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington], and W.E.B. [W.E.B. Du Bois] and, and Malcolm [Malcolm X] and all these people, and I was aware it existed, but I had not experienced the brunt of it because of Dr. Bowie at Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 557857
Speaker 1: Your last summer job before graduation was at the Urban League [Urban League of South Bend and St. Joseph County, South Bend, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Very good.  Silas West [Silas West, Jr.].  I still remember Silas, assistant director up there and he treated me so well.  We got a chance to go out in the community and try to help some people and you know I remember just enjoying working for the league.  I remember going to the league's national convention and how much fun that was meeting Whitney Young and people like that at that time.  It gave me that great experience.  And it was just a lot of fun.  You were working with the community, you were in the community, you were, it felt like you were doing some good, and the South Bend Urban League actually was a pretty neat place to work.  People seem to get along there well and wasn't a lot of back biting and fussing and fighting as you find in a lot of these institutions.  So, I, I felt good about that.  I enjoyed my stay at the Urban League.
Story_ID: 557858
Speaker 1: And what was next for you?  I know you worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] civil rights project.
Speaker 2: That was out of law school [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana].  That was up in Binghamton, New York, and boy was that a cultural shock.  I got--I made a mistake.  When I already graduated from law school I had a number of job offers or places I could go and went wherever the most money was to be honest with you.   I took the job based on money.  They paid me $17,500 and that was in 1973, which was unheard of.  And, but it was up in Binghamton at the NAACP Broome County [NAACP Broome Tioga Branch] civil rights projects.  And boy was it awful.  Little did I know when I got up there, that only 1 percent of the entire population was black.  Ah, it was awful.  I mean to see a black person, I mean, you know, and I was like you know seeing a black guy you know playing in movies during that time, you know.  Other than Sidney Poitier, I mean, you know, it wasn't there, so and 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner.' Guess who wasn't at dinner in Binghamton, New York.  It wasn't black folks.  And so the problem was, is that the, it is very lonely, I mean just horrible.  My first wife [Janice Cheek Smith] and I lived up there in a little place, this apartment complex called the Muse [ph.] in Endicott, New York.  And it was nice, the Muse was nice, but the view outside the Muse was not nice.  It was all white and the attitudes were not good with regard to black folks, so I exited out of there pretty quickly.
Story_ID: 557859
Speaker 1: I worked for a Jewish law firm as well up there, Walter and Clark [ph.].  Michael J. Walter took me in and taught me the ropes and, but I did not like Binghamton [New York] at all and I left in '74 [1974].  A year later went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], my old alma mater and began to teach.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry the name of the law firm Walter and--
Speaker 1: Walter and Clark.  George Clark [ph.] and Michael J. Walter.
Speaker 2: And you said you and your wife.  Who were you married to?
Speaker 1: Janice Cheek [Janice Cheek Smith], her maiden name was C-H-E-E-K from South Boston, Virginia, which is twenty-nine miles outside of Danville [Virginia].
Speaker 2: And where did you meet her?
Speaker 1: College.
Speaker 2: At (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was my college--
Speaker 2: At Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: Yes, she was my college sweetheart.
Speaker 2: So 1974 you go back to Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you teach what?
Speaker 1: I teach all the law courses in the political science department along with Afro- African American politics, of course, that they had me teach, and I enjoyed it immensely.  All my classes were over registered for, very popular, and I got along with the students very, very, well.
Story_ID: 557860
Speaker 1: Stayed there three years in fact before I left to start my own law practice and also at the time I worked for, I got a job with the attorney general's office [State of Alabama Office of the Attorney General], one of the first African Americans.  There I passed the bar, became assistant attorney general for the State of Alabama under the great Bill Baxley, the first AG to ever integrate that office.  [HistoryMaker] Myron Thompson was the first one--that you interviewed--Judge Thompson was the first one to integrate that office and two or three years later I came along with a few other individuals and so there were a handful of us up there who got our training from, from the attorney general's office.
Speaker 2: And what was the experience like at the attorney general's office?
Speaker 1: Interestingly different, but good.  We were treated pretty well.  There was still some old southern heads there that had old southern ways and you could sense that everybody wasn't thrilled that we were there, but there were some who were, and there were I think that for the most part many did as much as we could--as they could to accommodate us there.  They knew that we were there and were gonna be there.  Bill Baxley had appointed us, we weren't going anywhere, and I think that what they tried to do as many of them is make the best of a situation like that.  So, I think that overall my experience there was good.
Story_ID: 557861
Speaker 1: So, when you left the attorney general's office [State of Alabama Office of the Attorney General] you went into private practice.
Speaker 2: Yes I did.
Speaker 1: And you were in private practice from 1977 through 1998, is that right?
Speaker 2: As Jock M. Smith [HistoryMaker Jock Smith], attorney at law, yes.
Speaker 1: And before we talk about your law firm, during those years you also had a couple of judgeships.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: I was selected by a small black town in Camp Hill, Alabama, which is in Tallapoosa County [Alabama], and to be a municipal judge, and I served on the bench there for a year and then also Jim Folsom, Jr., the son of Big Fo- Big Jim Folsom [Jim Folsom, Sr.], during his tenure as governor for the State of Alabama, he appointed me as an administrator law judge in the environmental area and I was a, I was administrative law judge over at ADEM, Alabama Department of Environmental Management, and I had to hear complex cases involving the environment and polluters, people dumping, waste water treatment plants, whatever.  And I enjoyed that, that and I was on that, I was on bench over there for about a year as well, so I had two, two appointments and I enjoyed both of them immensely.
Story_ID: 557862
Speaker 1: Now in your private practice, tell me what type of client you serviced?  Who were your clients?
Speaker 2: Well, back when I started my client was the average citizen.  I didn't have any retainer agreements with any governmental agencies or anything of that sort.  I took everything I could get my hands on.  I fought it as if it were the [U.S.] Supreme Court case of the century, anything from landlord tenant disputes, basic divorces, collections, wills and trusts, loan closings of homes, major criminal defense to criminal cases, and just really a smattering of, of civil cases.  Didn't get a lot of those then 'cause those took years to, to, to get, but I, I had, I--bankruptcies, basic corporate, corp- corporation of basic corporate documents; I pretty much did it all.
Speaker 1: Are there any memorable cases?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, there's just so many cases, but I guess you could say the case of the State of Alabama vs. Donell Williams [State of Alabama v. Donell Williams] where I was appointed to this case in '79 [1979], two years out of, in practice, where a black man was charged with raping a white lady.  And nobody gave me any chance to win this case, and I did win the case.
Speaker 1: You did win.
Speaker 2: I did win the case.  And the stories that I tell a little bit about the story of what went on in the State of Alabama vs. Donell Williams in 'Climbing Jacobs Ladder' ['Climbing Jacob's Ladder: A Trial Lawyer's Journey on Behalf of "The Least of These",' Jock Smith] and the key question I asked during the trial is when were you first in fear of the defendant and the woman indicated she'd been in fear of the defendant hours after she'd met him, which sealed, I think, her doom in terms of it being a voluntary act.  The jury--he was charged with rape, robbery, and kidnap.  He was acquitted of all charges.  In closing argument to the jury, I remember telling the jury, "You know ladies and gentlemen we're, we all heard about the Scottsboro Boys case, enough said," and there was the verdict.  I remember seeing a woman in the post office the next day, and she said, "That won it, who all heard about the Scottsboro Boys case, enough said.  You centered in on what we needed to be thinking about in this case.  The evidence was shaky to begin with.  That was the, that's what tipped the scales of justice."  Another thing about that--talk about case, though the, the, the Williams case and then of course there are several other cases after Johnnie [Johnnie Cochran] and I got together and several cases even before then.
Story_ID: 557863
Speaker 1: The key cases was the Lucy Turner vs. Southern Life and Health Insurance Company [Southern Life and Health Insurance Company and Richard Perry v. Lucy R. Turner].  In December of 1988, I filed a law suit in behalf of Lucy Turner [Lucy R. Turner] who had no policy of insurance to bury her aunt.  As fate would have it, the agent had put the money in his pocket and had cancelled the policy.  She didn't find this out until after her aunt had passed away.  She called him up and said, he said, "I'm gonna give you your money, the insurance company is gonna give you your money, but you gotta give me all your papers Ms. Turner."  What he was doing was confiscating evidence.  He took every stick of paper involved with that policy out of that house.  She trusted this man.  What--she kept calling, no response.  Finally, she called him to the house and there was another man in the other room that he didn't know was in there.  They had one of these dining rooms where you could close off the two doors.  His name was Miller Ephraim and Miller Ephraim overheard this conversation, Ms. Turner speaking, "Mr. Perry [Richard Perry] my aunt is dead now when am I gonna get, I done bury my aunt on my own money, when am I gonna get my money back, Mr. Perry?"  "I need to talk to you about that Ms. Lucy.  Me and the boss man and I have been talking and we gonna give you your money back, but you can't tell anybody, we're gonna give it to you in cash at five hundred dollars a month, but you can't tell anybody Ms. Turner."  And the policy was only for like fifteen hundred dollars keep in mind.  And when he left, Mr. Ephraim encouraged Ms. Turner to report Mr. Perry to the Department of Insurance [Alabama Department of Insurance], which she did.  They then reported it to Southern Life and Health [Southern Life and Health Insurance Company].  I had a conversation with their lawyer, they wouldn't pay up, so we sued them and went to court.  On December 15th, 1988, the trial ended that day with closing arguments to the jury.  Before that, I had questioned Perry on the witness stand.  I said, "Ms. Turner," before I'd done this, "go home and see if you have any paper at all available from this encounter." And guess what? She dug up one paper on another unrelated insurance policy proving that Perry was there on a certain day he claimed not to have been to her house.  He claims that she had just let the policy lapse for nonpayment.  He saw me marking this paper as an exhibit, he started trembling.  He said, "Oh I think I, I wanna change something."  I said, "You wanna change your testimony now Mr. Perry?  You wanna change your testimony?  I'm gonna let you tell this jury anything you want to tell them Mr. Perry.  This document I got is bothering you, bothering you fella?  I want--." "Well she paid on one policy that day, but she didn't pay on the one involved her aunt that we're here about."  I said, "Wait a minute Mr. Perry you're telling this jury she didn't pay on her aunt's policy. She paid on her own policy first, is that what you're telling this jury?"  "Yeah."  He said, "But yo- ." And then Perry said this, the pressure was getting great, he said, "I get, I get, I get the impression you, you're charging me with racism."  I said, "Interesting you mention that word Mr. Perry.  I haven't said anything about racism."  Said, "I did a favor for a black man once."  "Well tell us Mr. Perry. I wanna hear what favor you've done for a black man.  Let us all hear it Mr. Perry.  I'm gonna get out of your way so you can tell this jury what favor you done.  We all wanna hear it, fella, we're just dying to hear it and go ahead and tell the jury." And whi- at, at which point Mr. Perry said, "Well I owned a grocery store one time and I allowed a black man to get a six pack a beer on food stamps."  I said, "Miller or Bud [Budweiser] that's all we drink," and the jury fell out laughing.  He looked, and his lawyer--the judge, and the judge hit the--I made a fool out of him.
Story_ID: 557864
Speaker 1: And the thing is in closing argument to the jury I remember telling the jury this, "You know normally ladies and gentlemen look at all these lawyers they have over there against me and my client and I would be dwarfed by their presence," I said, "but I'm a Bible toting Christian and I brought my sling shot to court with me, ladies and gentlemen.  You know my Bible tells me ladies and gentlemen that Jesus spoke in John 10:10 and told us that the thief would come in the night to kill, steal, and destroy, but I have come to give you life and to give you joy abundantly.  That must mean that there, that, that, that somewhere there's a robber and a thief somewhere in this courtroom ladies and gentlemen and there they sit."  The jury returned a verdict in twenty minutes of $5 million.  It was the largest verdict, one of the largest verdicts in the history of the state at the time and the largest verdict an African American lawyer had ever gotten in Alabama.  And I rode that verdict for many years.  I also remember telling the jury, "Ladies and gentlemen Miller Ephraim has died, but fortunately we were able to read his deposition to you.  You know when Knute Rockne went to see George Gipp one day in his hospital room and he was dying, he told him, 'One day when you really need to win a game tell him to win one for me.'  Notre Dame [Notre Dame Fighting Irish] was playing in a national championship game against Army [Army West Point Black Knights] and they were behind twelve to nothing at halftime as the story is told.  Knute Rockne went into that locker room and told the Fighting Irish what he had to tell them about the story of George Gipp that day and he said, 'Win one for the Gipper.'  Ladies and gentlemen, Miller Ephraim is looking down on these proceedings today.  He sits with Jesus along the right hand of the Father and expects you to bring him good news based on your verdict; win one for the Miller now."  And the jury did. And I sat there for about five or ten minutes after the court was over.  A gentleman who was an elected official came to me and said, "Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith] do you realize you won the biggest case a black lawyer has ever won in Alabama, but you're sitting there, you haven't moved since the verdict.  You should be jumping up and down and be excited."  I saw my whole life flash in front of me.  I saw my father's [Jacob Smith] death.  I heard the edict, "You'll be a good garbage worker."  I remember, "You have a gift to speak."  All this stuff flashed in front of me and I thanked the Lord for blessing me that day on December 15th, 1988, about four o'clock in the afternoon when the jury not only said $5 million, but said something more important: well done my good and faithful servant.  That was the day I knew I had beaten everything that Mr. Stein [ph.] had told my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance].  There was no doubt in my mind that was it when the jury, when that foreman of that jury stood up and said $5 million I knew then that I had accomplished something significant.  And those were the two cases I most remember before my partnership with Johnnie Cochran.  There were some others that I won and settled and made money and it was not making money, it's more to life than that I could tell you about, but it's not gonna tell you about that 'cause that's really not what HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is really about.  It's not about money in your pocket, it's about people that you've helped.  I've given you some indication.
Story_ID: 557865
Speaker 1: There was one other case, and I'm sorry I'm forgetting I would like to mention briefly.  I got called in by SEASHA, Southeast Alabama Self-Help Association, to assist families in the Alexander, Al- Alexander City, Alabama community who were in attached houses.  And they had bought these homes through mortgages, but they were called bonds for title.  The difference between a bond for title and a mortgage is that a bond for title you didn't get title to the property until after you paid it off.  The language of the bond for title also said if you missed even one payment that the owner could come in and repossess and keep all the money as rent.  And this rich landowner decided to foreclose on all these people because he had allowed them to engage in irregular payment schedule for years.  It was a trick.  It was, it was a way to steal land from blacks, and I was called into this case.  Not only did they strike all five blacks who were in (unclear) off of the jury, I was left with an all white jury in a white town with a black client.  There was a black woman sitting in the back of the courtroom for the whole trial who I did not know.  She was the only other black person in the courtroom.  Finally it got to the key point of the trial where the real estate agent had testified, their real estate agent, about how the property had gone up over the years, how the value was increased and just in case I lost I needed to devalue the property because of the rent that my client would have owed for all the years.  And these, this was my question to this real estate agent on cross examination, "Sir, you know you're quite an agent, quite a specialist, you're the real estate guru of this county."  "Yeah I am."  "You're the authority, the final word."  "I am indeed that."  "What was the racial makeup of this community sir in 1957 when it was built?"  He paused, "All, all white."  "What is the racial makeup of this community today?"  It was silence in the courtroom.  It was like time had stopped.  The jury started laughing, said, "Oh no Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith] is cornered.  He's got a trick up his sleeve."  This guy looked.  He said, "Well it's all black."  I said, "I see.  I have one final question for you sir, isn't it a pragmatic principle of real estate reality in the nasty now and now when us folks move in the value of the property goes down, is that not true sir?"  Pointed to myself, not my client.  My client comes first.  "That's true."  "That ends, sir, cross examination of this witness."  Told the jury, "I'm foolish enough to believe that in Alexander City an all white city that I will not be judged or my client by the color of my skin.  I'm foolish enough to believe that in Alexander City the ink is not dry yet on the Declaration of Independence that Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] at Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia] has redeeming value.  I'm foolish enough to believe that everything and Hamilton [Alexander Hamilton], and Washington [President George Washington], and Jefferson, and Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] stood for is here today.  I'm foolish enough to believe and as the song goes when y'all go back in that jury room I'm getting ready to find out what kind of fool am I because I'm placing everything I got, they're trying to put black people on the street because they're black and this is a rich white--you all do, you all say you are Bible toting Christians, but you got Jesus as a part time love.  I want a Jesus to show up in this courtroom today and now I decree it, I will accept anything less, I'm not afraid of you, I'm not frightened, I'm not scared of you, I have been sent here by the Lord."  This jury went back and returned a verdict for my client.
Story_ID: 557866
Speaker 1: And I walked out of that courtroom and this older black woman was standing at the footsteps of the courthouse.  She--I didn't even know who she was.  She said, "Son I wanna shake your hand I'm Ms. So and So.  I never thought I'd see this day in Alexander City [Alabama], son.  The Lord is gonna bless you, you gonna make a lot of money.  You gonna be a famous lawyer one day.  God told me to me and showed me what you're doing, son."  And I walked into the night, found my way back to Montgomery [Alabama] some kind of way that night from Alexander City.  This was five years even before I had gotten saved.  I guess I was operating not on God's promise.  I guess I was operating on the promise that my [maternal] grandmother [Rebecca Bowers] had told me that God would fulfill.  My grandmother became what Jesus Christ is for us.  She became in that trial my propitiation, the only acceptable substitute I had to be able to tell this jury something of any redeeming value at all.  And in that case the, the Whetstone [ph.] case, which I just told you about, that's the one we just talked about, the Turner case [Southern Life and Health Insurance Company and Richard Perry v. Lucy R. Turner] about the $5 million and the Williams case [State of Alabama v. Donell Williams] of a black man charged with raping a white woman, impossible circumstances to win.  With three victories amongst many others, but the three that (unclear) remember, that let me know that this was a ministry that God had called me into, that this, this being a trial lawyer that there was some gift tied up in this that God had blessed me with, and I've been rolling ever since.  But, that's, those are some of the cases that started out this, this journey to justice that Johnnie Cochran talked about.
Story_ID: 557867
Speaker 1: And you talked so passionately about what God has given you as a ministry, let's talk about your Christian experience and, and tell me about your church and the things that you're involved in there.
Speaker 2: On January 1, 1986, Redeeming Love Christian Center in Nanuet, New York, with Pastors Clinton [Clinton Utterbach] and Sarah Utterbach presiding, Bebe [HistoryMaker BeBe Winans] and CeCe [Priscilla Winans Love] playing that night.  My mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] took me to a New Year's Eve Christian celebration at this church.  Didn't want to be there.  I wanted to be on, you know watching the ball come down in Times Square [New York, New York].  How could you spend New Year's Eve in church, I thought this was the craziest thing that ever could be conceived by a human being, but, then so it was, and (laughter) the service lasted a long time and then we went to a member's home and had a meal and nobody was drinking.  Everybody was so happy, everybody was just so joyful and I realized then those people had something I didn't have and I was desperately in need of.  There was a book on the shelf, 'Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities' [sic. 'Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges'], and I'd never even purchased the book.  I was in, I couldn't afford to purchase as a student.  And I pulled it down from the wall, I said, "I believe I'm in this," and I was in it.  And a man came and looked over my shoulder and he said, "Let me read that."  I gave him the book.  He introduced himself as Aaron [ph.], I forget his last name, he said, "I'm assistant pastor of this church."  He said, "I, I think so well of your mother and your stepfather [Wade Nance].  They are loyal members here.  They're proud of you.  They always talk about your.  You've accomplished so much in so, so little time," 'cause this was all way before the verdicts and everything.  But, then he asked me how I stood with Jesus Christ.  I said, "Well sir you know I really don't stand with Jesus Christ.  I don't know anything much about him that's worth standing for."  And he said, "Well I appreciate your honesty."  He said, "Tell me why."  I said, "Tell how can the preachers tell me what to do and they're doing all the bad things, I mean they're sleeping with all the women, driving Cadillacs, putting money in their pocket.  Why would I want to follow somebody like that?  I can do that better than them.  I'm a lawyer, I can do that better than they can do it."  That guy looked at me, he said, "Let me ask you a question," he said, "do you believe the Bible is true?"  I said, "Oh yeah I was raised in the Presbyterian church.  After my daddy [Jacob Smith] died, I was raised Calvary Baptist [Calvary Baptist Church, Jamaica, New York] and the Presbyterian church, oh yeah I believe the Bible is true."  He said, "Let me show you something in the Bible," and he turned to that scripture where the scripture says we should keep our eyes on Jesus, not on men.  He said, "What do you think now?"  I said, "Well obviously I missed the point I was wrong in what I believed and what I knew."  At that point, I noticed it got real quiet in the room and all these people were surrounding me and I prayed the sinner's prayer.  I didn't realize what had happened.
Story_ID: 557868
Speaker 1: Gotten saved and came back to Montgomery [Alabama] from New York and my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] saw a sign on Christian Life Church [Montgomery, Alabama] that Jerry Savelle a famous minister was speaking that Sunday. She said, "There is son, that's the church that God is sending you to.  That's where I want you to start attending or at least examine that church for attendance there."  And I did, was very frightened at first 'cause it was a fully integrated church, very full church and the preacher was white and people were yelling and falling out in the Lord and all this and I, I just didn't know what to think about it.  But, as time when on I realized that that's where God had placed me and I'm still there.  It's twenty plus years since. Twenty--'86 [1986], '96 [1996], yeah twenty-one years and Pastor Steve Vickers--who was pastor there for many years, he just turned it over to his son-in-law a few years ago--mentored me, really prayed for me incessantly, taught me Christian values.  He along with two other people Sam [Sam Carpenter] and Willa Carpenter who were spiritual parents to me.  Pastor Vickers is white and the Carpenters are African American.  Those people mentored me and took time with me.  The thing I liked about it more than anything else is they showed unconditional love in the admonition of the Lord and really are responsible for in many ways all of the success that I've had or what success I've had in the practice.  Johnnie Cochran, my meeting him, I believe was a result of my Christian experience, and he eventually came to the church and they prayed for the national firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm] years after we formed a partnership.  There was a prayer day for the national firm at the church and Johnnie was there, and they laid hands on him and Johnnie told me this was a great, one of the best churches he'd ever been in his life and how he felt the pastor was anointed.  It just confirmed all of what I had felt over the years in this church and I, I, and I've enjoyed immensely my, my walk with Christian Life Church.  Pastor Vickers' daughter, Stacy, is now the wife of the pastor and they pastor the church, Brian Hubert and Stacy Hubert [ph.] they're good friends of mine.  Spend a lot of time with them and so I would say it's been great, I, I, I have no complaints about my walk in the church at all.  It's helped me tremendously.  It's kept me with hope.  It feeds me when I'm down and it has a resting place when I'm weary.  It's, it's, it's an escape from the worlds.  It's an escape from the carnality of the world and the evilness of the world, and it's, it's just been good to me in every respect.  I don't have any complaints at all.
Story_ID: 557869
Speaker 1: Here you talk about Johnnie Cochran.  What year did you meet Johnnie Cochran?
Speaker 2: November of 1996.
Speaker 1: And tell me what that meeting was like?
Speaker 2: I got a call from Delores Boyd along with Vanzetta who owned Roots and Wings bookstore [Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Vanzetta McPherson [HistoryMaker Vanzetta Penn McPherson]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They owned Roots and Wings bookstore at the time.  It was an African American bookstore that had a lot of celebrity black authors come through for book signings you know, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, Alex Haley, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, they all have been through here at one point at that bookstore.  They indicated to me that Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr., was coming through for his book signing and that they wanted me to be Cochran's escort to go to the airport, pick him up, take him to his hotel, make sure he's comfortable while they prepared the bookstore for the signing the next day.  They said they selected me 'cause they thought that I was a lawyer most like Johnnie Cochran and the one that Johnnie would enjoy, whose company Johnnie would enjoy the most, which is obviously high praise high compliment.  I really didn't watch a lot of the O.J. trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].  I mean I may have taped the closing argument of Johnnie Cochran.  You know I heard people talking about it, but I didn't really--(unclear) I was too busy being a lawyer myself so, practicing law.  Met at the airport along with his then bodyguard Henry Grayson, another very gracious man.  Took him to a seafood restaurant here in town and we just had the best time.  The next night we prepared a meal, my wife [Yvette Smiley-Smith] prepared a meal here at this very home you're sitting in now in that dining room.  We sat in there and ate, and Johnnie Cochran was wined and dined by us.  Riddick Bowe was fighting, I think, Holyfield [HistoryMaker Evander Holyfield] or somebody.  We had the fight on there he liked.  We piped the fight in.  We had talked to his publicist about his favorite food.  We gotten all of those.  We had done our homework.  And right in that room in there, my wife said, "Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith] ask the blessing."  So, we held hands and we had prayer.  And I talked about the hedge of protection, you know, God had around Johnnie's life and I prayed for Johnnie's, you know, safety and what not.  The next day Johnnie got into the car with the bodyguard and he says, "Jock you know, you know the Lord and we're gonna do some stuff together.  That's the most impressive prayer I've ever heard a lawyer pray, and you know the Lord Jesus Christ and we need to work together on some, some ventures in the future."  That was the first indication I had that Cochran had any interest in working with me.  I really--Johnnie--I later found out that Johnnie had told somebody he'd never been treated with such hospitality by anyone.  I asked nothing of Johnnie Cochran, absolutely nothing of him.  I picked up his bags, I made sure his meals were prepared, I got him to all of his appointments, and I did that out of love and out of respect for what he had done for African American lawyers vicariously by elevating all of us.  I felt like I owed Mr. Cochran, and it was Mr. Cochran didn't owe me anything.  I hadn't accomplished anything like Johnnie Cochran.  I was there to be a servant and I conducted myself as a servant.  Little did I know that it would result in a partnership, that God had something bigger in mind.  I took him up on the second floor of my sports museum, opened the door, and he said, "Oh my goodness."  He, I took a picture right in this living room where this interview is being conducted with Johnnie holding O.J.'s [O.J. Simpson] shirt and helmet in his hands and took pictures and later Johnnie signed those pictures thanking me for all that I had done for him.  He said right up in the museum, right up on that second floor he said, "As impressive is this is, what's more impressive is you've accumulated all this stuff.  You had, you had to network.  You had to know somebody, you had to work hard.  We as a people, you had to have a vision, we as a people lack a vision.  You have vision.  We remain second class citizens today because we lack this vision."  And there it was, the collection, the prayer, Johnnie Cochran.  When he left, I told my wife I felt like I lost a friend for life, that I've known him for all my life, but only known him forty-eight hours.  She said, "Don't worry you'll see him again.  There's a synergy between you and Johnnie Cochran that I felt.  There's something going on here.  God is working."  "Are you certain of that he's working?"  "Yes he is, just be patient."  And there it was a year later the telephone rings.  "I'm starting a sports agency, Cochran Sports Management [Cochran Sports Management, LLC], I want you to be one of my partners in the venture.  With your knowledge of sports and my celebrity and knowledge involvement we can remake the world." And we started the sports agency together.  So that gives you a little idea of how I met him, who introduced me, or at least how I got the in- the intro and some of the things that went on in our first forty-eight hours together.
Story_ID: 557870
Speaker 1: So, tell me about the formulation of the partnership, the law firm with Johnnie Cochran.
Speaker 2: Johnnie and I were already as I'd mentioned earlier sports agency partners, and we had formulated the Cochran Sports Management [Cochran Sports Management, LLC] and we enjoyed working together immensely.  And then what happened I went to an Alabama trial lawyer convention, which I regularly attended as a member, and ran into a gentleman named Keith Givens and Keith approached me.  He had heard about the partnership or about my involvement with Johnnie Cochran and he began to ask me questions about Johnnie's availability for the practice of law.  I knew it was the largest ideas I'd ever heard in my life 'cause I knew that it was something from God because I knew some things about Johnnie that, that were confidential, that were causing me to believe that though Johnnie was spending a lot of time on court TV at that time, that his future in law was brighter than ever, he was a shining star no question in celebrity law, the greatest lawyer that ever lived.  So, I talked to Johnnie about it.  He said, "Well let's meet with Givens and see what he has to offer."  So, the next time we were together we were supposed to call Keith and we were down at the Jazz Fest [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival] in New Orleans [Louisiana], Johnnie got a room for me and my wife [Yvette Smiley-Smith] and he and his wife, Dale [Dale Mason Cochran], we were at Windsor Court [Windsor Court Hotel, New Orleans, Louisiana] staying there for three or four nights.  And my wife mentioned to me, "Now you know you are supposed to call this Keith Givens next time y'all are together."  And this was like Saturday around midnight.  I said, "Oh baby it's too late I wouldn't call anybody's home.  I don't even know that man that well."  She said, "No I don't think he'll be disturbed." I said--so she dialed the number and gave me the phone.  His wife, Carrie Givens [Carrie Deloney Givens], answered the phone.  I said, "Can I speak to Keith please?"  She said, "He's gone to bed."  I said, "Well don't, please don't bother him I apologize for calling your house late, I'm [HistoryMaker] Jock Smith."  She said, "Hold on, hold on."  He must have told her whenever I call to interrupt or to wake him up.  He was on the next plane the next morning flying to New Orleans.  By six o'clock the next evening, when we came back from the Jazz Fest you know hot and, and, and all that from the day's activities and spent, we had a three hour meeting up on the second floor of Windsor Court with Keith Givens, Jock Smith, and Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr.  At the end of the meeting, Keith left, you know went back to Dothan, Alabama.  I asked Johnnie, I said, "What do you think?"  He said, "I like this guy, let's continue the talks."  Keith was talking about a national law firm.  Two months later or approximately two months--this would have been around April of '98 [1998] when the Jazz Fest went on up there, not the one that Essence has every year, but another, the other one.  The ESSENCE [Essence Music Festival] is always in July as you may know.  All right, so we had a meeting out of Johnnie's law office, 4929, the downtown offices I said of Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr., 4929 Wilshire Boulevard, the City of Angels [Los Angeles, California].  In this meeting was Keith Givens, Sam Cherry, his partner, Jock Smith, and Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr.  At the end of that meeting, an agreement in principle was arrived at to formulate Cochran, Cherry, Givens, and Smith [The Cochran Firm, Los Angeles, California], a national law firm for the civil practice of law across the United States of America.
Story_ID: 557871
Speaker 1: We started in Columbus, Georgia, because there was a gentleman there named Joe Wiley [Joseph Wiley] that had a preacher, a black preacher who, who was recommending to Givens [Keith Givens].  Though that office only stayed open a year, it didn't live out the true creed of its meaning as the Declaration of Independence says.  It still became a cornerstone of the beginnings of Cochran, Cherry, Givens, Smith [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm].  We then merged my Tuskegee [Alabama] office, the Dothan [Alabama] office of Cherry and Givens and the Los Angeles [California] office of Johnnie L. Cochran, Jr. [Johnnie Cochran].  His three other offices in the firm probably six months after the origins of July of '98 [1998], so by January of '99 [1999] we were probably sitting with, we were sitting with four offices, Columbus, Georgia; Tuskegee, Alabama; Dothan Alabama; Los Angeles, California.  Johnnie had continued his relationship with Peter Neufeld and Barry Scheck, the DNA experts, after the O.J. trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] and had some kind of arrangement with them in New York [New York].  Six months later after the, so this would have been about a year later, after July of '98 [1998], Johnnie turned over that office to us, so then we had New York as well.  He began to trust us, began to entrust more to us based on our earned respect and comradeship together.  Cherry [Sam Cherry] and Givens are two white men, so I was the only black, only African American partner in this venture.  We began to speak with people in larger cities that we had identified.  We kind of redlined the United States, in so called Cochran friendly cities.  We had, and the list probably had fifteen, twenty cities on there.  We categorized them by priority.  Near the top of the list was Atlanta [Georgia].  Chicago [Illinois] was near the top of the list.  The District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] was near the top, and there were some others, I think Memphis [Tennessee] and New Orleans [Louisiana] may have been near the top, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], some others.  And what we began to do was go into these cities and interview these perspective lawyers that we identified based on references that would be good for us and for our operations, to run our operations in these cities.  These are lawyers who already had existing firms that were already successful.  We didn't take any neophytes on; we took existing lawyers.  In, in Atlanta, we selected this Hezekiah Sistrunk [Hezekiah Sistrunk, Jr.] who you know, and in Chicago we selected Jim Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery] who you also know.  So, other cities we selected other people.  We began to put these offices together.  Now I was one of the people that would go and interview these people and I would help make the selections.  Like if it got down to a taffy pool I'd go in and say, "You know Johnnie I think we need to go with Jim Montgomery in Chicago.  We, we don't, don't need to go with Corboy and Demetrio."  Somebody try to say "Ca- ." I said, "No, no, no, no this is an African American firm, no we need to go with Jim Montgomery," and I had to fight for that.  I had to fight some of my partners--I won't name them, but I had to fight them 'cause of Jim's age is another thing.  They said, "He's too old."  "No, no, no, no, no, no this man will be good." Turned out to be right.  Same thing in Atlanta, Hezekiah Sistrunk was my choice there.  There was another man who was being considered.  I said, "No, no we don't need that man.  His personal conduct is very questionable.  I've seen some things.  We don't want this in the firm.  Hezekiah Sistrunk."  So, we put, we handpicked these people and, and we made some mistakes like any other firm, but we made a lot better choices than we made poor choices and that has sustained the firm and the firm grew to seventeen offices before Johnnie's death.  We had opened in New Orleans and St. Louis [Missouri] were the last two offices we opened before Johnnie expired this earth with the Lord--went on to be with the Lord.  We had opened D.C.  We'd opened Memphis.  We'd opened Las Vegas [Nevada].  We, of course as I mentioned already Chicago, Atlanta, and there were others.  Los Angeles and New York were already up and running, so we had most of the major cities.  We still didn't have Philadelphia.  In fact, I would say the only major cities we didn't have at Johnnie's death probably, that I call major African American cities would be probably Philadelphia and Chica- not Chicago, Detroit [Michigan].  We've since opened up in those cities, but we had not at the time of Johnnie's--at the time Johnnie was living.
Story_ID: 557872
Speaker 1: And I felt good about the progress of the firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm].  The firm was doing well, we settled, Johnnie [Johnnie Cochran] and I settled the largest environmental case [Tolbert v. Monsanto Company] in the history of the nation, $700 million involving PCBs [polychlorinated biphenyl] and Monsanto [Monsanto Company] and Solutia [Solutia Inc.] and Pharmacia [Pharmacia Corporation] were the defendants.  We went down there, Johnnie had gotten a tip, he had spoken at graduation of Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama].  The people--which is very near this Anniston, Alabama, community where these polluters, corporate polluters were, were casting out their lines of discord in the midnight hours, most people would say, when they blew down all this, all this guck into the ocean and polluted the whole community.  Went in there, called a meeting, had eight thousand people at this meeting, signed up all these people who ended up settling the case for $700 million, record settlement.  I'm proud to say that Johnnie Cochran and I worked on the case representing this law firm, very proud to say that, that we helped these differen- disenfran- franchised African Americans. Eighteen thousand people.
Story_ID: 557873
Speaker 1: I was able to really see God at work with this man, a special man who really just matured me in the, in, in the things of the Lord as well as the things of the law.  I learned more from Johnnie Cochran about how to live than I learned how to be a lawyer.  I was a pretty fair country lawyer before I met Johnnie Cochran, but I had to improve on my, some of my aspects of how I viewed life.  Johnnie made me more confident.  I felt very vulnerable in certain respects.  Johnnie assured me that those, those fears would be laid to rest.  The, the case, as I said the environmental case [Tolbert v. Monsanto Company] stands today as the record.  And there were other cases as well, but--which I can get into in a moment, but I want to segue this a certain way so I want get into this right now, take your lead on that, but that's basically what we did and I felt very good about the firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm] and then of course Johnnie is dearly missed and Johnnie's passing is the only thing I could compare it to is the sho- the shots that were fired killed my father [Jacob Smith] on April 24, 1957.  Johnnie became a surrogate father to me, the only second one I ever had after I lost my earthly father.  Johnnie and I talked about any and everything.  If Johnnie had some personal issues, he would call me up and discuss them with me and what I thought.  Johnnie entrusted to me an empire that really was his empire.  It was not my empire.  It really was God's empire.  It was the Lord's empire.  It was on loan to Johnnie Cochran and I became one of his trusted beneficiaries that's the way I wanna put it.  I had no entitlement to this.  I didn't try the O.J. case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].  I wasn't on television.  I had no entitlement, but, but, but God had blessed me abundantly blessed me and I had the chance to travel and to spend time to see him and to work alongside with him and so it was the best of times, no question about it.
Story_ID: 557874
Speaker 1: Well let's now talk about some of the, the cases that your firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm] won that are important to you.
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly enough in August of 2000 Johnnie [Johnnie Cochran] and I had back to back verdicts.  Johnnie was down in Disney [Walt Disney World Resort], in the land of Disney in Orlando, Florida, trying a case involving two brothers who claimed that the sports theme park idea had been stolen by Disney.  They had presented the sports theme park idea to Disney, and then they told them they weren't interested in it, and they stole the idea and built a theme park.  And Johnnie was one of the lawyers that filed a lawsuit and ended up getting a $240 million verdict in Disney's backyard with a six man jury.  That was on August 11th in 2000.  In a courtroom in Alabama on August 18th of 2000, I, August, the week of August actually I guess 14, I started a trial involving Orkin pest control [Orkin Exterminating Company, Inc.] in the Carolyn- I mean--
Speaker 1: Jeter.
Speaker 2: --Jeter, Artie Mae Jeter, I'm sorry.  What had happened was this, Artie Mae Jeter had a lifetime contract with Orkin to insure her home against termites to the tune of one hundred thousand dollars.  She paid all her premiums for twenty plus years, had never missed any premiums, wasn't any discussion, wasn't any dispute about that, undisputed evidence.  She--a lawyer named Tricia Diak [Patricia Diak] from Birmingham [Alabama] came down one day and said, "I need to talk with you. In another unrelated lawsuit we have--to this potential case against Orkin, Ms. Jeter we have discovered in--some discovery that we were sent that we have discovered a document that you need to read." And this document was saying in essence--it had to be in this discovery packet in another lawsuit by mistake.  This document indicated, well we--this is from the regional mana- the, the state manager of Alabama for Orkin to the regional manager of Atlanta [Georgia] and here's what the correspondence involving Ms. Artie Mae Jeter basically said: well we gonna continue to lead her on.  Her house is so broken up it can't be fixed it's so full of termites.  But it makes no difference because she's old, poor, gonna, black die--black, she's gonna die soon anyway.  We gotta continue to cover this up.  If Jeter gets a lawyer, we're in trouble.  This lawyer got a hold of this correspondence and they filed a lawsuit and they brought me involved, they got me involved in the case and I became chief counsel for the trial in this case [Robert Jeter et al. v. Orkin Exterminating Company, Inc., and Bill Maxwell].  Artie Mae Jeter didn't live to see the trial.  The proceedings prolonged about a year later before we got to court.  Artie died and at the counsel table her two sons were there representing her estate.
Story_ID: 557875
Speaker 1: Remember telling the jury her name--oh before we even got to that Bill Maxwell who had authored this memo I said, "Bil- Mr. Maxwell, how do you explain this memo?"  No, I asked the corporate rep- (unclear) "Bill Maxwell a good employee?"  "Yeah."  "Is he trusted?"  "Yeah."  "Reliable over the years?"  "Yeah."  "You ever catch Bill Maxwell in a fairytale as an employee?"  "No."  "Bill Maxwell ever been reprimanded for twenty plus years he was an employee of Orkin [Orkin Exterminating Company, Inc.]?"  "No sir."  "All right since you believe he always speaks the truth I wanna show this document and ask you to read it sir."  This guy read this thing he was shaking.  (Makes sound) I said, "You read that sir?"  I said, "Since you say Bi- Bill Maxwell is such a man of truth and veracity let's, let's read to the jury what truth and veracity he edified on the day in question.  Just read it fella line by line." Made him read it.  "She's [Artie Mae Jeter] old, we gonna continue to lead her own.  Her house is full of termites and cannot be fixed."  "Do you believe that Bill Maxwell was telling the truth at the time that he made this statement?  He was not under any undue rest, nobody forced him to write this letter did they sir?  Nobody held a gun to his head at the time he wrote this letter did they?  No?"  "Well, I guess it's true."  "It is true then isn't it fella?  And she's an old poor and black, gonna die."  I said, "This is how y'all talk about your customers?"  "Well no."  "Well Bill Maxwell is supposed to such a man of truth and veracity I want you to tell this jury in your sworn testimony why he talked this way if it wasn't true."  Closing argument to the jury, we're a day later now.  Lawyer for Orkin gets up in closing argument and says, "Ladies and gentlemen, the Old Testament tells me in the Book of Numbers that when you cheat somebody you ain't supposed to pay them back but five times what you cheated them for.  So, since this policy is a hundred thousand dollars you ought to render a verdict of five hundred thousand dollars and all of us need to go home."  I got up and told the jury I said, "Ladies and gentlemen this is the first case I'd never thought I'd live to see the day that I'd be trying a case I'd be a half a million dollars ahead and I hadn't even spoken yet."  I told the jury among other things that it's interesting that the lawyer would quote the Bible because he didn't quote the entire Bible.  But what he quoted was completely out of context because my Bible also tells me that God says we're supposed to leave behind an inheritance to our children's children and since there is no inheritance there must be a robber and a thief somewhere in this courtroom.  And I quoted again John 10:10 and asked the jury for a verdict to shake the nation, a large verdict to shake this nation.  The jury did just that.  On August 18th of 2000 in the afternoon at about six o'clock in the evening, the jury came back with a verdict of $80,800,000, probably, no doubt, the largest verdict rendered against a pest control company in the history of this country, and one of the two or three largest verdicts rendered in the history of the State of Alabama.  The, that case [Robert Jeter et al. v. Orkin Exterminating Company, Inc., and Bill Maxwell] stands as a cornerstone.  It was, it was the best that, the best result, the most positive result I felt that we could have gotten in a case where a woman had passed away and her inheritance to her family, the only inheritance that she had after changing hospital beds for thirty-five years was compromised by the thievery and the skullduggery of a pest control company.
Story_ID: 557876
Speaker 1: The Carolyn Whittaker case was in 2004 [Whittaker v. Southwestern Life Insurance Company, 2004], and I'll sum it for you.  Carolyn Whittaker had been a longtime customer of Southwestern Life Insurance Company.  She had the same debit agent--you're not gonna believe this--the same debit agent she had that came by and collected her money was the same guy that I hit for $5 million in '88 [1988], Mr. Perry [Richard Perry].  Mr. Perry was still on the prowl.  He was working for another company.  They would not get rid of this crook.  Perry came by her house on one Saturday morning and said, "Ms., you know Ms. Whittaker you need to change your insurance to another company."  She said, "Well Mr. Perry why would I change my insurance?  I've been with this company for years.  I got cash values build up in these policies."  "Oh I got a better company for you."  She got suspicious and so she called the Texas office in Dallas of Southwestern Life Insurance Company to find out the status for her policies.  She had several policies.  When she called, she found out, guess what, that the policies had lapsed five or six years ago.  Perry was coming by there for five or six years and put all this money in his pocket.  These policies had lapse five or six years ago.  The same Richard Perry by the way who said he did a black man a favor one day, sold him a six pack a beer on food stamps, that same guy.  So, she came to my office crying.  I said, "Mrs. Whittaker," she was just out of control.  She said, "Mr. Perry done stole my money."  I said, "Ms. Whittaker calm down, I need to talk, tell me what the problem is."  "Mr. Perry done stole my money, Mr. Smith [HistoryMaker Jock Smith]. We gotta stop him."  We finally was able to console her (unclear) finally got enough sense to me.  We figured out that's what had happened, so we filed a lawsuit.  Same story, arrogant insurance company, "We're not gonna pay up.  We'll pay you ten thousand dollars."  I said, "Ten thousand dollars, you crazy.  This is a theft.  This is fraud.  We want major money out of this case."  Went to trial on the case.  Mr. Perry got up--the insurance company was so frightened that Mr. Perry by the time the case got to trial it separated itself.  Mr. Perry had another, it se- the defense lawyers for Southwestern sat at another table completely away from Mr. Perry.  Mr. Perry sat by himself and acted, listen to this, as his own lawyer and got up and said, "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury may it please the court. I'm tired of people like Jock Smith and Johnnie Cochran running around all around this company- country.  They, they take all these cases on a contingent fee basis.  They're the ones who the crook.  I wasn't trying to steal from that woman over there."  He said, he said, "I put that money in the bank.  I was gonna pay it back next week.  I was gonna let interest draw.  I took it."  He said, "I had a few bills to pay, I'm wh- I'm a white boy, I'm broke, everybody white ain't rich."  And people were like what in--I mean it was like.  I sat there, said to myself, keep talking, keep talking Mr. Perry, keep talking, ring, ring, ring, keep talking.  So, the, I get up and tell the jury this in essence.  I said, "Ladies and gentlemen there are some long tall Texans that we brought in this case, Southwestern Life Insurance Company from Dallas, that have been living on the Ponderosa on this little lady's money, but I want you all to know something today I want a Hoss Cartwright [Eric "Hoss" Cartwright] result.  I want a bonanza.  He got a--they got a Jock Ewing mentality, and they took Jock Ewing off the TV years ago and killed him based on his dastardly deeds of iniquity.  I need a bonanza now."  And the jury came back with $1,620,000,000.  When I first heard it, it was hard to get out a seat.  It was different than when I first heard $5 million the first time in '88 [1988] with Lucy Turner [Southern Life and Health Insurance Company and Richard Perry v. Lucy R. Turner] because that was a reflection, moment of reflection and lamentation.  This was a moment of just, I don't know if shock is the word.  I don't what to say when I heard it come out of their mouth I was paralyzed with joy from the standpoint that we had rectified a terrible wrong here.  The case was published in 337 newspapers.  It was the largest verdict for the entire nation for 2004 as reported by the National Law Journal and U.S. Lawyers Weekly [Lawyers Weekly USA].  And if stands today, it's the largest verdict an African American lawyer has ever achieved in this nation.  And think about it, it all started with Jacob Smith, his tragic death and the prognostications of my counselor that'd I make a good garbage collector.
Story_ID: 557877
Speaker 1: The only thing I can say about it to HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] and anybody listening that God is good and that when somebody writes your epitaph don't ever, ever give up.  Don't take that as a (unclear).  Always trust in the Lord and realize that he will finish for you what he begins.  I look at that and some of the other awards have come in since then, the Lawdragon magazine, the five hundred top lawyers in America out of Beverly Hills, California, and so many other accolades, all the awards, the Trumpet Awards down in Atlanta [Georgia], the (unclear), and other things, all the stuff that's come up.  It's really more than I ever could have expected out of life.  And when you think about it, it's not just people who have been, it's people like me that have been blessed.  I owe it all to my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance], my grandmother [Rebecca Bowers], to my wife [Yvette Smiley-Smith] of thirty years, my daughter [Janay Smith] tolerated all my inconsistencies and my imperfections.  I owe it all to my pastor [Steve Vickers], all the people in the born again Christian movement who helped me, and also owe it to all the clients, the people who voluntarily gave me an opportunity to accomplish what I've been able to accomplish.  And I owe so much to Johnnie Cochran, his estate, his legacy, his belief in me to give me a partnership.  And the people like, the people at HistoryMakers, people who are spending time out on the road trying to chronicle this history.  You, you are the people that really needed to be commended.  I'm out here trying to do the right thing.  As Johnnie Cochran said to that jury in the O.J. Simpson case [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] when he had the hat on after he'd put the hat on, "Do I look like Johnnie Cochran? You recognize me, you still know who I am.  They would know who Simpson [O.J. Simpson] was that night.  Will, will you be true to the oath, do the right thing?"  I've tried to do what Johnnie Cochran said to that jury in the Simpson case.  I've tried to be true to my oath.  I've tried to do the right thing, and that is what keeps me going, you know and you all are doing the right thing too and I appreciate having the opportunity to talk, be here today.  God is good and blessed me to be here in this interview.
Story_ID: 557878
Speaker 1: Two things I'd like to ask about the law firm [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm].  One is that, this was a civil law practice--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so you no longer are a trial lawyer, a criminal trial lawyer.  Can you practice criminal law or is your firm specifically now civil law?
Speaker 2: Yes we can.  Lawyers have a license to practice law can practice any kind of law, and the firm in certain outlets of the office, of, of the firm.  Now, we do have certain locations where we are doing some criminal cases in Birmingham [Alabama] for example.  We doing some cases there with a very great criminal lawyer there.  And we have other locations as well, but we're still primarily civil case. Civil cases, automobile accidents, you know nursing home abuse, products liability, environmental catastrophes, things of that sort.  But, we can still do criminal cases, well yes, and we still do some criminal cases across the country.
Speaker 1: Was there a reason why civil law was chosen to be the main focus of the law firms across the country?
Speaker 2: Well you know civil law is so broad because it covers so many areas.  When somebody is injured by a product we help them.  Somebody, if an elderly person is compromised in a nursing home we help them.  Somebody is seriously injured in an automobile we help.  Criminal law still has its place, don't get me wrong, but unfortunately most of the cases in the criminal justice system involve things that are not good, drugs, trafficking drugs, major white collar crime on the part of corporations where employees' stocks options and things are ruined, their retirements are crushed for life.  So, there is a handful of criminal cases that we would still be interested in where the side of right would be in order, but in many of these instances, and I'm not saying everybody is guilty, that is not what I'm saying, everybody is innocent until proven guilty, that's the system, I respect the system, but as far as the number of criminal cases that are worthy of the attention of this law firm, given the nature of the society we live in now, you have 80 percent of the cases in court and somebody catch dead red handed with three pounds of crack [crack cocaine] on him doesn't seem like the kind of case we'd be interested in.  I'm not downplaying, these people have a right to a lawyer, but that's probably one of the reasons we've got away from that.
Story_ID: 557879
Speaker 1: The next thing I want to get on record you talked about your wife, and we talked about Janice [Smith's first wife, Janice Cheek Smith] earlier.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're now married to Yvette [Yvette Smiley-Smith] and have been married to her for a number of years.  Tell me about when you met her and then tell me about your daughter [Janay Smith].
Speaker 2: Yvette and I met at a political convention, the Alabama Democratic Conference convention in 1978 and I was just coming out of a bad marriage at that time and we spent some time together and the first time we met we went out to dinner and enjoyed conduc- company immensely.  Yvette was physically engaging.  She was also intellectually gifted.  She had a radiance about her that was second to none.  She had a learnedness that was second to none.  First black woman to ever get a CPA [certified public accountant] certification in Alabama.  She was working, well had worked for Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP] an (unclear) company, which was unheard of for an African American to work for a company of that sort.  And she had accomplished so much.  She had her own CPA firm she'd be running once in (unclear), later on in Montgomery [Alabama] when I met her.  Then she went work for the Public Service Commission [Alabama Public Service Commission] where she became head of the trial staff there and established herself as the utility regulatory expert.
Story_ID: 557880
Speaker 1: Continue telling me about your wife Yvette [Yvette Smiley-Smith].
Speaker 2: So it was definitely one of those situations where it was love at first sight.  There is no question that it was destiny.  We, I was coming out of, as I said, another situation and I talked to some lady in New York [New York] and was a very impressive person, Ph.D. and whatnot and spoke several languages, but it was clear that things were changing as they say or as Sam Cooke said a change is gonna come, I guess he knew what he was talking about.  And it did come.  A few months later I, you know, was coming back from one of these trips in New York and I asked Yvette to meet me at the airport and she did and spent some time and we'd only spent at that time maybe a total of ten hours together, ten or twelve hours together, max.  And I said, "Well I've made up my mind."  She said, "Made up your mind about what?"  I said, "You know we ought to get together, you know we ought, we ought to get married."  She said, "Married? What are you talking about? I just met you."  I said, "That's begging the question.  What is the answer? Yes or no.  I'm not interested in longevity.  Why you gonna put off tomorrow, what you can do today.  Tomorrow is not promised to you except in the Lord is it?"  She said, "You're some kind of man.  I ain't never met no man like you, this confident, African American."  I don't know if it's confident, it may be need, maybe I don't what it is really and she accepted and so some months later we got married in June of '79 [1979].  Yvette has--is already in a good mood.  She's got a sweet spirit.  She was, her father [Richmond Smiley] was a deacon in Dr. King's church [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama].  The night before the Selma to Montgomery March when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, all these ministers were in her living room talking about they were, you know didn't know if they could continue to practice nonviolence or whether they could survive the movement, she heard Dr. King speak words of peace as she was standing in the hall.  Those words not only changed all those ministers' lives, but it brought about Selma to Montgomery, successfully and changed her life.  She participated in the marches with Dr. King as a young kid.  She was raised in the admonition of the Lor- of the Lord.  Her mother [Jean Smiley] was a devote Catholic, passed away a few years ago, all the masses.  Her father was a devout Baptist in Dr. King's church.  Yvette is a very interesting person.  She's never had a drink in her life, never had a cigarette in her life, and yet she's not a sadity person.  I'm not telling you that to say that's better than everybody else, that's not my point, my point was that Yvette was truly raised in the admonition of the Lord and that Yvette, if you met her, well you will meet her shortly, would disengage you immediately with charm and kindness and pour blessings of God upon you and receive very little herself.  She's a giver and not a taker.  She is responsible for the great degree of my success in many instances where I would have quit or given up the saddle of the horse and everything else by telling me, "No you are gonna make it."  That was even before the first million dollar verdict, before Lucy Turner [Southern Life and Health Insurance Company and Richard Perry v. Lucy R. Turner]. Yvette--'cause keep in mind Yvette and I married in '79 [1979].  Turner didn't come through until '88 [1988], so we were married nine years before I hit my first million dollar verdict.  Yvette was with me when I didn't have anything.  I mean I had a little something.  I mean I'd say I was broke, not so much that way, but didn't have substantial assets or anything like that.  So, and Yvette was always with me.  She was always and always has been with me.  She's been an encourager, and she's been, she been a blessing to my life that, that God has, has, has called my cup to run over as 23rd Psalms says.  And surely goodness and mercy have followed me all the days of my life because of him and because of what he sent me.
Story_ID: 557881
Speaker 1: As far as my daughter is concerned, she is just becoming a lawyer now.  She was a career engineer.  She--her name is Janay [Janay Smith], J-A-N-A-Y.  She is, left Gillette [The Gillette Company] where she redesigned all their razors and toothbrushes to take on a new career now.  She did undergrad at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] where she got electrical engineering degree, I'm sorry mechanical, then she went on to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and got a master's in product design engineering, the only African American woman to ever receive that degree.  And her advisor out there who was the provost of Stanford at the time was none other than Condoleezza Rice before she became what she is today.  And so my daughter is an engineer and now a lawyer to be.  She's waiting on her bar results, graduated from Cumberland law school [Cumberland School of Law] in Birmingham [Alabama], and she will join me in the practice, hopefully, to continue this, this legacy, which is important and I need someone particularly after the loss of Johnnie Cochran.  And she also has been very encouraging to me over the years in, in, in keeping me sustained in, in, in forward thinking during difficult times.  And that's it.  It's a small family.  The--and I'm blessed that I have both of them.  I guess again like the old adage I understood what [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers was saying I am third.  Well, he had good reason to say. I gave you my scenario earlier why I'm third in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] now you've heard the reason why I'm third in this family.  I always, I tend to be the caboose, tend to pull up the rear.  I mean these two women are more accomplished than I'll ever be, and they have more godly features, they have more patience.  They not as quick to judge, and they have unconditional love and I guess God gave that to women.  Men is for us, it's, it's learned behavior unfortunately.  For women because they're mothers it is nurturing behavior, it is from the Lord, and that's what these two women have and they show it every day.
Story_ID: 557882
Speaker 1: You have great interest in--and I see where your history background comes in--collecting information and documenting African American achievement or American achievement through your museum and you're so interested in sports that from a child we can see why you're so interested in, in, in the different sports.  Talk to me--you, you told me about the sports agency [Cochran Sports Management, LLC], but we didn't go into what it was that you and Johnnie Cochran did at the sports agency, and then tell me about what is that you're doing with your museum and all the things that you are involved in when it comes to sports as far as being in a play by play announcer and all the organizations that you belong to as far as sports.
Speaker 2: Well, first of all the sports agency that Johnnie and I put together in 1997 was really the genesis of our relationship in terms of the business relationship, and what happened, we were doing well in the sports agency, but the law practice [Cochran, Cherry, Givens and Smith; The Cochran Firm] got to be so all consuming with opening all these offices and setting up a national firm that we just did a little bit of the sports agency and a whole lot of the law.  We had some good clients now.  We had some good sports agency clients, but that did not take up the majority of our time, but it still is very important in our history because it resignated the relationship, developed the relationship Johnnie and I in trust and business that resulted in the law firm, which never would have been without the, the forerunner to the same being the sports agency.
Story_ID: 557883
Speaker 1: As far as the collection goes, the collection is the largest in the world.  I started collecting out of the need to, to have the garments worn by the players that my father [Jacob Smith] and I started together and lar- now it's twenty-five years later and it's the largest in the world.  The collection has over eleven hundred game worn uniforms, you know, it in.  It's thousands of autographs, autograph of every president of the United States, and autograph with most of the famous African Americans, historical documents, slave papers, Babe Ruth's uniform, Ali's [Muhammad Ali] robe from the Bonavena [Oscar Bonavena] fight, Jim Brown's uniform, Jim Brown's two MVP trophies.  It goes on and on and on.  What I intend to do with it one day, or soon is to look at my options and perhaps set up an African American or just a general all-American museum for sports and/or history including presidential history, African American history.  To be able to put more knowledge into the plate on the table of the marketplace.  Again, knowledge being power. And also appreciation of legacy.  I think that what has happened in the African American community to a certain extent is that legacy is not emphasized as much as it should be or as it once was.  To prove my point, when they gave a recent examination to students I think at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as I was told they could tell you who Sean "Puffy" Combs [P. Diddy; Sean Combs] was, but they couldn't tell you what year [President] Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves.  They could tell you who Master P was, but they couldn't tell you who was at George Washington's side in Valley Forge [Pennsylvania] when he marched on the British in the midnight hour.  That's not good.  What I do is, history has a way of keeping close to me or close to the vest my value system.  For me to look around this room and see Abraham Lincoln's brief he wrote to the court in nin- in 1857 that he signed or see Gandhi's [Mahatma Gandhi] autograph, or to see a 1798 brief that Alexander Hamilton wrote to the court as an officer of the state, as a lawyer of New York.  And also for a man of color, a West Indian man, not a white man, his story needs to be written as a person of color who changed this world.  Or behind me a personal letter that Frederick Douglass wrote somebody in 1876 or Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], a letter he penned in '67 [1967] on SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] stationary.  You gotta feel good about this kind of stuff being in your presence.  It reminds you of what the dues that people have paid.
Story_ID: 557884
Speaker 1: Sports items remind me of the important role that sports has, sports has played as life in microcosm.  In one of my speeches that I make around the country I often talk about Jackie Roosevelt Robinson [Jackie Robinson].  April 15, 1947, seemed like an ordinary day in America, but it was a special day.  Forget the, forget the fact that income tax returns were due that day.  Forget even Ebbets Field [New York, New York] the architecture so regaled.  Forget even Bodan- Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] tap dance on the Ebbets Field dugout, the Dodger [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] dugout that day.  It was a day when no longer white men were running after a ball.  It was a day when some figure emerged from the dugout, black, jet black, Jackie Roosevelt Robinson.  People, thoughtful people, realized that sport was changing, that sport was playing a role in the great experiment.  At the time that Jackie Robinson was integrating baseball, there was a man sitting in California named Earl Warren who was the governor of California, conservative Republican man who was appointed by Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] some years later to head the United States Supreme Court.  Earl Warren didn't live up to the Nixon cry though.  He was in a hotel one night and told his driver he was park and he'd see him in the morning.  When he got back out in the morning, the driver was still in the car.  Earl Warren asked the driver, "What are you doing?  Why didn't you stay in the hotel?"  He said, "Sir I'm a black man, they won't allow me to stay in the hotel."  Earl Warren, I believe heard that radio when Jackie Robinson integrated baseball and decided to do something about his driver and about the plight of African Americans.  In Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] seven years later he penned the greatest decision known to man saying that segregated school systems bring psychological inferiority to black youth, it must be struck down.  It's a violation of the equal protection and due process.  Quoted Dr. Kenneth Clark, a great black sociologist, as his authority.  A man that also taught my dad [Jacob Smith] at City College [Brooklyn Law School, Brooklyn, New York].  Yes, that's why I surround myself with sports.  Sports was the condition precedent to Brown.  It was the great experiment of Jackie Robinson that worked out on a diamond, on a baseball diamond that caused people to say wait a minute these schools need to be integrated.  This thing is working.  There's nothing wrong with Robinson.  He's just like anybody else.  He's a great ball player that just happen to be black.  And, and sports have played this role that we all owe so much to and that is why along with my father and the ball yards that we visited, why I collect.  And what I intend to do with all of this stuff is to make it a landmark somewhere, some place, in some city, be it New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], here, Montgomery [Alabama], wherever, we need to do something to preserve our legacy.
Story_ID: 557885
Speaker 1: Now you've written your autobiography, 'Climbing Jacob's Ladder: A Trial Lawyer's Journey on Behalf of "The Least of These"' [Jock Smith].  Tell me why you wrote your autobiography?
Speaker 2: I wrote my autobiography to resignate my father's [Jacob Smith] life that was aborted by an assassin's bullet, and I also showed that no matter who writes your epitaph, never give up.  It was written to give hope to people who have been told, so many black kids in the school systems throughout America always told you'll never measure up to anything, you're incapable of being anything, you aren't anything.  Little Johnnie is not gonna make it.  Never give up.  They killed my father.  There were no stars next to my name.  My epitaph was written.  But God is bigger than your circumstances.  He is the God of reformation.  He is the God of resurrection.  He is a comforter.  He's a counselor.  He's a bright and morning star.  He's Abraham's seed.  That's why I wrote the book so people would know who really is in charge of who you are, who can change your destiny at any moment.  Other men will say nay.  There'll always be men saying what you cannot do, what you cannot achieve, what cannot happen, but the greater one in all of us says differently, and he has proven, his word has never proven void.  And I also wrote the book to show the importance of having a good father during the formative years for African Americans to learn and know that the formative years determine oftentimes your destiny.  To have a mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance] and father and later a grandmother who taught me the right things, and I came back, you know like the Bible says, "Raise up a child in the way he should go, and when he's old he will not depart," [Proverbs 22:6].  Now he may take another path along the way, there's adolescence, there's teenagers, there's girls, there's liquor, there's distractions, there's sins of the flesh, their needs, their wants, their weaknesses, there's carnality, even Jesus was tempted, but through it all, through it all you'll return to your beginnings.  And we can learn this as African Americans, nurture our children, do the right thing at an early age.  May go off the path, but eventually they shall return.  And that's why I wrote the book to show that it is important that we educate our children and teach our children the proper value system during the formative years.
Story_ID: 557886
Speaker 1: What are your concerns about the African American community?
Speaker 2: That it's too, that the jet set, the rap generation I call it.  Instant fix, give me something Mr. Charlie, give me the forty acres and a mule you promised me and never delivered on.  They ain't gonna deliver on that.  Nobody is going to give you forty acres and a mule, and that's probably what [President] Abraham Lincoln said.  They killed him for saying it.  John Wilkes Booth didn't like it and it hasn't resonated since.  So, the point is that I'm concerned that young people don't know anything about legacy, don't know anything about history, don't know anything about who our pioneers are.  They don't know anything about Frederick Douglass, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], et cetera, but they know all about these rappers and about the cars.  And I'm concerned that what is being put out in the black community even on black television stations in many instances is really not what's needed at this point.  There's enough of that on MTV, let's face it.  There's enough of that on the regular networks.  Why are we continuing to poison the minds of young people and have them believe that you gotta be Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] to be a black woman?  You gotta be, you gotta look that good to be a woman.  You got, if you don't look like Beyonce you ain't got it made.  You, you're no good.  If you, you know if you, if you don't have the bling bling like Puffy Combs [P. Diddy; Sean Combs] you, you've failed as a male.  You, you've let everybody down.  If you're not driving a pink Cadillac or a Royce [Rolls Royce], you know, if you don't have you know multiple homes you've failed.  That's not the message to send.  Martin Luther King died a modest man of modest means.  He was richer than all these rappers put together.  Many of these people died of modest means.  They put their lives into the lives of others, and the whole ministry of Jesus Christ is based on really when you think about Christianity is really based on losing one's own life to gain the world and to gain the lives of others.  That's not wh- that's not what's being taught.  That's what concerns me.  The value of school teachers has gone down.  The schools are drug infested, full of druggies on every corner, full of kids who, who are not being taught the proper way.  Athletes are being paid millions of dollars, and the teachers are still underpaid and underserved.  More applause is given for a five hundred foot homerun than a teacher that saves a kid's life.  Nobody loves a five hundred foot homerun more than me, but I'm not a fool.  No matter how many homeruns Barry Bonds hits, he's not as significant as Martin Luther King.  I'm not a fool.  You can't hit that many homeruns.  We, we have a value system that is, that is wrong, and that it's not teaching people what to applaud, not temporarily, but in the last (unclear).  Yeah we ought to applaud Barry Bonds, yeah we ought to applaud all these guys I agree with that, but once the applause is over, you did good, we're proud of you, you're, but the teacher, the parent, the school system, that's where we need to be concentrating, and I think that we're not concentrating on some of the things that we need to con-  I think we've lost our, our compass, our moral and educational compass in terms of where we need to be.
Story_ID: 557887
Speaker 1: You talk about legacy.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  Probably different than what I would have thought I would have wanted it to be as I made, continue this walk, as I say on this climb up Jacob's ladder, to use a metaphor of my book ['Climbing Jacob's Ladder: A Trial Lawyer's Journey on Behalf of "The Least of These",' Jock Smith].  I think I want my legacy to be that he was for the little guy, that Jock [HistoryMaker Jock Smith] tried to serve the least of these; that he served the Lord with gladness; that he represented the poor and disenfranchised, to use my [maternal] grandmother's [Rebecca Bowers] words, that he represented the locked in, the bereaved, and the shut out; that he represented as Johnnie [Johnnie Cochran] used to always say, not only the O.J.'s [O.J. Simpson] but the no-J's; that he represented the no-J's with dignity and class and, and a sincere concern for their vested interest; that he treated them with fidelity as Paul R. Moo said in that great graduation speech; that he practiced law with fidelity.  And that Jock never met a stranger and he never met anybody he wasn't capable of loving and that his unconditional love was real, his concern for people genuine, and his, his credit that he gave the Lord for what he, whatever he accomplished was genuine as well.  I think that would be the best legacy I--I remember telling some lawyers one time in a speech I made for all these lawyers, I said, "You know everybody says, a lot of lawyers say they gonna be the richest lawyer or be the richest man in America.  It's not much that I can say about that, but there is something to say about the poorest lawyer in America." And it got real quiet. "'Cause my Bible tells me that 'Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven for they should be called the children of God.'  What I'm saying to all you lawyers today is that if you're not prepared to give your life in a courtroom for the life of your client, you have violated the greatest and only salient principle of Christianity from which an old rugged cross is based on a Sunday morning.  If your only dream is how big the house is, how many bottles of liquor you can drink or how many women you can sleep with, then you are sick and you're going nowhere fast.  The conquests that you should be concerned about should be on your feet, not when you're off your feet, and there are many conquests that are unresolved that need our attention desperately.  Won't you focus on that awhile?  It just may keep you out of trouble." (Laughter) And that, that, that, that, that, you know that, that's just the kind, you know, the way I talk when I go to these places.  This is kind of what I believe, you know, and living it is harder than saying it, we all have to fight it every day to live it, but at least I'm in the battle and recognize what the battle is and I'm fighting with the right tools.
Story_ID: 557888
Speaker 1: Because this interview will be viewed by future generations, what message do you want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: That we are a great people.  That our legacy from Africa, though we didn't come here on the Mayflower, has been sustained through the accomplishments of African Americans in America under insurmountable odds and circumstances, connotating insurmountable odds. That Charlie Drew [Charles R. Drew] invented blood plasma, that Benjamin Banneker laid out Washington, D.C., that George Washington Carver revolutionized the southern planter, the agrarian South, and brought it into the industrial age.  That it wasn't just about the peanut, it was about industrializing the soil and manifested blessing to all of God's people.  When Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] got, went to General Armstrong [Samuel C. Armstrong] in Hampton University [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and saw where a white man had started a colored boy's college and went to Tuskegee [Alabama] and did the same thing himself and now it's called Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama], which is where the Negro airmen [Tuskegee Airmen] came out of and Carver as well.  That really the accomplishments of the Johnnie Cochrans the Thurgood Marshalls, Martin Luther Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Frederick Douglass do indicate that the best of us, as once said, must save the rest of us.  There also is something to be said about God's message of salvation that he's already saved us all.  We already paid a price for all of you kids out there.  This man paid a price and on the third day we saw what the price was.  He gotta believe that nobody can stop you.  If your heroes are sports figures, you know like Jim Brown or some of the others, the one thing about them that made them great is they sustained themselves through insurmountable odds on the field of play, Jackie Roosevelt Robinson [Jackie Robinson], all the rest, and I believe that you too can accomplish your dreams, you too can accomplish your wildest dream.  When they tell you, you can't, Sammy Davis' book ['Yes I Can: The Story of Sammy Davis, Jr.,' Sammy Davis, Jr. with Jane Boyar and Burt Boyar] says, yes I can.  When it looks like you're going down you're probably close to a breakthrough.  When it looks like it's all over, it's probably just beginning.  As we sit here today, one caution: if you think you got it made at any point in life and you think you cannot be taken down, if you think you're bigger than your circumstances or you think I've got it made, remember the stories of O.J. Simpson and Michael Vick today and please understand that you're only a moment away from losing the very blessing that God has given you.  Never take anything for granted.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Rebecca Bowers] used to always say, "Never ever get too big for your britches."  Don't ever do that because it can lead you down a path that you'll never believe how far down you can go so fast.  That's what I have to say.
Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story.  It's most, been most inspirational and I just wanna say thank you once again.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Y'all been so kind, thank you, thank you, thank you.
Story_ID: 557889
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's a family portrait we took earlier this year of course myself, my wife Yvette Smiley-Smith, and my daughter Janay Smith.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the National Law Journal issue that commemorates the verdict I got in behalf of Carolyn Whittaker for 1,620,000,000 [dollars] as the largest verdict in the United States of America for the year 2004.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Lawdragon magazine out of Hollywood, California [Hollywood, Los Angeles, California], that selected me for the second year in January, February 2007 edition as one of the five hundred leading plaintiffs lawyers in America.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is an actual firm brochure with Johnnie's [Johnnie Cochran] picture along with myself on the cover that was in circulation during the time that Johnnie was living in the formulation of the firm of Cochran, Cherry, Givens, and Smith [The Cochran Firm], and actually it still is used.  This particular brochure is still used by the firm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of my father [Jacob Smith] along with his client, the famous Count Basie, and his brother, Wilson Smith [Wilson Smith,Jr.] and his wife, Ossie [ph.], along with my mother [Betty Lou Bowers Nance].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: You ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Guy [Guy R. Brewer] and Marie Brewer [Marie Brown Brewer] who started the United Democratic Club [Guy R. Brewer United Democratic Club] in Queens [New York] along with my father so that African Americans could be elected to public office, and it's me receiving the Eleanor Roosevelt award, scholarship to go to college.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it.
Speaker 2: This is simply a graduation picture from high school [Andrew Jackson High School, Queens, New York] of my- myself. This is simply a picture of me as a young boy.
Speaker 1: Do you know what age?
Speaker 2: I'd say around five, six.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Joe Namath and I holding up his 1970 AFL All-Star [American Football League All-Star] uniform he wore in the AFL All-Star game before the leagues merged.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Any time you're ready, you can just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is a picture of me in front of the signs to the antebellum home which was my law building before I merged with Johnnie because if you notice the sign says [HistoryMaker] Jock M. Smith Attorney at Law and that's a picture of me that, that sign before the merger of the national firm, the partnership Johnnie and I had together. This is a picture of me holding up or, or actually alongside Muhammad Ali's 1974 robe he wore in training for the Foreman [George Foreman] fight in Zaire, Africa.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good.
Speaker 2: This is a
Speaker 1: Don't wanna stay up there.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of part of the sports museum at one point.  It houses the largest sports collection in the world.  You see a lot of game worn uniforms and statues and other displays in, in the picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at the kickoff celebration and presentation of my non-profit Scoring For Life [Scoring For Life, Inc.] where I talk about the choices we make in life determine our destiny.  You know notice there are a lot of uniforms on mannequins.  Jackie Robinson's uniform, Brooklyn Dodger [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] uniform is there, Magic Johnson, Lawrence Taylor, and Dwight Gooden, people I was speaking on that night.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Paul Hemphill, Hemphill and I, the gentleman who I conferred with who helped me write 'Climbing Jacob's Ladder' ['Climbing Jacob's Ladder: A Trial Lawyer's Journey on Behalf of "The Least of These",' Jock Smith].
Speaker 2: A picture of Johnnie Cochran and I, my law partner, in our New York law office.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on.
Speaker 2: New York, New York.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next.
Speaker 2: A picture of me in front of a 1978 240D, diesel Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], the first Mercedes I ever owned.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: A picture of me playing the bongos at the home (laughter) as a young teenager in front of the house that I was raised in.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: A picture of me in college after being elected president- vice president of the student body, Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: The picture on the left is my father, in the center is his brother Wilson, on the right is his brother Jean [Jean Smith].  All three together watching the television, the 1955 World Series when the Brooklyn Dodgers, when the integrated baseball team defeated the New York Yankees in the World Series.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one moment. Okay, next.
Speaker 1: A picture of me as a child probably two to three years old.
