Story_ID: 13581
Speaker 1: Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Earl E. Strayhorn, S-T-R-A-Y-H-O-R-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 24th, 1918.
Speaker 1: And, sir, your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: At present, I'm pleasantly retired and doing consulting work here in the office where we're situated and also working as a special assistant prosecutor in the investigation that is ongoing of past police brutality in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: --and playing golf--when I can.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April--today is January 14, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: We're presently located in my office at the Monadnock Building located at 53 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois 60604.
Story_ID: 13582
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, you hit me right--because I really don't have any food that I favor over any other any longer.  I suppose earlier it might have been black-eyed peas and pig tails.  But my doctor tells me that that's not the proper diet for a person my age now.  So I don't get into that very often.
Speaker 1: So your favorite food's been banned basically?
Speaker 2: Yes, basically.  So I just exist.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not into color schemes or things of that kind.  So I, I really can't say that I have--I favor any one color over another, just whatever I feel comfortable with in wearing.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I like all of the seasons.  That's why I've been in Chicago [Illinois] so long because we see all the seasons in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I like to go around in different places for vacation.  So I, I don't concentrate on one area, no.
Speaker 1: All right, now, and finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not favorite, but if, if you press me, I'd have to say how lucky I am to have existed and been allowed to be around for as long as I have, have been.
Story_ID: 13583
Speaker 1: Do you know much about your ancestors or where they came from or what your family was doing in the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that my mother [Minnie Lee Davis], who was born a Davis, and she was born in [Columbus] Mississippi where I was born.  I knew my maternal grandfather [Edward Davis].  I knew some of his brothers, slightly, because they separated and went to different areas.  My grandfather came to Chicago [Illinois] here.  His brothers--some, one went to Birmingham [Alabama], another went to Detroit [Michigan].  And I knew very little about my father's [Earl Edward Strayhorn Sr.] family except that I knew that he had one brother.  And I knew that brother, and he lived in, in St. Louis [Missouri].  And it wasn't until I became a judge and was involved in, actively in cases that were of some public notoriety that I had a case that was reported in JET magazine.  And I received--they had, in reporting that case, put a picture of me in the, with the story.  And after that issue came out, I received a letter from a lady in McKenzie, Tennessee.  And the letter started off, "I have just read the article concerning the case that you were adjudging in Chicago.  And in reading the article and seeing your name, I think we're related."  And the letter recited who her father was and who his brothers were and included in the brothers of her father was the name, Earl, who was my father.  And she gave me a telephone number, and I called her immediately upon reading the letter.  And we talked.  And she told me that I had an aunt that I wasn't aware of.  And that that aunt was presently at that time in Chicago visiting her son, who was a resident of Chicago.  And she gave me the address of, of that son.  And the address was familiar to me because it was just across the street from the residence of my then senior partner, Charles B. Evans.  And I finished the telephone conversation and got in my car and drove out and met that lady who turned out to be the youngest of my father's siblings.  She, and she was the only sister.  And I got a chance to meet my aunt, that I didn't know existed.  Two weeks after that, when she returned home, she died.  So that was the only opportunity that I had.  But I didn't know that she or any of these other people existed until that article was published in, in JET magazine.  And then I went down to McKenzie [Tennessee] after this date.  And I visited with all of those people.  And I met my cousins, my first cousins that I didn't know exis--existed.  And we all sat around the table.  And we tried to figure out what it was that had happened that had made my father disassociate himself from his family to the extent that he didn't even tell his, his, his children about these other members of his family that he had left.  And we never, we never came up with any set answer other than probably the fact that his family down in, in the Tennessee area were blacks of some means or owned property and so forth.  And it was possible that under the circumstances that existed in the South then, that his parents disagreed with his selection of my mother to marry.  And when he decided to go against their wishes and marry my mother, they wiped him out of the family or he wiped himself out of the family.  I don't know which.  But that's the only thing we could come up with.  But since that time, I see these cousins on a regular basis.  And I'll be going back in April of this year when my second cousin, the daughter of my first cousin, her child is, is being married.  And so I'm going back down to Nashville [Tennessee] for the wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had good fortune in being able to--
Speaker 2: Yes, it--I was very fortunate because up to that time, my uncle in--that I knew in St. Louis, he had died.  And my father was dead so I thought that all of the Strayhorn side that pre--that came before me was gone on the male side.  And I found out that that isn't, isn't so because there is another male, two other male Strayhorns that are still living there in the Tennessee area.
Speaker 1: Now, did either your mother or your father talk about (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not, neither one of, neither one of them spoke anything about these incidents that gave us any clue about what occurred.  And we could only speculate.  And that's what we did.  We speculated, and that was the best answer we could come up with.  I think, I think that my mother was probably illegitimate.  And that may have had something to do with, with this rift in the family because in later years, it, it develops that my mother was not closely aligned with the Davis part of the family.
Story_ID: 13584
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her full name was Minnie Lee Davis, Minnie, M-I-N-N-I-E, and Lee, L-E-E, which is a common name in the South, I understand, Minnie Lee.
Speaker 1: Do you know her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, she would now be somewhere in the range of 102 years old, but I don't know her specific date of birth.  But she'd be over a hundred years old now.
Speaker 1: So about the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I think that since I was born in 1918, she probably was about seventeen or eighteen years old when I was born, so, yes, around the turn of the century.  That, the nineteenth century, that, that probably is correct--twentieth century rather.
Speaker 1: And was she born near Columbus, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: She was born, yes, in or around Columbus.
Speaker 1: Now, your father, what was his full name and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Earl Edward Strayhorn, same name as I have.  I'm a Junior.
Speaker 1: And do you know his birth date?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't know what Dad's birthday--he died in 1937.  So, no, I, I don't know his birth date.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think, was he close to the same age as your mother?
Speaker 2: Maybe--yes, close.  He might have been two or three years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay, and was he born in Columbus, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Tennessee.  He was born in Dyersburg, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, not to, not to my recollection, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were born in Columbus, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: I was born in Columbus, and my brother was born [ca. 1932] in Columbus.  My brother, Wilber, we were both born in Columbus.  Wilber is a little, or was, two years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Now, who are your brothers and sisters?  Can you name them all for us?
Speaker 2: One brother, his name is Wilber, middle initial B, Benson.  And he died in 1970 here in Chicago [Illinois], unmarried when he died.
Story_ID: 13585
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about your father [Earl E. Strayhorn Sr.]?  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My dad worked, when we came to Chicago [Illinois], with the Pullman Company.  He was a painter.  And he held that job until he went on disability because at that time, paints were all lead-based.  And they didn't have the protection then that they have now of requiring painters who are dealing with lead-based paint to have the, the, a breathing mask to take out the deadly lead fumes.  And as a result of not following those kinds of protective procedures, he developed lead poisoning.  And he went on disability from the Pullman Company with this lead poisoning, which eventually led to heart problems, which eventually took his life when he was, oh, around forty-five years old.  So the breadwinner in, in our family that I recollect was, was my mother [Minnie Lee Davis], who had been a teacher, a school teacher down in Mississippi.  But when she came to Chicago, she didn't pursue teaching, and she ended up being a clerk in what was--one of, the only large, the second largest largest grocery chain in the Chicago area, which was Consumer's Grocery Store, which was bought by Kroger and eventually became a Kroger grocery store.  And that was where she worked during her working years.
Story_ID: 13586
Speaker 1: Now, you were in Columbus [Mississippi] until you were about five years old?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the family moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: The family moved to Chicago in 1927.
Speaker 1: And why did the family move then?
Speaker 2: Well, I suppose that that was during the, the grand influx of blacks coming to Chicago from the South.  And they were a part of that, that influx.  And they, they came right up--we came right up the IC trail, on the IC train [the Illinois Central Railroad] from Mississippi to 12th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: That was 1920--
Speaker 2: 1927.
Speaker 1: Seven, okay.  Was that the year of that big flood in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't remember any event that caused them to move.  I just conclude that it was their decision that they could find a better life here in Chicago than, than existed for them down in Mississippi.  And in retrospect, it might be that because of the circumstances of their marriage, not pleasing, at least from my perspective, one side of the family, they decided to really get away from both families.
Speaker 1: Okay, as far as you know, did they have any relatives here already or any contacts?
Speaker 2: No, I think that our family was the first part of the Davis family to move to Chicago, although our home eventually became the central location for the arrival of other members of the Davis family.  My mother's brothers, half-brothers that is, when they decided to move from Mississippi to Chicago, their first stop was in our home.  And they stayed in our home until they established their own, own residences.  And that was Zack and Joe and Steve, Steve was the youngest.  And there were two daughter, two sisters, Dolly and--a senior moment.  There was another, another sister whose name escapes me at the moment.  But they all lived in our home when they came to Chicago until they established their own places of residence.
Story_ID: 13587
Speaker 1: Tell me about what it was like growing up in, I guess, if you can remember--whatever you remember about [Columbus] Mississippi and then in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: The only thing I remember about growing up in Mississippi is walking barefoot in a dirt road and cutting my heel on a piece of glass and getting treated by the doctor.  And then somehow, when I was taking a bath or being given a bath, I sat on a piece of glass in the bathtub.  And I remember that injury that I received to my posterior.  But those are the only significant things that I remember about the time in, in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And they're not pleasant either.
Speaker 2: No, they weren't pleasant, but I remember them to this day.
Speaker 1: Well, what about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Chicago, and where did you all live in the city?
Speaker 2: Well, when we, when we got here, when we first got here to Chicago, my, my mother [Minnie Lee Davis] had an uncle who owned a restaurant in the then thriving area called Bronzeville of 35th and State [Street].  And that was her first job in Chicago as a waitress in his, in uncle Henry's restaurant.  And that's where we had our first meal in the Chicago area.  We moved to a building, a four-story apartment building located at 37th and Cottage Grove.  That building is no longer at that location because that location has been taken over.  It's a park there now, a public park.
Speaker 1: Madden Park.
Speaker 2: No, not Madden Park.  It's a smaller park because it's on the, the west side of Cottage Grove at 37th Street. [Ellis Park is currently at this location though it is larger than Madden Park.]  On the east side of that intersection is the Donahue School.  And Madden Park is right east of the Donahue School, east and south of the Donahue School.  That's, that's Madden Park.  [located at 3800 South Rhodes Avenue in Chicago.] And that's where we first moved.  And my first--that's where I had my first educational experience because I entered as a kindergarten student at a public school [Doolittle Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] that is still located at 35th and Rhodes.
Story_ID: 13588
Speaker 1: That was my first school [Doolittle Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And then after I completed my first year in kindergarten, then the family moved to the area of 50th and Prairie.
Speaker 2: Now, did you basically grow up there?
Speaker 1: And that's where I grew up because I did the rest of my elementary school at [Edmund] Burke Elementary School, which was located at what was then 54th Place and South Park Avenue.  South Park has now been renamed Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive.  And I went to elementary school there at Burke School.  When I graduated from Burke School, then I went to high school at Tilden Technical High School, which was a technical school.
Story_ID: 13589
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to get too far ahead.  But can you take us back to your early childhood and give us picture of, you know, of some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood [in Chicago, Illinois] and what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was pleasant, really.  We lived in a nice community, and a nice neighborhood.  Everybody knew one another.  All of the people were friendly with one another.  The people that were not working, particularly, the, the women of the neighborhood, were the sub-parents.  And they would watch over the kids of the neighborhood as they were playing in and around the area and correct us when we did something wrong.  And sometimes, that correction would take the bent of being corporal punishment, spank us, and then tell our, our parents what we had done.  And then we'd get another spanking.  So that was the kind of, the community that we grew up in, where people respected one another and didn't necessarily like one another, but they respected one another.  And they were neighborly.  And they acted neighborly.  We played out on the street and in the alleys and in the yards of the buildings that we lived in.  We, in the wintertime--and the winters then were much more severe then than they are now, we would sled in the streets because the ice would ice up the streets.  And we'd take our, our sleds out and flop up and down the streets.  Car traffic was not a big problem then because you didn't have that many cars, particularly, in the community.  And so we didn't have to be concerned too much about automobiles, but we were watchful.  And it was a pleasant experience growing up.
Story_ID: 13590
Speaker 1: We had gangs, gangs existed then.  But they were non-lethal gangs.  When you fought with another gang, you fought with your fist or with rocks or pebbles or pea-shooters.  When I say pea-shooters, I mean actually, little peas, hardened peas that you blow through a little tube.
Speaker 2: Plastic tube?
Speaker 1: No, it was, it was a wooden tube.  But those were the kinds of fights that we had.  And you can't kill someone with a pea shooter, not those kind of pea shooters.  And so, yes, gangs existed then because it was a neighborhood-type thing.
Speaker 2: Now, what were the names of some of the gangs?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, the only, only gang I remember is the gang that was supposed to be the baddest in the, in the group, the 40th, 47th Street Marauders.  We, in my neighborhood, which was at 50th Street, we weren't bad enough to, to dignify putting a name on our, on our gang.  But these, these guys were, they were, they were larger than we were, and they were, they were pretty significantly avoided.
Speaker 2: So gangs were, were they basically community people that were just kind of--
Speaker 1: Out of different, different neighborhoods, yes.  Every neighborhood had a gang.
Speaker 2: Okay, and they'd kind of watch over the neighborhood for any--
Speaker 1: Yes, well, I don't know about watching over the neighborhood, but they defended the territory of the, of the area, yes, so to speak.  But it wasn't until much later that gang activity became the lethal type that it is now.  So it's possible to have gangs, and the gangs not be anti-social or criminal in, in nature.  I think it's natural for boys to congregate together as they're growing up.  And in congregating together, they, they get in a gang.  And a gang is a neighborhood gang, but now that signifies something that is anti-social, criminal--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Were the gangs social and would they like hold social events?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Absolutely.
Story_ID: 13591
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I liked sports, but I was not very good at any of the physical sports, maybe baseball.  I played third base and, and short centerfield, but I was a slight boy.  I didn't weigh any more than seventy-five or eighty pounds. And I must have been about five-foot-eight or nine inches tall, if that, that tall.  But I could run forever.  But track and softball were, were my major successes and, sports wise,  I wanted to be big enough to be a football player when I was in high school.  But I never got over 100 pounds while I was in high school.  So I couldn't, I couldn't--I didn't fit on the--in terms of physical strength, to play football.
Speaker 1: Throughout your whole career in high school, you never were more than 100 pounds?
Speaker 2: I didn't get over 100 pounds until I was a sophomore in college.
Story_ID: 13592
Speaker 1: So, but, but I, and yet in spite of this, and in spite of that great disappointment of not being able to play football, I still was active in high school [Tilden Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] with, with the blacks who tended to associate together because we were like a lump of ice in a, in a glass of buttermilk, a lump of coal. I should say in a glass of buttermilk because there were only about forty-five of us in a student enrollment of over 2,000.  So we, we tended to stick together and work together.  And that, that kind of sticking together led us in later years, before we graduate to do something very significant, which you might like to hear about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would.
Speaker 1: Being blacks at a predominantly white enrollment--
Speaker 2: You're talking about at Tilden?
Speaker 1: At Tilden, we were at that time tolerated.  And by the time we became juniors and the junior prom time came around, all of a sudden we found that we were not wanted at the junior prom and the senior prom.  And the only we combated that was by having some of our white friends buy us bids to the, these proms.  And that's the way we, we went because we couldn't purchase a bid ourselves.
Speaker 2: Now, what is a bid to a prom?
Speaker 1: A ticket to the prom, yes.  A ticket to, to attend the prom.  And at that time, the local ballroom that was attended by whites was the Trianon Ballroom, located at 61st and Cottage Grove, beautiful, beautiful ballroom.  And that's where the high schools on the South Side generally held their proms.  And the only way we got to go to any of these proms was, as I have stated, we would pony up our little nickels and pennies and dimes.  And we'd get a sufficient amount together to get two or three or four bids.  And then we would select straws and see which of the boys was going to invite a date to the prom.  And when we did that, then we would pony up enough money so that we could give whoever the winning fellows were, a sufficient amount of money to take their date to the prom by taxicab, rather than taking the public transportation, and having it necessary for the young lady to go on the streetcar in her splendid, long dress.  And so we decided when we got to be seniors that we were tired of this kind of shenanigans.  And we were gonna have our own--pardon me, party.  So we formed an organization called the Tilden Senior Techs.  And we gave it the Greek alphabet letters of the Tau Sigma Tau.  That was our designation for our club.  Another gang, Larry, if you will because it was composed of all of the seniors there at Tilden.  And we said that we're gonna have our own prom.  The leading orchestra in the United States at that time was the Benny Goodman Band, with Helen Forest as his singer and [vibraphonist] Lionel Hampton playing with him, the first black to play with a white orchestra.  He, at that time, was playing in the ballroom of the hotel, still in existence in Chicago, called the Auditorium Hotel, down there at--which is presently located at Michigan and the Dan Ryan Expressway--I mean the Eisenhower Expressway.  The Auditorium, where the Auditorium Theater is.  And he was playing at that hotel.  And then it was just radio.  So he was broadcasting by radio every night out of that hotel, and he was going all over the United States.  And we decided that we wanted Benny Goodman to play for our prom.  We formed a committee, called him at the hotel, told him what we had in mind.  He invited our committee as his guests to come to one of his performances at the hotel, reserved a table for our committee, received them, saw that they were properly fed, and then talked with them about what it was we wanted, and agreed to play at our prom or at our party.  And he asked where we were gonna hold it.  And we told him we were gonna hold it at the Eighth Regiment Armory, which was located, at that time, at 35th [Street] and Giles [Avenue].  And they rented out the Armory to hold parties and dances and things of that kind.  And that's where we were gonna hold it--we hadn't even rented the Armory when we made these arrangements with him.
Story_ID: 13593
Speaker 1: He agreed, and he said that I'll--you'll have to give me--when you sign the contract, one half down, and he charged $1600.  "You'll give me $800 down at the signing of the contract, and I'll require the balance of $800 at intermission on the night of the event."  We had $800 in our treasury, and we gave it to him when we signed the contract, high school kids now, Larry.  We--not a single parent involved in this.  This was just a high school group.  We signed that contract.  I don't know how legal it was 'cause we, we--I guess it must have been legal, 'cause we were seniors, so we must have been seventeen, some eighteen years old.  And then we proceeded to rent the Armory.  We got the advertising.  We got the newspaper ads.  We got the placards.  We got the tickets.  And then we set out selling the tickets.  We sold that place out.  And at intermission when it came time to pay him the balance of his contract, he was paid in full.  And we had left over sufficient funds, that the following year, when we gave our second party, we had Cab Calloway.  And we were still high school kids, and that club went on, even after I graduated from high school, as a senior group.  And it stayed in existence for twenty-five  years.  And that's the way, that's the way we beat that kind of, of discriminatory action by the, the school authorities when they decided that they didn't want to, as blacks, to come to these senior events and junior events put on by the schools.  And as a result of our activity, other schools that had a goodly number of blacks, such as Englewood [High School] formed a senior group called the Englewood Circle Soronies (ph.).  Hyde Park [High School] had a significant number of blacks there, and they formed a senior group called the HP Envicty (ph.).  And we would then give breakfast dances and other kinds of dances at the Savoy Ballroom.  And each club would try to outdo the other in the type of event that, that the club gave.  And that's the way we, we got our social activities on the roll in our area through those kinds of activities.  But that's the way we fought some of the discrimination and prejudice that we faced as we were coming up in high school.
Speaker 2: Now, did any of the white students or the regular people that were celebrating the prom come to your event?
Speaker 1: Yes.  We always had friends on, white friends.  That's the way we, that's the way we initially beat the, the fact that the authorities would not sell bids to us as blacks.  We, we used our white friends as, as intermediaries and they bought the bids for us and then turned them over to us.  So, yes, we had a few that, that came to these events, and they were welcomed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and too because it seems that, that your event was, had talent that was superior to the other event.
Speaker 1: It did, it did because these were real star material professionals, well known, well known throughout the community and throughout the country for that matter.
Speaker 2: Cab Calloway and Benny Goodman, in those days, that's--you couldn't get any better.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So, and we had fun with it.  And the, the putting the, putting these events together was, was a real fun thing because we broke down, the organization down into committees, and every one of those committees worked just the way they were supposed to.  And they worked because they were proud of what they were doing, and they wanted everything to be right.
Story_ID: 13594
Speaker 1: You know, what teachers really took an interest in you or what teachers did you particularly, you know, like in terms of what they were able to teach at both the grade school level and the high school level.  Was there anyone that stood out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I still remember Ms. Honan, who--
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: H-O-N-A-N, and she was my teacher in elementary school [Edmund Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember her, how hard she was, but how interested she was in, in all of the students and how much she stayed on us to, to learn.  And I remember Ms. Kelly, she was another teacher from elementary school that I remember.  She was a big woman, had a big, big bust line, and stilt-like legs.  And we called her, 'the city hall on stilts.'  But she was a good teacher, and she was a disciplinarian.  And she also had a great influence on us in, in terms of keeping us together.  It was in Ms. Kelly's class when she was teaching the eighth, eighth grade at, at Burke that we misbehaved one day in our eighth year when--just before graduation when she was out of the class.  And she snuck up on us and got back in the classroom, and then had a chance to see some of the things that were going on in her absence.  And, and it was Ms. Kelly who decided, along with the concurrence of the principal, that because of the, that activity in that class on that day, that there would be no formal graduation exercises.  And we received our diplomas in our seats there in the, in the classroom, rather than having a formal--that was our punishment for misbehavior.  But she was a good teacher.  So I remember Ms. Kelly and I remember Ms. Honan.  I remember the school principal.  And in high school, I don't remember the--I remember the shop teacher who taught Ford Shop.  I don't remember his name.  I remember the mechanical drawing teacher.  He was good.  I don't remember his name.  But those are teachers that, that I remember that were fair and were real teachers, and they--they taught the total class.  And they didn't have any, any racial bias in their, in their teaching activities
Story_ID: 13595
Speaker 1: We had one teacher [at Tilden Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] who was the swimming instructor.  And he didn't really like the fact that blacks were allowed to come to swimming class along with the whites because, you, you took that class, and you were naked, no swimming trunks, no anything.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a practice that I've heard about before that's been discontinued in most schools--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But in those days, everybody would swim in the nude.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Is there a reason?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know, but it--see, we were an all-boys school, so it really didn't--we were an all-boys school.  So it wasn't anything unusual, but that was a practice then.  And he didn't, he didn't like the fact that we were allowed to swim in the swim class with the whites.  Later on he became a leader in the teacher union movement.  And he ended up as being the, the president of the Chicago Teachers Organization.  And later on I became involved in politics and as I advanced and, and my name became known, we had occasion to meet at an affair in which he was called upon to speak before I spoke.  And he spoke glowingly of me as being one of his boys from Tilden.  And I growled under my breath, "Yeah, you're the one that tried to keep me out of the swimming pool."  But I didn't say anything when I got up to speech--to speak about that.
Story_ID: 13596
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?  Were you a good student or--
Speaker 2: Average.  I, I fought math and lost.  Just, did just enough math and trigonometry and, and algebra and advanced algebra--don't mention calculus, to get by those classes in high school.  But when I got to college, wouldn't even walk through the math building down at the University of Illinois, skirted it every time I saw it.  But I was an average student.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when it came time for graduation, did you know what you wanted to do, you know, with the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't made any firm decisions.  I just knew that I was going to college.  But where that road was going to lead hadn't been decided in my mind as yet.  And so, when I, when I enrolled at the University of Illinois in Champaign, I took a course leading, in liberal arts and sciences and--because at that time, we weren't required to make a decision as to what our major and minor subject field was going to be until we were juniors.  And so for two years, I went through the, the process.  Again, as I said, no, no math courses, and I, I ended up, in my junior year, I selected my major as political science with a minor in U.S. history.  And that's what I, I took my degree in, a bachelors' degree, major in political science and a minor in United States history.
Speaker 1: Did you really enjoy political science?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed political science.  The political science instructor was one of the greatest instructors that I've ever encountered in my life.  And he made the subject a very, very alive and interesting and educational.  And the things that I learned in his classes in, in that subject has stood me in good stead as I advanced in later in, in the field of, of politics.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember his name.  I just remember that he came from a very, very important millionaire family in Peoria.  But teaching was his love, and he was a good teacher.
Story_ID: 13597
Speaker 1: What college activities were you involved in at U of I [University of Illinois, Ubana-Champaign, Illinois]?  Were there many black students there?
Speaker 2: When I went down to Champaign, I guess the enrollment there was about 18,000, maybe a little less.  This was in 1936.  And there were probably thirty-five blacks on campus.  We all knew one another intimately.  And the Champaign-Urbana area itself was segregated.  We couldn't eat in the public restaurants outside of the campus.  When we went to the show, we had to go up into the balcony.  But we, we learned, and we lived, and we did more than exist.  We participated and became a part of the activity in the school.  I joined a fraternity.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, what fraternity did you--
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked as a waiter in a white fraternity house.  And being a waiter in this fraternity house meant that my food bills were taken care of because we served three meals a day in that fraternity house, breakfast, lunch and dinner.  And that was our pay.  Me and my fellow waiters who were all from the Kappa House, and that's the way we paid our food bill, which was a significant portion of the expenses that we would have had to pay.  The rest of the expenses that I ran into going through college, I made during the summer because tuition, believe it or not, at the University of Illinois at that time was $35 a semester.
Speaker 1: Now, that was even low then, right?
Speaker 2: I, I thought it was high.  But it was not as high as the tuition at the school that I really wanted to attend for college, which was the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin].  But Wisconsin, as did Illinois, charged an additional fee if you were a non-Wisconsin resident.  And so I couldn't come up with that additional fee easily.  So I ended up going down to the state school where these, tuition was only $35.  And I made my clothing expenses and tuition expenses and book expenses by working here in Chicago [Illinois] during the summer breaks.
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in sports in college?
Speaker 2: Intercollegiate, not intercollegiate, but intramural.  I played on our Kappa basketball team, not very well.  But--and then I played the, their softball team, and ran track on the intramural track, track team.
Speaker 1: So then you ran track in high school [Tilden Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I wasn't a part of the team.  I didn't make the team.  I tried for the team, but I didn't make it.
Speaker 1: But you had, you said one of your classmates was Ralph Metcalfe, right?
Speaker 2: Ralph Metcalfe was--preceded me at Tilden.  He was two years in advance of me, and he ran track there at Tilden.  He was on the track team.  When I, when I was in school, the dominant black athlete was Walter Black, who eventually became captain of the Tilden basketball team, co-captain of the Tilden basketball team, which won the city championship in 1935, I think it was.  And Walt was the person who was really responsible for my ending up going to the University of Illinois because he preceded me at the University of Illinois by two years.  And he was also instrumental in getting me the job working at the Kappa Sigma fraternity house as a waiter.
Story_ID: 13598
Speaker 1: Judge Strayhorn, I wanted to ask you about the '36 [1936] Olympics and what you all, what that meant to black people and especially those who knew Ralph Metcalfe at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, we were, of course, proud because Ralph was a Tilden-ite [a graduate of Tilden Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And we all felt as though we knew him even though none of us, that, in my group, had ever really met him at that time.  And so, yes, we were very proud.  And, and then we were proud of what he and, and Jesse Owens--and there was another black sprinter in that.  His name was Tolin, Bobby Tolin (ph.), I think it was.  I think he was from Michigan.  So those three men, they really did the race proud and the country proud in those Olympics there under--and, and they stuck, they stuck the flag right in [Adolph] Hitler's face.  And that, that made us feel good too.
Story_ID: 13599
Speaker 1: Now tell me about graduation from U of I [University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] and what was on your mind when you graduated from the University of Illinois?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time graduation turned around, I had made up my mind that I was gonna go to law school after graduation.  I had determined that that was going to be what I was gonna do after graduation.  But the clouds of war [World War II, 1939-1945] were gathering.  I graduated in June of 1941.  Europe was already at war, and we were on the threshold of it.  I really didn't recognize how close we were to war when I graduated in June of 1941, but we were close.  At that time, our country had enacted what is called the Selective Service Act.  And that act required every male American citizen eighteen years of age or older--up to a top age I don't remember, I think it was forty-five, to serve in the United States military service for a period of one year.  And when I graduated, I knew that my number was close, coming up for induction and selection to do my one year service.  So I really wasn't surprised when on October 15, 1941, I received my induction notice and my notice to report for induction.  And that's--
Speaker 1: And where did you report to?
Speaker 2: --that's when I reported down here at Van Buren, on Van Buren Street, just off of Wabash to the induction station, where I was inducted into the Army to do my one year of service.  And I was sent to Fort Custer, Michigan for my basic training.  When I got to Fort Custer, my basic training consist--consisted all of ten days because now I realized that the authorities recognized that we were close to war.  So I didn't get a chance in that group to go through the normal basic training period which normally takes three months.  But after those ten days, I, along with a cadre of forty-five other soldiers that were inducted at the same time I was, were shipped off to a location, which we later found out to be Tuskegee, Alabama.  And we were the first cadre of black soldiers at the then newly constructed Tuskegee Air Force Base, where the Army had decided that they were gonna try the Tuskegee Experiment.  And that experiment consisted of training blacks to fly in combat.  And my group of forty-five men and myself were the first soldiers to be there at Tuskegee.  We got there before they completed the base.  They were in the final stages.  They hadn't finished the, the barracks to the extent that they could be occupied.  So we had to stay in tents down on the stream, which ran through the Air Force, which ran through the, the base.  And we slept in these tents which had wood-burning stoves, and if anybody tells you that it doesn't get cold in Alabama in November, tell 'em to come see me.  And we had to burn wood in these wood-burning stoves, and those were days before they impregnated the canvas and made it fire proof.  And we had to be very careful with this wood that we used to heat up the inside of the tent because the sparks would land on the non-impregnated canvas and burn holes through, through the canvas and sometimes it would burn the entire tent down.  So we had to be very careful.  And that meant that we had to have spark deflectors on top of the stove pipe and, because we were burning untreated wood, which brought about a lot of soot, the spark deflectors would get clogged up with soot and that would cut off the draft, and we would have difficulty in keeping the wood burning.  So we--every morning, we'd have to send somebody up on top of the tent to take off the spark deflector and clean out all of that soot so it could get a draft.
Speaker 1: So, but you were there about ten days, right?
Speaker 2: We were there in, in that condition for about ten days before the barracks were opened up.  And then we, when we moved into the barracks, then we were, were relieved of that, of that obligation of, of having the wood-burning stove fire.
Speaker 1: So what was your--
Speaker 2: I became--my assignment at that time, since we were the first on the base, we were designated as the MP detachment.  And I was the first sergeant of that detachment.  And I remained with that designation until I left Tuskegee to go to Officer Candidate School.
Speaker 1: Did you have any observations about the Tuskegee training of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: I was there for the first, I was there for the first class and part of the second class.  And, no, my observations were, were limited to just seeing these young, black men going through their training, but the close, close details of what they were going through, I really didn't observe.  I learned about what they had to go through, through the expressions given by, given later to me by friends of mine that went through it; my former law partner, Judge John Rogers, went through it.  So he, he told me a lot about what they had to go through, but insofar as knowing any of these things and seeing them personally, no.  I, I wasn't aware of some of the things, nasty, horrible things that they had to go through in their training.  I wasn't really aware of that from my perspective as a, as an enlisted man.
Speaker 1: Were you called upon to discipline any of them as an MP or to bring them in?
Speaker 2: No, there were never any incidents involving any of the cadets that caused them to come into any problems with us as the base MPs.  So, no, we, we weren't ever called, and I rather suspect that this was because they were so busy (coughing) pardon me, trying to learn, under the circumstances that they were in, that they didn't have any time to get into any other trouble.
Story_ID: 13600
Speaker 1: Now, you applied for Officer Candidate School?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I was sent away in February of 1942 because Pearl Harbor [Hawaii, 1941] had hit about ten days after we got to Tuskegee [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, November 7th, I think it was.
Speaker 2: No, December 7th.
Speaker 1: December 7th, right.
Speaker 2: I remember that day like no other.  I was walking guard on the water tower.  And the guard sergeant came out, and he said, the Japanese have just burned, bombed Pearl Harbor.  And my words to the sergeant were, "Where is Pearl Harbor?"  And that was our first knowledge that we were at war.
Speaker 1: So how did you feel about that?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, everything went out the window from there because I knew that, war being declared, that my year's obligation was gonna be longer than a year, and it was because from October of 1941, I didn't come home again until February of 1946.  So that was a long year.
Story_ID: 13601
Speaker 1: So you go into Officers Candidate School?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Officers Candidate School at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, which was the artillery school.  And I, I took my commission in artillery.  And after I was commissioned, I was re--I was sent back to a unit at Fort Custer, Michigan, which was comprised predominantly of black men from the Chicago [Illinois] area and from Chicago.  And I served in that unit or in successor units of that unit up until the end of the war [World War II, 1939-1945].
Speaker 1: Now, you were sent to Italy?
Speaker 2: Yes, we, that unit became the 600th Field Artillery Battalion.  And we were assigned to the 92nd Infantry Division, an all-black infantry division, and our battalion was the 155 Millimeter Howitzer battalion, the General Support Battalion for the field artillery of that division.  And that's, that's the way we served.  We went into the line just after the Battle of Rome [Italy ].  And we remained on line throughout the battle in Italy, up until the end of the war, in which we ended up near the French-Italian-Swiss border, the top of the boot, the top of the Italian boot.
Speaker 1: Well, how was Italy, you know, for you as a black soldier?
Speaker 2: The Italian people were extremely friendly.  They were extremely poor, but they were extremely friendly, and we had very good relations with, with the Italian people in the areas that we occupied over there when we were, when we were there.  And I have nothing but warm memories of, of the people of Italy when I was serving there.
Speaker 1: All right.  Are there any particular incidents of the war that stand out that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the nice one, well it turned out to be funny, was a time when I was invited to dine with one of the families in the community in which my unit was located.  And believing that they were in distressed circumstances, I, as a gift, took a five-pound block of butter to give to my hostess, and it was kindly received.  And then we sat down to dinner.  And the meal was begun with a big steaming bowl of pasta that had some of that butter that I had brought in it.  And out of my mistaken belief that these, that this family was in real bad circumstances, I thought that this bowl of pasta was the main dish.  And so, following my mother's teachings, I ate every bit of that pasta, which was sufficient to fill me up for the rest of the night.  And it turned out that the pasta was the beginning course of what turned out to be an eight-course meal, which I somehow got through.  The main course had a main dish, unlike any I had ever seen because it was a meat that was a deep pink, and it had a gelatinous surface to it.  And I ate it.  And, and then after I made the mistake of asking the host what the meat was, and it was then for the first time that I understood why, in all of the time that I'd been in Italy, I had never seen a cat because he told me, when I asked him what the meat was, he said, "Gato."  And I said, "Cosa?"  "Gato" is Italian for cat.  "Cosa" is what.  And when he said, "gato" again, I almost gave it up, but I didn't disgrace myself and my mother's teaching.  And I kept the meal down, but I never, from that point after, ever repeated in any place that I went, when I ate something that I wasn't certain of what it was that I was eating, of asking someone what it was I had just eaten.  And another funny incident that night was, you know, we Americans, we think that we're--can handle any kind of, of drink.  And so the last course of the dinner is the, the, the little dinner cocktail drink, which at that time they served in a little glass about this big.  It's called a pony glass, for those of you who know about drinks.  And it takes about an ounce of liquid.  And the glass that they gave me was a clear liquid.  It looked like water to me.  And being a, an American, I--and with that idea that you can drink anything, I took it down the hatch and almost died.  My eyes began to water.  My nose began to run.  I began to have froth from my mouth.  My ears began to burn.  I was steaming all over, and the, the host, he was almost rolling on the floor, he was laughing so.  And when I finally got my breath back where I could ask him what it was I had just taken down, he told me it was grappa.  And it was 175 proof.  Grappa is the drink that the Italians make, and they still have it, and it's, it's served on the bars here and around the world.  And it is distilled from the leavings of the wine process, the hull, the grape hulls--the grape leaves, the grape vines, the grape peelings, the grape seeds are reprocessed in, in the distilling process just as the wine is made.  And it comes out a clear liquid.  And it's 175 and 180 proof.  But for any of you who want to try it, I'd suggest you ask your bartender to give you a shot of grappa, G-R-U-P-P-A. [more commonly accepted spelling is 'grappa.']
Speaker 1: But be careful, though.
Speaker 2: But be careful, sip it.  Don't take it down the hatch.
Story_ID: 13602
Speaker 1: At the close of the war [World War II], we were supposed to, were scheduled to return to the United States and not even land in the United States.  We were gonna be taken through the Panama Canal into the Pacific [Ocean], and then transported over to an area in the Pacific in preparation for the, the advance on, on the country of Japan.  But before that happened, V-J [Victory over Japan] Day came around.  So then the plans changed, and when I came home, they sent us--we landed in Boston [Massachusetts], and we were housed at Camp Waterbury, I think it is, or Massachusetts, Camp Waterbury, Massachusetts, where we then were trained from there to Fort Sheridan, Illinois, where, where we received our decommissioning papers.  And I came out and that must have been around December 1st of 1945.
Story_ID: 13603
Speaker 1: Now, you have a decision about law school, right, because (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I had already made that decision because I was well set that that's what I was gonna do if I came back.  One of my buddies over there was a lawyer.  He just died here this past summer.  He had served as a commissioner, in, industrial commissioner in the state of Illinois.  He later, after the war [World War II, 1939-1945], became a well-known author.  His name was Cyrus Colter.
Speaker 1: Cyrus Colter, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And--
Speaker 1: What's the name of his famous novel?
Speaker 2: 'The Beach Umbrella,' yeah.  That was his first novel and that was his best, the one.  But he wrote several, but 'The Beach Umbrella' was the one that is the best known, very, very good short story writer.  And Cyrus had talked to me about the law as it existed and as a professor--as a profession.  And he was the one that really helped me make my decision that that's what I was gonna go into when I got back.  So I had written an application to the University of Illinois, I mean the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois] and to DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois].  I selected those because I was married now.  I had a family, and I couldn't, in my mind, go back to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] to their law school so--because I was gonna have to work in addition to going to school.
Story_ID: 13604
Speaker 1: Now, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married before I went to the service.  I got married in--August 17th, 1941.  And, so DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] accepted me.  And when I came back, I went down and enrolled.  And the first two weeks, I had to go to class in my uniform because I didn't have any civilian dress.  And my class consisted of seventy-nine students, two women, four blacks and all the rest returning war veterans like I was, married with families, anxious to make up lost time, so anxious that we convinced the school authorities that we didn't need any vacations, that we wanted to go to school and catch up and get out of school and get on with our lives in, in the practice of law.  And we did a three-year law requirement in two years by not taking any vacations.
Speaker 1: A serious group of students.
Speaker 2: Yes, a serious group, but it was the most exhilarating educational experience that I've ever gone through because of the fact that the--all of us were, we were trying to catch up with lost time.  And we didn't have any time to waste and, and we were serious about our pursuit.  And so, therefore, we, we made those professors teach better than they probably thought they could teach because we probed and pushed and, and questioned and, and doubted.  And, and we just made them teach.  And we, it was an exhilarating educational experience, those two years at DePaul.
Speaker 1: Are there any professors that really stand out--
Speaker 2: Professor Anderson, my contracts teacher, yes, he stands out.  Professor Rapasse (ph.), he was, he was my real property instructor.  Dane Taft, he taught the constitutional law.  Those, those are the names that stand out.  Professor Dan Ward, who lately, who later became the States Attorney of Cook County, he taught the criminal--taught my class criminal law.  So, yes, I remember Dan Ward also.  Those are professors that stand, whom I recall and remember fondly for the work that they did in teaching us.
Speaker 1: Did DePaul Law School have any specialty or special focus as such that you know of in those days?
Speaker 2: No.  It was just a normal law school that taught the normal law school curricula.  But I'm not aware of any specialty that they had at, at that time.
Speaker 1: So when you finished law school, that was--
Speaker 2: I graduated in, in 1948.  And I took the bar in 1948.  And I passed the bar, and I began practice in 1948.  I practiced for six months with a private attorney by the name of, of Williams.  He had an office out here at 37th and Michigan, in the basement of his home.  And he took me in.  And that's where I got my first experience in the practice of law.  And the first day I walked into a courtroom to represent a client, I can remember that my knees were shaking like castanets I was so afraid because that time was the first time that I had set foot inside of a courtroom.
Story_ID: 13605
Speaker 1: Well, I was in the courtroom, like I said, I was scared, I was scared to death.  As a matter of fact, I, I often think that I should have been, I should have paid the client rather than vice versa (laughter).  I don't know how much representation I gave, I gave that client as afraid as I was the first time I walked into that courtroom in that situation.  But that didn't last long.  I--eventually the courtroom became a place of, of comfort rather than a place of discomfort as that one was.
Speaker 2: Now, were you with a firm at that time or were you by yourself?
Speaker 1: No, I was with, I was with Mr. Williams, Augustus Williams.  I was with him.
Story_ID: 13606
Speaker 1: And then came the event that, oh, it's a significant event in my life because we were having an election here in Chicago [Illinois].  And it was a national election.  And, but I was interested in the local part of the national election because one of the candidates was running for [Illinois] state's attorney of Cook County.  And I had been actively involved with that candidate in his candidacy for that position.  He had invited one of my classmates, his name was Dennis Horan, and he was member of the Horan family.  And the Horan family were, played significant roles in the Democratic politics of Cook County.  And Dennis had been a classmate of mine.  And he had formed John Boyle's Veterans Committee.  And when he formed that committee, Dennis asked me if I would like to come aboard and help in the campaign.  And I said, yes.  And so I helped in that campaign.  I stuffed envelopes and I licked envelopes and I stamped envelopes.  And I answered telephones, and I ran around delivering placards and other campaign memorabilia for, for John Boyle.  And he was successful.  He won that, won that race.  And when he won, he asked me what it was that I wanted as a result of having helped in the campaign.  And I said, "I want to go out to the West Side with you."  And he said, "You got it."  And he ended up hiring me as an assistant state's attorney.  And I began work with, with John Boyle as an assistant state's attorney.  And I worked in all of the areas of the state's attorney's office.  For the first two years, I was in the police court out at 48th and Wabash [Avenue], when that place existed.  Then I worked down at 11th & State [Street] at a court called the 'Boys' Court'.  And I worked in a court called the gun court, and then I worked a court called the misdemeanor court.  I worked in all of those courts.  And I worked in all of the sections.  And I learned the operations of the state's attorney's office backwards and forwards through being actively engaged in all of those districts.  And then when I'd been there for two years, then John Boyle promoted me and brought me over to 26th and California [Avenue] and assigned me to a criminal division courtroom.  And I became the second black in the history of Cook County to be assigned as the prosecutor in a criminal, criminal division courtroom.  The first one preceded me by a week, and his name was Archie LeCesne.
Speaker 2: Can you spell LeCesne?
Speaker 1: LeCesne, L-E-C-E-S-N-E.  Archie is now dead.  Archie became a judge before he died also.  But he and I were the first two blacks assigned to the felony trial division in the history of Cook County.
Speaker 2: What do you--I'm interested in your reflections on that experience because, I mean especially in light of the recent activities of George Ryan and the prosecutorial abuse and that sort of thing.  Did you--were things different then?
Speaker 1: We didn't, we didn't run into any situations like, like existed in these cases.  In the first place, I don't think Boyle would have, would have stood for it.  And we were trained to look for things that were improper, and, and we weren't finding any of those kinds of things going on in the instances when we went into these various police districts to question suspects.  And so things like that, if they were going on, were so well hidden that they never, never really popped up.  And that kind of activity didn't come about until many years later where, where it became more or less open.  So we didn't, as state's attorney in the four years that I was in the, in the office and on the occasions when I was called into these police districts and police stations to question and take statements from suspects, I never ran into anything like that, like has been, has been reported, and that we've seen come about through investigation of [former Chicago police officer Jon] Burge and his cohorts [ref. to police torture allegations].  So we didn't run into that.  The office that I came in and out of and worked in was very professionally run.  You were supposed to and required to prosecute diligently, but not step over the line.  You were supposed to be the kind of a prosecutor that the statute and the Constitution requires; present your evidence to the fact finder, argue your case, be lawful in your approach, and then let the finder of fact make the decision.  And that's, that's the way we were taught, and that's the way we were required to act when we were States Attorneys.
Story_ID: 13607
Speaker 1: Now, did black people like stand a decent chance, I guess--
Speaker 2: Back then I, and, and when I look back over it, I think that they stood a much better chance back then because the system was not as scarred back then as it, as it has become.
Speaker 1: And I think proportionately more black people go to jail now than ever before.
Speaker 2: And there were, it was the--there was still that imbalance, then.  It was beginning then, I guess, but the, the system wasn't so bent on convictions and unfairness as it has become.  The judges then weren't the kind of judges that started off with a preconception of trying to do everything they could to, to help the prosecution convict.  Those judges were real judges.  And you had to have the evidence, and the law had to be complied with, with the judges in those days.  And, and so therefore, we didn't have that kind of, of activity.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever observe cases where people should have been prosecuted and weren't or that kind of irregularity, where people seemed never to be charged even though they (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't observe close up any instances of those, of that happening.  I suppose it could have happened, but I wasn't that high up in the hierarchy to, to be really knowledgeable of things like that.  But in the area where I was active, what I saw was, people doing the job that the law required them to do and doing it in the proper fashion and not stepping over the line or not taking advantage of the awesome powers that they possessed as, as prosecutors.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any particular cases that come to mind and stand out where some real menace to the community wasn't prosecuted?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can think of any that, where anybody that was a menace to the community was, was set out on the street.
Story_ID: 13608
Speaker 1: I do have a fond recollection of, of my first criminal case, where I was called upon to try a case against two of the top criminal defense lawyers in the city of Chicago [Illinois], Aaron Payne (ph.) and, and Euclid Taylor. (ph.) I, I remember those cases because these were icons in the black community, Aaron Payne and, and Euclid Taylor.  They were top lawyers.
Speaker 2: And they were defending somebody--
Speaker 1: And they were defending someone in the case, and I was a prosecutor.  And I beat them in that case.  And my fondest memory of my time in the [Illinois] state's attorney's office is the time that I beat, in a jury case, in a criminal court, the top criminal lawyer in the entire state of Illinois.  His name was Joe Clayton.  And I won that case that Mr. Clayton was the defense council on.  It was, his client was charged with the armed robbery of a collection spot in the policy house, which in those days was the same thing as our state lottery.
Speaker 2: Except illegal.
Speaker 1: Except it was illegal.  And the jury convicted his client in, in that case.  And, and I was the lead prosecutor in that case, and that was my--the top, the top event of my time in the state's attorney's office, beating, beating Joe Clayton in that case because he was, without, without any argument, the top criminal lawyer in the entire state of Illinois, black man.
Speaker 2: Do you have any, I guess message for young lawyers trying to try a case, I guess, against a top gun like the lawyer that you went up against? What would you advise young lawyers to do?
Speaker 1: Well, first, I guess the best advice I could give is not to be carried away by the reputation of the, the great reputation of person against whom you are appearing as the opposite party, and do your thorough preparation of your case, just as you would in any other situation.  And act professionally and present your case, put it together as you have presented it, back in the office before you got into the courtroom, and then present it that way, without regard to the personality or the person against whom you are appearing because if you're trying to impress that person, then you are being distracted from doing what you're supposed to be doing, and that is, representing your client.  So you can't allow your, the fact that you think this is a great lawyer or he might be a great lawyer or that you're appearing in court against this great lawyer.  You can't allow that to become a distraction.  You've got to lay that aside and try your case just as you would try any other case against a lawyer that doesn't have that kind of a reputation, where you don't--you're not trying to impress that lawyer.  You're trying to beat him and you've got to have that same attitude.  Don't allow the stars to get into your eyes to the point where they distract you from the job you have to do in representing a client in a court of law.
Speaker 2: So any other cases from the state's attorney's days that you--
Speaker 1: Oh, several, I, I've tried cases against other top-notch criminal lawyers, Charlie Bellows and Harry Bush and George Crane (ph.), but that's where I learned to be a trial lawyer, the experience that I had for these four years in the States Attorneys Office of Cook County [Illinois], going against lawyers of that caliber.  I learned to be a lawyer then.  And that, those experiences lasted me up to this day because that's where I really learned how to be a lawyer, and how to try a case.
Story_ID: 13609
Speaker 1: How was it that you came to leave the [Illinois] state's attorney's office?
Speaker 2: I left the state's attorney's office at the conclusion of John Boyles' term because the man that succeeded him, I didn't want to work for. Because that new state's attorney encouraged--partners to turn on one another if they suspected that their partner in the courtroom was doing something that wasn't right.  And he encouraged and expected you to turn your partner in under those circumstances rather than sitting down and trying to conclude the matter and solve the matter between yourselves.  And I decided I didn't want to work for a person of that kind.  So I left the office and went into private practice.
Speaker 1: So what were the significant cases that you, that stand out in private practice?
Speaker 2: Oh, a criminal, as a criminal lawyer--and that's what I became, you have all kinds of cases.  And I, and I tried all kinds of cases, murders and rapes and robberies and burglaries, and I used the experience and the knowledge that I had learned in trying cases in the states attorney's office.  And I just transferred that over to the other side of the table and became a defense counsel.  And I was reasonably successful as a defense counsel; defending people who were charged with violating the criminal laws of the state.  And in the course of that, then I became involved with other criminal defense lawyers, and, and my reputation expanded.  And that meant that I would, in many instances, be called upon to try cases outside of this jurisdiction, which I did.  And then I began to write appellate briefs and appeal cases to our appellate courts and, and expanded my knowledge of the law.  And then I associated myself with other young attorneys that were involved in the criminal practice, [R. Eugene] Gene Pincham being one, Maurice Scott, another, Lucas Clarkston, Howard Jeter and his father; Claude Holman--Claude Holman wasn't a young attorney, but he was one of the top attorneys and also active in politics.  And being in criminal cases brought you on a daily basis in contact with people like this.  And you learn from them.
Story_ID: 13610
Speaker 1: There was a case that you mentioned, and I heard about, the case of Julian Black?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Julian Black, Julian Black was the, the manager of Joe Louis [boxer].  When Joe Louis became famous and went on to become the heavyweight champion of the, of the world, and Julian Black was one of his managers.  And Julian Black was charged here in our federal district court with income tax evasion, he and two other men.  And I was part of the defense team who represented Mr. Black in the defense of that case here in the United States [7th circuit] district court.  And I wasn't the lead counsel, but I was a part of that team, and, and I was active in, in that, in that case.  And it was while that case was being tried and defended that the famous case of, the Brown case [Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], striking segregation in schools, came down while we were in the midst of trying that case.
Speaker 1: This was 1954?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember walking out of court that--the day that the decision came down, and being faced by a big headline in the 'Chicago Daily News,' which as the dominant afternoon newspaper in Chicago [Illinois] at that time, "Supreme Court Strikes Down School Segregation."
Story_ID: 13611
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the lawyers involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew [William Robert] Bob, Bob Ming [Jr.], Walter Black, Chauncey Eskridge, yes.  They were, they were active in the NAACP, and they were members of the, of the NAACP trial team.  And they had a firm here in Chicago [Illinois], McCoy, Ming & Leighton.  Bob Lay--George [N.] Leighton is still active here in Chicago.  He came out of that firm.  He went on to be a state court judge and then later on a federal judge.  And now he's back in the private practice, and he's practicing every day I understand.  George ought to, George has got to be pretty close to ninety now, but he's still getting, hitting the, hitting the books.  So, yes, I knew those people, and they were very active in the NAACP.
Story_ID: 13612
Speaker 1: You had another criminal defense case that had to do with someone charged with statutory rape.
Speaker 2: Oh, one of the assistant editors at the Johnson Publication Company--
Speaker 1: Who we will not name.
Speaker 2: --who shall remain unnamed, got himself charged with the offense of statutory rape.  Statutory rape is a, an adult male having consensual sex with a non-adult female.  And I defended that gentleman in that case in a jury trial over in the criminal court.
Speaker 1: And did he win?
Speaker 2: Very, very interesting case.  Yes, we won the case.
Speaker 1: Well, what--
Speaker 2: The jury came in with a finding of 'not guilty.'
Speaker 1: We were talking about the statutory rape case.
Speaker 2: I think we'd finished that--we won the case.
Speaker 1: My question was how do you win such a case if it's, in fact, true that the young lady is underage and the gentleman is older?
Speaker 2: Well, he denied, he denied that he had, he had sex with her.  So it was a factual issue.  And it had to be decided by the jury as to whom they believed, and they believed his denial.
Story_ID: 13613
Speaker 1: There's another case where seven defendants were charged with arson.  Now, this was--
Speaker 2: Oh, that was in the, in the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] day riots [ref. to riots after Dr. King's assasination in April 1968] where the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] was under fire.  And seven of these men were arrested and charged with arson in those events.  And the man's, whose office we are presently seated in was one of the defense counsel in that case, and along with [R. Eugene] Gene Pincham, John Powers Crowley, Sam Adam, [James] Jim Montgomery and myself, we, we were the defense team in that case.
Speaker 1: Who were these seven that they were, that they (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They were, they were civil rights activists, one of whom was called [Edward] Fats Crawford.  He was a very active member in the civil rights actions out there on the West Side.  And another was Doug Andrews.  And they were leaders in the Civil Rights Movement out there on the West Side.  And they were targeted as being the perpetrators of the fires that causes the, these buildings to be destroyed on the West Side during the, during those riots.  And they were charged with seven counts of, various counts of arson and other criminal activities.
Speaker 1: So, once--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The trial went on for six weeks, and it was a jury.  And when, when the word came back, back to us that the jury was about ready to come in, and the verdict was not guilty, the prosecutor wanted the general verdicts, seven general not-guilty verdicts to be read.  But we insisted and the court agreed with us that the clerk read seven not-guilty verdicts for each of the charges that had been rendered against each of the seven defendants.  So they had to read thirty-six not guilty verdicts.
Speaker 1: And that's to prevent it from coming up again.
Speaker 2: And then we took the jury out and had a party.
Speaker 1: A big victory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, big victory party.
Speaker 1: A victory for the activists that were on the West Side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was, it was a good victory because they actually did not prove them guilty of the event.  And they were innocent of the charges that had been brought against them.  They, they didn't prove it.
Speaker 1: Was it suspected that this was some sort of city vendetta against the activists?
Speaker 2: Well, it's entirely possible since they were leaders in the, in the act--in the civil rights activity out there on the West Side.
Story_ID: 13614
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about your career as an attorney, as a defense attorney.  Is there anything else, any other story you want to relate to us about that, about those days or lessons from those days?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the interesting things that I do recall and like to, to recall, is what happened when I left the States Attorney's Office and decided to go into private practice.  That was in 1952.  And I joined together with a man that I had known for many, many years.  We had been in high school together [Tilden Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And he was also a Tuskegee Airman as I was, except that he ended up as a flyer.  He flew with the 332nd Pursuit Squadron, and that was Jack Rogers.  And Jack and I--Jack graduated from the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois].  And he and I decided that we would go into practice together, and that we would form a partnership.  We began to seek space, and we wanted office space in the Loop [downtown Chicago, Illinois], and we began to seek space.  And it wasn't long before we noticed a trend.  We weren't being permitted by the building managers to be shown space in the buildings that we selected.  They would always say that they had no space available.  Well, then it became apparent to us that this was based upon us being black.  And we weren't gonna stand for it.  Then I was pretty active in politics.  I was a member of the Civil Service Commission of the City of Chicago, one of three civil service commissioners appointed by the elder Mayor [Richard J.] Daley.  And I had sat on that board and had, had some cases of public significance.  So my name had become known.  So when I complained to a court--to a news reporter who wrote for the Chicago Daily News, he ran a featured story in the Daily News about the difficulties that we were running into in being shown space in the Loop, and the fact that we were considering filing suit against these buildings and owners.  That opened the door a little bit.  It opened it enough that we were able to see space, but what they would show us would be not completed space, but four-wall space, all they would show us would be places that had nothing but four walls.  But they made a mistake because both Jack and I were graduates of Tilden Technical High School.  We knew about mechanical drawing.  We knew about architectural drawings.  We knew about construction drawings.  So when we finally selected a four wall space that was shown us by the building manager at 64 West Randolph Street, we took that space.  We went in.  We measured the space.  We sat down on the weekend, and we drew up an office plan for that space.  We went out and we bought the material.  We had the material delivered to the location, and then at night and on weekends, he and I sawed and hammered.  And we put up in that four wall space, three private offices, a reception area, a secretarial area, a little space for a library, the beginning of a library and a waiting room.  And we hung in our waiting room the most expensive wall covering that we could find, Japanese grass cloth.  And we hung that perfectly.  We put those walls up.  They were in plumb and straight.  We put the doors in.  They shut and didn't jam.  We painted the walls.  And when the building manager of that building came down on the day that we had our opening, his jaw dropped.  But we had beat him at his own game because we had a five year lease.  And he couldn't raise our rental during that five year period.  And that's where we started our law office together there, at that--and we took advantage of what we had learned back in our high school days to help us get around this roadblock that people had attempted to put up before us and, and as we were going into the practice of law.  And I tell that in order to recount that there's always ways to get around roadblocks.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story.
Speaker 2: You can go around them; you can climb over them; you can dig under them or you can plow through them.  There's always ways that you can find a way to get around a roadblock that is put in your way to try to make it hard for you to do something that you feel that you want to do and that you can do, if you give your little thought to it.  So we took a negative and turned it into a positive.  And we stayed in that office five years.  But when it came time for the renewal of the lease, we told the man that he could have the property, and we weren't gonna give him the opportunity of raising the rent exorbitantly over our heads because of how we had increased the value of that property.  And we moved to another location and a larger location and in a nicer building.  So we beat him at his own game.
Speaker 1: So were you the first black law firm in the Loop?
Speaker 2: No, we weren't the black--first black law, but certainly, we were among the first, maybe among the first five, I would say, because there were probably two other, three others that preceded us.  McCoy, with the McCoy, Ming & Leighton firm, the Adams and Geeter (ph. Jeter?) firm, they preceded us.  Then there was Euclid Taylor and his--he had his office in the Loop.  So we, we maybe were fourth or fifth.
Story_ID: 13615
Speaker 1: How did you become a judge?  And tell me the story of how that took place.
Speaker 2: Well, about the time that I was being active in politics, there was this push on having more black judges.  At that time, there were only three or maybe four black judges, Judge Wendell Green, Judge Ferguson, Judge [Richard A.] Harewood, those, those were the ones that I remember that were on the bench at that time.  And as the opportunities opened up, the young men of my age and time in the practice of law began to come forward as candidates for these positions.  We had already worked in the Young Democratic Organization in its formation and in its inception.  So they had a good cadre of black lawyers that had been actively involved in the Young Democrat Organization, which was an offshoot of the regular Democratic Organization.  And it was out of this organization that the young blacks that ended up on the bench were selected by the various black committeemen to be candidates for judgeships.  Kenneth Wilson, out of Ralph Metcalfe's ward.  Ralph Metcalfe was now a ward committeeman and one of the leaders in the Democratic Party here in Cook County [Illinois].  Kenny Wilson came out of his organization, and he became a judge.  Marion Garnett (ph.), Marion Garnett and Kenny had been law partners together.  And they practiced together.  And Garnett came out of the eighth ward.  I was a member of the second ward, Regular Democratic Organization, which was headed by the dominant black politician in the United States, Congressman William Levi Dawson, who was also a very, very important member of the Democratic Party of Cook County.  And it was through Congressman Dawson's efforts and support that I was slated to take the unexpired term of a judge who had died.  And that came about while I was serving as a commissioner of the Sanitary District of Greater Chicago in 1970.  I had already run for the position in 1968.  But 1968 was a year when the, for once in a lifetime, the Republicans won.  And I lost in that 1968 election.  And it was in 1970 that this opening came up to fill the vacancy of this judge who had died.  And Congressman Dawson put my name forward.  And I went through the selection process with the Cook County Central Democratic Committee, selection committee, and I was slated for that position.  And I won in 1970.  And I took the bench December 8, 1970 to fill that vacancy.  That's the way, that's the way I got it.  But I had worked with the organization, the second ward Democratic Organization.  I was the legal counsel for Congressman Dawson in that organization.  And I worked with them, ever since I had been practicing law.
Story_ID: 13616
Speaker 1: Now, what was Congressman [William Levi] Dawson like, since you knew him and--
Speaker 2: Great, great man, great, great politician, great person for black people; did so many things to help black people advance politically and sociologically and economically, and not only here in Chicago [Illinois] in this area where he lived, but throughout the country.  He was one of the dominant moving forces in, in moving the Democratic party forward in becoming a national party because he was always traveling throughout the South, working on bringing the message of getting people registered to vote, to come out to vote, particularly black people.  But it, it ran across the, the spectrum of race because in his travels he also touched many white Southern politicians because his reputation was such that he was able to get into areas that other black politicians weren't able to because of the reputation that he had gained through his service as a congressman.  And he was instrumental in the early get-out-the-vote campaigns that resulted in the Democrats becoming successful in, in politics nationally.  And it was through his efforts that, largely, that this success came about.  So he was a great man, a great politician.  He had vision and, and commitment.  He believed in, in, in helping people, and he did help the people in his district and helped blacks generally across the, across the country.
Speaker 1: Now, when he was a congressman, was he the only black congressman in this area at that time?
Speaker 2: He was--yes.  He was, he was the only black congressman from Illinois at that time, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, we have three in the Chicago area--
Speaker 2: Yes, but he, he was the second.  I think Oscar DePriest--no, he was the third.  Oscar DePriest, and then the Republican, I can't think of the Republican's name who succeeded Oscar DePriest, were also in Congress before Dawson was in.  But he was the third black.
Speaker 1: Now, he was, he's almost--his name is always brought synonymous with the [Mayor Richard J.] Daley--
Speaker 2: He and, and the elder Daley were very close politically.  They respected one another.  They worked together in politics, as Democrats to make the Democratic party the success that it was here in Cook County and in Illinois, for that matter.  And they had a very close political relationship.
Story_ID: 13617
Speaker 1: It's been written also that Harold Washington's father, Roy Washington, who was an attorney on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], had also been close to [Congressman William Levi] Dawson.
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was also close to and a member of, of the [Ralph] Metcalfe Organization because Roy Washington was a precinct captain for Ralph Metcalfe in, in his third ward organization.  And that's where Harold cut his teeth in politics, helping his daddy in the third ward in his operations as a precinct captain.  And Harold cut his teeth there and went on to law school and then, after that to practice, and after that he ended up as he did, as mayor of the city of Chicago until his untimely death.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any personal reflections of Harold Washington, you might share with us?
Speaker 2: I worked with him, practiced with him.  We practiced at just about the same time, so I would always run into Harold in and out of these courts because we were contemporaries in, in that area and in that time.  So, yes, I, I--and it was always a pleasant relationship.  And it's one of the sad happenings of our time that he died at such a young age because he, he was and would have been a better, than a great mayor.  He, he did many good things for the city of Chicago as mayor before he died.  And he was destined to do more, more good things.  And his death was so, so tragic and untimely.  But he didn't take care of his health.  He ate himself to death, I think.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of speculation about, now, his death was right at the point where he was ready to--
Speaker 2: He--it happened just at the time when he had beat the opposition in the 'Council Wars' and had finally gotten the reigns of government and the control and the power that a mayor should have in his hands and was on the verge of thrusting off and carrying his, his program forward.
Speaker 1: Now, did you think at the time, I mean events took place so rapidly over a short period of time, [19]77, Mayor Richard J. Daley dies and well, he runs for election and Harold Washington opposes him in elections.  And I don't think he had any thought that he would win, but it was more or less a political statement at that time.  And then shortly thereafter, when Daley wins the election, he--well, no, no.  That's not the way it went.  Daley dies first.  Then Harold ran against Bilandic (unclear), yeah, it was more of a political statement, without much of a chance.  But shortly thereafter, Jane Byrne beats Bilandic and soon the political, kind of upheaval in Chicago in the sense that the regular Democratic party seemed to be, you know, not as regular as it used to be because for so years, it was no--you know, very little change.  And all of a sudden there's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he had been in power for so long and it began to get a little, a little lazy and a little slothful and the results began to show.  That's, that's what led to that, and they needed to get licked a couple of times in order to get their attention back, which, which happened, not to the extent that, that a Republican was elected mayor, but certainly to the extent that a, what shall I call, non-participant in the leadership of the regular Democratic organization is able to come up and beat a regular Democratic organization candidate for the office of, of, of mayor because certainly, Jane Byrne was not the first choice of the real leadership of the Democratic party.  And she, she beat Bilandic hands on in that race.  He was the, the one that the regulars wanted to be, continue to be, the mayor.  And she licked him.
Speaker 1: Now, was that like a--
Speaker 2: It was a watershed event.  That was the attention-getter, gatherer for--
Speaker 1: Did the lights go off with you and other people?
Speaker 2: Not really because we, as blacks, we're on the outside.  We're not really on the inside looking in.  We're, we're not really involved in it.  That's them fighting.
Speaker 1: I mean did you--were you encouraged by the fact that things weren't--the regular, you know--
Speaker 2: Things were better than they had been.  The light didn't really go off for blacks until Harold came on the scene and, and Bill Berry and his group organized and, and got sufficient funds and sat down and convinced Harold that he ought to run, and they, they came up with a hell of a platform and a program, and focused him on it, and helped him, and ran a campaign that was, that was excellent.  And he got elected.  That's when, that's when the change began.
Story_ID: 13618
Speaker 1: Tell me about your career as a judge.  1970, you're a judge in the criminal courts?
Speaker 2: My first assignment was at the criminal court of Cook County [Illinois], 26th and California.  The chief judge at that time was my old boss, my first boss in politics in a political position, Judge John S. Boyle.  He was the presiding judge--no, he was the chief judge, the first chief judge of the circuit court of Cook County.  And he was my boss then, and when I was elected in 1970, he assigned me to the criminal court.  And I was sent out there, and I went to room 706 at 26th and California.  And I sat in that location, in that courtroom for the next twenty-four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the first day as a judge like?  Was it like the first day when you were an attorney?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't quite as traumatic as, as that first day as an attorney because by now being in a courtroom was more or less second nature to me.  Now, I was the court.  And that was strange because it was now to me to whom everything was directed in that particular location.  And it took a year, literally a year, before I became comfortable enough with my role as a judge for me to step out of the well of the courtroom and take my seat up on the bench above the fray, so to speak, because for that year, I was constantly saying to myself, about lawyers and about things they were doing the courtroom, "Why doesn't he ask this question; why doesn't he do that?  Why doesn't he do the other?"  Being a lawyer in an adversarial setting rather than being a judge.  And that made it difficult because, a judge is supposed to be above the fray.  And a judge is supposed to be the referee.  And a judge is supposed to be the one that is the calm in the eye of the storm and whatever is going on in the courtroom.  And I didn't help myself too well because I was still emotionally and intellectually, I believe, still down there in the well of the courtroom in an adversarial position, even though I was up on the bench in a black robe, supposed to be a judge.  So that first year was a little difficult, but after that first year, and once I convinced myself that that was a proper thing for me to do, then I, I didn't have any problems being a judge.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a certain judicial philosophy?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My judicial philosophy is, that as a judge, it is my sworn duty to be fair and impartial to everyone who steps into my courtroom, to listen to all of the evidence that is presented to me in my courtroom, to judge that evidence based upon my understanding of what the law is and then to rule in accordance with what I feel the law says I should rule.  That's my, that's my philosophy.
Story_ID: 13619
Speaker 1: Well, are there any cases that you presided over that really stick out in your mind as important cases--well, I know they're all important.
Speaker 2: Oh, I presided over many, many important cases, but probably the one that will always stick out in my mind and never be forgotten is the, is the Valdez case.  Miguel Valdez was charged with double murder of two people, one a male, one a female.  The female had been his former lover.  And they had split up, but he blamed the split-up on the male who was the victim in this case, who was a doctor.  His former lover was a nurse, and she worked for this doctor.  And Miguel Valdez decided that he wasn't gonna take the break-up without doing something about it.  And he decided the thing that he could do about it was that if he couldn't have this woman, nobody else was gonna have her.  So he killed her.  He stabbed her to death, many times.  After he killed her, he then severed her head from her body, and he severed nine of her ten toes from her body.  He packaged up her head in a packing case.  And he mailed it through the United States mail to the woman's parents in the Philippines.  He made a reservation with the doctor, who he now concluded must die because he had taken this woman away from him.  And when the doctor came in to see him on the first reservation that he made, he took out a forty-five caliber army pistol and put seven bullets in his skull.
Story_ID: 13620
Speaker 1: After he [Miguel Valdez] killed the man [his ex-girlfriend's lover, a doctor], he decided he had to do something with those nine toes [that he had severed from the body of his ex-girlfriend].  Now, Valdez, in spite of everything that he had done, was a very, very smart man.  He was involved in an ongoing dispute between he--between himself and the astrological bodies around the world, involving the concept of the earth revolving around the sun.  And his, his view was opposite to the prevailing scientific view.  And he had written widely on this and had been involved in this dispute with these bodies.  So he--
Speaker 2: What was his profession?
Speaker 1: He was just another ordinary Joe as far as the evidence showed.  He wasn't scientifically trained.  He hadn't, didn't have a college degree, but he was well read in, in these areas.  And he had been arguing with these bodies for many months.  And so he took his written theory that he had written out and he sent it to nine of these bodies around the world, and he included in the envelope with his written theory and exposition on this problem, one of the toes from the body of the woman he had killed.  Now, I tell you this in order to make the point that I'm about to state.  He was supposed to be tried--he's charged with double murder.  We--he couldn't be tried for those offenses because Valdez turned out to be truly, truly a person who, at the time he committed these acts that he was charged with committing, didn't understand the difference between right or wrong or because of a mental disease or defect, was unable to choose the right as against the wrong.  He was truly and in every sense of the word an insane person as that phrase is defined in our law.  And because of that fact, everybody agreed, every doctor that examined him, both the defense doctors and the prosecution doctors came up to the same conclusion.  He was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia, the serious and the most devastating of all of the mental diseases and the most deadly.  And he was found not guilty of these two offenses by reason of insanity.  Now, under our law, and I to this day don't know why I did what I did, I was required to have a hearing after he was found not guilty by reason of insanity, to determine his present mental state, this mental state that he's in as he's standing now before me after this finding of not guilty.
Story_ID: 13621
Speaker 1: And I had that hearing, as the law requires.  And I found that he was still actively suffering from this mental disease and in need of hospitalization for treatment.  But I did something else.  I stated when I sent him down to the [Illinois] state mental hospital for treatment that he was not to be released from the custody of the state mental health authorities without prior authority of the court, me.  Wouldn't you know that he wasn't in the hospital for thirty days before I received a letter from the [Illinois] Department of Mental Health that they were going to release this man back into free society.  And I said, "No, you're not.  You're gonna appear before me, every person that has had anything to do with this man since he has been in your custody for thirty days, every doctor that has spoken to him or conferred with him or treated him, every nurse that has seen him, every nurse's aid that has participated with him, as he has been in your custody in that department, is gonna come into this courtroom and testify as to what it is they know about what this man has done and has been doing."  It turned out that the doctor that was supposed to be his treating doctor, couldn't even testify under oath as to what his condition was, what he was suffering from.  The nurses that testified--testified that in the thirty days that he was there, he never participated in the daily activities on the ward where the, all the patients were called together in a general area and, and they congregated and spoke in the treatment process.  The doctor couldn't state what kind of medication he was on.  And so therefore, I concluded that he had not been given any treatment.  All they had done was sedate him and kept him quiet for the thirty days that he'd been down there.  And now they were gonna throw him out.  And I said,"Well, if you don't have a treatment plan for him, I'm gonna give a treatment plan."  And they said, "No, you're not.  You're not a psychiatrist."  I said, "I certainly am not, but I'm gonna give a treatment plan."  So I took his file, his medical records, all of it, everything.  And I turned it over to one of the pre-eminent psychiatrists in the city.  And I asked him to take that file and with his staff, tell me what kind of a treatment plan ought to be--this person ought to be under.  And, and Dr. Cavanaugh, who was one of the psychiatrists who testified in, in the case of that man [John Hinkley] that shot [President Ronald] Reagan, and his staff down at Presbyterian St. Luke's Hospital, they staffed that man's file and came up with a plan and gave it to me.  I read it and approved it and adopted it on the record.  The fool, Department of Mental Health, decided that they would appeal that order of mine because I, I gave them that as a treatment plan under the direction that if they didn't follow that plan, that somebody was gonna go to jail for contempt of court.  And they appealed and the appellate court said that I did the right thing under the circumstances, and that the Department has to follow that plan.  And that's the written law in the state of Illinois now, that a judge, under certain circumstances, if the professionals don't do their job, can step in and make out a medical plan that must be followed in treating someone under those circumstances.  I kept--he was there, under that treatment.  He stayed in the custody of the department for fifteen years before I was comfortable enough to believe that the treatment had relieved him of this disease and allowed him to be released and let him go back to Florida.
Speaker 2: So he's back in Florida now?
Speaker 1: Back in Florida and to my knowledge, he's not committed any other criminal act, and no one else has ever since been hurt, thank God, but I, I held my breath when I entered the order letting him go back because, you know, I didn't want something else like that to happen.  But it's been now twenty-five years since that happened, and nothing untoward has occurred.  So that's a case I remember vividly.  Several others, but none as, as vivid as that.
Story_ID: 13622
Speaker 1: I just got a call today from a reporter because one of the people whom I sentenced to death was a recipient of commutation that governor, former [Illinois] governor [George] Ryan entered on Saturday of this past week.  And this reporter was calling to inquire about the circumstances of that particular case and about my feeling about the judge--the governor commuting this man's sentence.  That was an interesting case also.
Speaker 2: Well, what was that case?  And this is a topic of this being, I guess, highly debated in the state as well as over the country, is the death penalty proper or should it, you know, is this something that makes us more barbarous or is it something that helps us?  You know, what are your feelings on that?
Speaker 1: Well, my feelings were, when I was a judge at the criminal court, I had very, very definite moral difficulty with the death penalty because I felt that no human being has a right to make the life and death choice.  I don't have a right as a human being, I felt, to say, "You die, and he lives."  I, I--but I'm sworn to follow the law, and the law of the state of Illinois calls for the death penalty in certain instances.  So I must follow the law if I'm gonna live up to my oath.  So rationalized my moral uncomfortableness by saying that those cases, six cases that I imposed the death penalty on, the death penalty was the only penalty that would recognize and justify the life that had been so murderously taken from, from the victim, and give credence to their being and their humaneness [sic].  And on those six, I don't have any, any feeling of that anything wrong was done or that that was not the proper sentence.  But the system that we work under is badly flawed.  And because of that flawing, there is an increased possibility that some innocent person can be murdered legally.  And it's entirely possible that some one of those 167 whom Ryan commuted their sentence, somewhere in that 167, there's an innocent person.  And for us as a free, humane society, to kill an innocent person under the guise of, of law, is, is--that's, that's a risk too much for me to take at this present time until this system is fixed.
Story_ID: 13623
Speaker 1: What was the particular case that was discussed today that the lawyer talked--the reporter?
Speaker 2: He was--this man was a neo-Nazi.  And he was charged with killing, shooting a plastic surgeon, who was not a Jewish person.  But this neo-Nazi came here from San Francisco [California].  And he picked up a telephone directory, and he looked into the plastic surgery section.  And he picked this man's name out, and he made an appointment to see him. And when he came into his office, he shot him dead because he said at his trial, he was using his skills as a plastic surgeon to turn non-Aryan people into Aryan-type people.  And he killed him.
Speaker 1: Now, that sounds crazy, actually.
Speaker 2: He was not crazy.  He was another--a very, very smart, brilliant, bright person, but he wasn't crazy.  He defended himself against my advice, took two hours in a final argument, a very smart man.  But he was one of the ones that I gave the death penalty to.  And he was--his penalty was commuted last week.  But that was the governor's [Governor George Ryan] decision.  Fine, I'll live with it, but I didn't have any feelings that the system was abused, and--when I gave him that sentence of death because he executed an innocent man.
Story_ID: 13624
Speaker 1: Is being a judge easy or is it easier than you thought it was gonna be or is it harder?  It may sound like a dumb question, but--
Speaker 2: No, it's not dumb.  Human beings sitting in judgment on other human beings is always a difficult task.  So, yes, being a judge is difficult because we, as judges, sit in judgment on other human beings.  And we, being humans, are subject to all of the human frailties up to and including those of being mistaken from time to time.
Speaker 1: Have you ever felt that you might have been mistaken or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I have never at the conclusion of a case felt that I was, rendered a judgment that I wasn't sure of.  I have been reversed, not often, but I have been reversed.  So that is just a part of our system, so I expect to be overseen by our appellate courts.  But, like I said, I'm human, so I'm likely to make mistakes.  And the appellate courts have said on occasion that "You misapprehended the law in this case," or whatever, but the reversals that the appellate court has done against me on my cases have always been on an issue of law, and not any issue of fact or not any issue of an abuse of power by me as a judge or against the individual that is standing before me.  It's always been on a question of an interpretation of the law.  And they have said that, "You interpreted the law wrong in this case and therefore, we're gonna have to send this case back for a new trial," or whatever.  But, yes, being a judge is difficult, and for those reasons, I, I believe.  It's an honorable profession.  It's a profession that, that requires one to look deeply within one's own soul and to literally try to be the kind of a judge that I would wish to judge me if I happened to be in a position where I had to be before a judge.
Speaker 1: That's almost the Golden Rule, I would say.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's the way, that's the way I try, tried to approach my position as a judge, every case.  Every case is different.  You can't have a cookie crumb [sic] judge.  There's no cookie cut.  Everybody is different.  You can't have a situation that applies the same to everybody.
Story_ID: 13625
Speaker 1: There've been cases I've heard of, of people who become a judge right out of law school and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Sure, Vanessa, Judge Hopkins, she, and--two years out of law school.  And she has turned into a superior judge, even though she didn't have either the legal or the judicial experience when she first started, through the dint of her effort, through the dint of her study, going to the judge's schools and seminars, reading, her own individual personal belief of trying to do the right thing, trying to be the kind of a judge that a person can feel has had their day in court when she rules.  She has turned herself into a superior judge and one that I am proud to have worked with in her formative years.  And, and now that she is more experienced, I'm proud to say that I knew her when she began.
Speaker 1: So it's possible for someone to not have the experience and then--
Speaker 2: It, it's possible, but it's, it's much more difficult, but you've got to have that mindset that she had, that she was going to be the best judge that she could be, and that she was gonna study and learn.  And, and even though she had to learn and do in her daily activities, it was--the learning curve was high for her at the beginning.  But she, she did it, but it was through her determination that she wasn't gonna let her lack of experience drag her down and make her less than what she thought she ought to be, which was a fair and honest judge.
Story_ID: 13626
Speaker 1: There's a rating process in which--the various Bar associations go through various rating processes.  That's a flawed way, but it's the best way I think.  I would much prefer our system of presenting the judges to the general population than to have our judges picked by a small group like the governor or a governor's committee or something of that kind.  I'd just as soon present my case to the, all of the people as we do when we go on our retention campaign.  We go out and we go around the area in which we have judged in, in the jurisdiction, and we stand before the people and ask them to send us back to continue to do our job.  And now, as I said, in a jurisdiction as large as this, it's, it's a little difficult for the people to really get to know a judge under those circumstances.  But I'll stand on it, and I'll bear with the, the evaluation process such as it exists now.  It's not the best, but it's better than the, than the other way because the other way, then we leave the selection process in the hands of a minute few.
Story_ID: 13627
Speaker 1: Now, how long did you serve as a judge?
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight years.  Twenty-four years I sat in our criminal division, trying cases, and the last four years of my tenure, I was the presiding judge of the First Municipal District of the Circuit Court of Cook County [Illinois], in which I was the, the leader of about 100 judges who served in various elements of our court system.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you do as leader of those--
Speaker 2: Well, you make assignments, and you set vacation schedules, and you talk to judges when they're having a little difficulty.  You're the father figure so they come and cry on your shoulder.  And you advise and you consult and you cajole and sometimes you kick behind, whatever the case--whatever, whatever it, it takes to keep the court system going, and under high pressure.  And sometimes it's just a matter of sitting down listening to a judge who's having a little difficulty, and that listening process is cathartic.  And when, when it's over, I don't have to say anything.  They've gotten it all out of the open, all of the, the, the bad stuff is out in the open, and it--when it gets out in the open, and when they look at it, it's not as bad as it seemed when I was holding it in.  And under those circumstances, I don't have to do anything except, "Go on, and you're doing all right.  Go on back to it."  So, those are things, some of the things that a presiding judge has to do.  But it was interesting.  It was--I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 13628
Speaker 1: As an experienced judge and someone whose been in the criminal justice system a long time, how would you improve the criminal justice system here in Cook County [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well--I think one of the things that I would do, and we're talking about the criminal justice system--is make the criminal division, begin the criminal division with more experienced judges.  I'd make the criminal division a division where good judges aspire to be and to set, and not to say that they don't have good judges over there now.  I don't I don't say that.  But what I'm saying is that it might be too young, and it's a tendency to have the criminal division manned by people who are new to the bench.  They haven't--and they've been closely involved with either the prosecution or, in some instances, the defense.  I think they ought to work their way up to that criminal division and not go into the criminal division as their first assignment, even though that's the way I came aboard.
Story_ID: 13629
Speaker 1: In short, I think that the most experienced judges, the judges that have been around the block, so to speak, as judges ought to be the ones that predominant on that bench over there at the criminal court.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: If anything can, if anything can be too young, I might, I might say that the, the criminal bench over there is too young.  They're, or might tend to be, and I don't know that this so, but it's possible, they might tend to be in an adversarial or a position where they're trying to make a record.  We don't, we don't need judges sitting on that are trying to make a reputation.  We need judges over there that are cool, calm, and knowledgeable of the law and confident of their own abilities as, as judges, so that they don't have to reach out and seek to impress other people.
Story_ID: 13630
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the black community are that we can continue to upgrade the education, educational process so that our children get the benefit of the best education that they can in the public school system, so that when they reach the point where they are coming out into the work community and being expected to stand on their own, they can compete with any of the other citizens in the community for any job or any position that exists in their, their community.  And if given that opportunity, do their job in an exemplary fashion.  So I guess what I'm saying is, that when they come out, whether they go to college or whether they go to a trade school or whether they leave high school and go into the work force, I want them to be able to be productive citizens and hold jobs that are productive and conducive of advancement of their own advancement, and their family's advancement and their children to come, advancement.  That's what I expect, I would hope that our public school system would do and what, what our black community would do.  So education is so important, and education ought to be a priority in every black home where there are black kids.  And, and the parents ought to be, the parents ought to be actively engaged in, in pushing their children and helping their children and supporting their children, as they're going to these schools and not be satis--go to the school, be actively involved in the school process so that you know what's going on up in that school system.  You know whether there's a teacher that's not teaching, so that you can see that, that the kids are getting good, solid foundations taught to them, so that when they come out, they're more than functionally illiterate.  They're able to be competitive citizens in the workforce or else they're gonna be a lost ball in high weeds.
Story_ID: 13631
Speaker 1: Sir, what would you see as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: I'm too young to think about what my legacy is gonna be.  I'm just busy trying to live as good as I can and do as good a job, in whatever I do, as I can, and then my legacy will take care of itself.
Speaker 1: And, sir, this slightly different.  How would you like to be remembered?  I know you've got a long time.
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person that was fair and just and called them as he saw them, regardless of the outcome.
Story_ID: 13632
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, this was a picture that was taken when I was a presiding judge at First Municipal District, and Chief Judge O'Connnell was asking for all of the presiding judges to have pictures taken for, to be put in, in some publication that was coming out regarding the Circuit Court of Cook County [Illinois], and all of the judges and presiding judges.  And I think this was a picture that was taken by that photographer who is the, the court photographer.
Speaker 2: [Earl E. Strayhorn.  From the collection of Earl E. Strayhorn.]
Story_ID: 13633
Speaker 1: This goes back to 1965, thereabouts, and as you can see, I am much younger and there's no gray in my hair.  And I'm smoking a cigarette at that time.  The gentleman with me is my fellow commissioner.  We, at that time, were commissioners of the Sanitary District of Greater Chicago [Illinois].  And the gentleman with me is Marshall Korshak.  He was a commissioner with me for a period of six years.
Speaker 2: Could you spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: Korshak, K-O-R-S-H-A-K, first name, Marshall.  And Marshall was also the ward committeeman of the fifth ward of the city of Chicago at that time, when this picture was taken.  And this was taken over at the district's offices at 100 East Erie Street.
Speaker 2: [Earl E. Strayhorn with Marshall Korshak, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1965.  From the collection of Earl E. Strayhorn.]
