Story_ID: 93357
Speaker 1: Okay we're ready to start.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our Videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Eugene F. Scott.  E-U-G-E-N-E, F. for Frederick and S-C-O-T-T.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Miami, Florida.  Date of birth is 10/14/39 [1939].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have any nicknames or other names.
Speaker 2: No, no nicknames (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay alright, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm the President of the Chicago Defender Charities and Chairman of the Military, African American Military Museum in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And you're retired?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired army colonel.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And former Publisher of the Chicago Defender Chicago Newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 1-December, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are here at 1900 S. Michigan at the HistoryMakers' office.
Story_ID: 93358
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions, lightweight questions that just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That we always ask, you know.  The first one is Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say tan.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And Sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think my favorite saying is that "It can always be done", yeah, "It can always be done." Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93359
Speaker 1: Alright I'm gonna ask you some questions about your family background, and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, and start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Bertha Mae, oh, the maiden name?
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Bertha Mae Jones, B-E-R-T-H-A-, and M-A-E, J-O-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: One September, 1919, New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can trace her side of--I have a picture of her grandmother and I have, of course, a picture of her mother and I can trace my mother's side of the family back to Fitzgerald, Georgia right after the Civil War and they started heading toward Florida, you know, so the following, I guess it was kind of work related following work down into South Florida.  They had just--they were starting to put the railroad in, in the early 1900s and I think that's--they had family members that were associated with work with railroads.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family about life in the 19th Century after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Yeah because grandmother is--my mother would eventually would talk about--she would talk about--she talked about her life as a slave cause she was, I think, about fifteen when the Civil War ended, so she spent some years as a slave and she would talk about, and this was primarily in peanut-growing country, in other farming, you know, supporting other farming other than cotton.  There wasn't a whole lot of cotton in the area that they were in but, it was a lot of peanuts and other type small crop and she did talk about that, and at that point it seemed like her life as a slave--she didn't talk about it as being very difficult because I'm sure after that, after several hundred years of slavery they'd kind of settled into some kind of routine and were able to work it out.  She did talk about the childhood games they played and dancing and just kind of how life was as a slave and then she talked about what Fitzgerald looked like after the Civil War when the Union Soldiers came in and there were some Black Union Soldiers too, and many of them took up with some of the women of Fitzgerald and married them and stayed there and a lot of things happened, yeah alright.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Okay, that's interesting.  Now what about your--now see your--what about your grandmother that's you're--that would be your great grandmother right, in the--?
Speaker 2: That would be my great grandmother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, during--the aftermath of the Civil War
Speaker 2: Right, right.  That's her, my great grandmother.
Speaker 1: Right, did she--she moved to Florida you said?
Speaker 2: She moved to Florida.  They--that's when the family came to Miami--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The whole families, her sisters, she had about four or five sisters and they all ended up in Miami in the early 1900s, and again I think it was the railroads that--that you know brought everybody down there cause they had just opened up the railroad to Miami, Florida, East Coast Railroad [sic, Florida East Coast Railway].  My great grandmother was a nurse by profession and she was a--what do they call them?  There is a term for the type nurse that she was that would go to the homes and assist the families in having the babies.
Speaker 1: Oh, a mid-wife.
Speaker 2: A mid-wife yeah (laughter), yeah there we go, right, yeah but that evolved, she evolved from being a mid-wife to becoming the first licensed nurse for the Miami black hospital which was, I think it was a--same as in Chicago called Chicago called Provident Hospital in Miami.  So she was their first nurse--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That they were able to get licensed for their hospital.
Speaker 1: Can you give us their names, the great grandmother and the grandmother?
Speaker 2: My great grandmother's name was Sarah Miller and my grandmother's name--slips me (laughter).  I got my great grandmother, but I have to--I'll have to think about her first name 'cause I always called her grandmother, yeah laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her last name, of course, was Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it'll probably come to me, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 93360
Speaker 1: [What about your mother (Bertha Mae Jones Scott)?  What was her life like?]
Speaker 2: She was born in New York City, but came back to Miami [Florida], her mother, my grandmother was up in New York and I think again, following the jobs.  There were a lot of jobs for blacks around New Jersey and in New York City, domestic jobs and other jobs and they were up there and she was pregnant with my mother.  They had the baby in New York and then back to Miami with the family, so she's back into the family household at Miami.
Speaker 1: Okay so was it your grandfather who was from Barbados?
Speaker 2: It was my grandfather on my father's side (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: On your father's side, okay--
Speaker 2: Right, on my father's side that was from Barbados, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but not, okay.  So your mother--okay so she went up with her mother to New York to--?
Speaker 2: To New York, right, right.
Speaker 1: To New York, you know, for job reasons, for job-related reasons.  Okay, well what kind of a life did she have in New York, what--?
Speaker 2: Well, remember she left New York--my mother left New York as a baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she spent most of her life, about almost all of it Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Right, and there she was just basically, she was basically a housewife most of her life, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to school when she was younger?
Speaker 2: She went to high school and she was like one of the few family members that did not go to college and I think her having the baby had something to do with it because everybody else in the '30s [1930s] went to college.  You know there were like about seven adults in the house and they all went to college except her.
Speaker 1: Where did they go?  Did they go to the same school or did they go to different places?
Speaker 2: One went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and graduated from Morehouse in the early '30s [1930]; one went to Florida Normal College [now Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida] which was up at St. Augustine.  Most of them went to Florida Normal College and the one went to Morehouse and Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of the people that went to--?
Speaker 2: Johnny Collins, Eddie Collins went to Florida Normal; Sarah Jones, my aunt went to Florida Normal College; Miller Collins went to Morehouse and Miller finished at Morehouse and then went on to get some graduate work at Atlanta University.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, yeah, that's remarkable that a family, you know that many members going to school, in those days you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah in those days I think it would be--really was.  It was--they were a fairly an educated group around Miami, they ended up being school teachers.  So this--the school teaching part of our family sort of lasted from about 1930 until the present day where my sister is retiring as a school teacher.  My father was a principal.  My father's sister's had seven children and five of them are teachers in the Dade County Public School system.  So when we start looking at family members we've got God, we've--everybody was a teacher in the Dade County Public system, except I didn't teach I went into the military, but my father and my sister and my aunts were all teachers.
Story_ID: 93361
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Eugene F. Scott, same as mine, but his middle initial was Franklin instead of--and mine's Frederick that's why I'm not a junior (laughter).  Yeah, we pulled a fast one on you, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is 4-April 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, well what do you know about his side of the family, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to his father, my grandfather and that's about as far as I can go back.  I think there is information that is probably available, I just have not been able to research, and I know it's available because I was looking in a book just recently and I saw one of my father's uncles who was a doctor that came out of the School of Medicine in London, went up to practice in New York in the early '20s [1920s] so he was a--they described him as being a female doctor.  Okay well I should not say (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay from a--
Speaker 2: Gynecology, obstetrician but that's what they said in the book and it listed his brothers and his sisters and in that little--it was "Colored Americans in the 1920s and 1930s" was the name of the book, and it identified my father's uncle, my father's father which was his brother, and some other family members and both my father and this uncle had some medical training.  My grandfather who was named John Scott in Barbados was a unlicensed, practicing dentist for like about sixty years.  My father would say up in the mountains there in Barbados.  He had obviously gone to school but he didn't get his degree or something 'cause he was you know--he was just practicing (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think in those days the practice of dentistry was kind of up in the air and you know they--barbers used to pull teeth--.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: At a certain point.  I think at a certain point in the '20s [1920s] they made it official.
Speaker 2: '20s [1920] Right, right, so it wasn't--but that's what he did for many, many years yeah and, of course, his brother was (unclear) a licensed medical doctor, right, but that is far as I could go back but obviously there's probably some research that can be done to trace that line a little further back, yeah right.
Speaker 1: Well, okay so you're father's father came here from Barbados right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Well when you say came here--.
Speaker 1: Came to yeah--.
Speaker 2: When you say came to here I'm not sure if he came here, but obviously he must have been visiting here because (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: Well I wasn't talking about Chicago [Illinois] necessarily but the States--.
Speaker 2: No, I'm talking about (unclear).  I say that because I don't think he ever spent any time in the States.  He obviously must have been--traveled up that Gulf to Mobile [Alabama] where my father was born you know and had some kind of interaction with my grandmother, but I don't know of any long-term residence in the United States by my grandfather.  He pretty much came and went back to Barbados.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your father was born in Mobile and--.
Speaker 2: Right and his family, his mother, I mean, yeah, his mother migrated to Miami [Florida] you know almost right after he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again may have been chasing the same thing that my mother and parents were chasing to come down to South Florida, right.
Speaker 1: Okay South Florida was opening up then as a--
Speaker 2: It was opening up.
Speaker 1: They were developing it as a tourist attraction in the '20s [1920s] I know--it use to-what was once swampy land--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to hear my grandmother talk about it, about "Oh that use to be swamp land down there", but see swamp land is an interesting piece of property once you drain it--it's good to go.  So a lot of the property--my family lived in the same house in Miami for seventy-five years.  My grandfather built the house and they stayed there.  I was born in the house you know (laughter), so it was--it was kind of like an anchor in the black community and what it made it particularly relevant was that it generated educated people.  So they became the--what my uncle that I lived with that was in Chicago was; the teacher out of the school, he was the choir director at the church you know, he taught music at the house and when I was growing up as a little boy I saw the remnants of that because the piano was still there.  It had seen a lot of--termites had gotten into it but it was still around.  When I was a kid, you know the piano was there in the '30s [1930s]. I was a kid in the '50s [1950s] and the piano was still there.  I found a handbill that said "If you want to learn how to play the piano to come to our house and we give you lessons".  I think $10.00 would give you lessons for like a month or so (laughter), right.  So the family was locked into the community.
Story_ID: 93362
Speaker 1: So what was your father [Eugene Scott] like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father taught school.  He taught math and then in his latter years he became assistant principal and principals of schools, but he was a teacher and was a pretty no-nonsense person, you know.  I don't remember seeing him display a lot of emotions.  The first time I saw him cry was at his mother's funeral, and my daughter told me the same thing.  The first time she ever saw me--"I didn't know you could cry" and my mother [Bertha Mae Jones Scott] passed and she saw that I could cry too (laughter), you know, but he was pretty no-nonsense.  I had to go to the same high school that he went to and he was like an A student and many of his teachers were my teachers and they would remind me of that, "You know your dad did a little bit better in math than you're doing" and I (laughter) (unclear) don't try to compare me, but--so when I go to the--and I went to school in Miami [Florida] and Chicago [Chicago], but when I go to the school--my first education is in Miami and then about fifth grade I come to Chicago and I don't go back to Miami again until 12th grade.  You know so I've got this Chicago education at A. O. Sexton Elementary then at Englewood High School.  So I go back to Miami and I'm sort of out of place with the Miami people because everybody's grown up--and elementary school and high school and "Where were you and who are you"?  Just to inject yourself into the senior year, you know you're sort of not quite in step with everybody else.  Now many of the teachers there like I said, they taught my father and they were friends of my uncle, the one that was the music teacher, the band, you know, the music teacher at the school, so you know it was like I went back and when I got there I was--they said-they said I know Miller didn't teach you that in Chicago cause he's--was a certain type of person and that type of educated guy and I had to deal with that.  The expectations because many of those teachers were his friends that he had gone to school with, so it was like old family week you know back at the high school.
Story_ID: 93363
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you.  How did you parents meet?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: My father [Eugene Scott] obviously--oh, he met my mother [Bertha Mae Jones Scott] in high school and he just said that she caught his eye (laughter), and you'd have to know him to understand that, but he said she caught his eye.  Now in those days my grandmother did not allow boys to visit the house.  I mean you could sit on the front porch, but you had to leave at a certain time, and he just shared with me recently that my grandmother would say out "Is that boy still out there?", and my mother would say he just left and he said he would go up the street and turn around and come back (laughter).  Once Ms. Collins--once they knew that okay he's not here anymore so he told me that story but they met in high school.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 93364
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was it like growing up?  Now you all had a big active household?  How many brothers and sisters did you have?
Speaker 2: I only had one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--.
Speaker 1: What's your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Maxine Seers (ph.) and she's also a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Growing up in the house--it was school every day.  The lady that lived next door was my elementary school teacher.  So it was like I was under constant surveillance (laughter) in school and at home, you know.  So if I got out of line all she would do--on her way home she would stop in and tell my mother [Bertha Mae Jones Scott] or grandmother.  Many times it was my grandmother that she told and then I would have to suffer the consequences.  I--no one told me that you must go to college.  It was sort of like--it was expected, you know, when I finished high school both my sister and I, she went first she was year ahead of me and she went to college and I finished high and was like "Where you gonna go to college"?  It wasn't like what are you gonna do, it's where are you going to college which was a decision that I had to make and--but that was the kind of atmosphere that we grew up.  We knew that education was a very important element in the family, and nobody talked about it, they just lived it and you understood it and they practiced it, you know it was school.  It was Sunday school on Sunday mornings, it was what they Baptist Young People's Training Union [BYPTU] at 5:00, and then there was evening service.  You had an option on morning service and evening service.  You did not have an option in my house on Sunday School and BYPTU; I think that's what it was called.  You just got up and went 'cause you couldn't be sick, you couldn't be like "Well you know my shoes aren't shined".  Hey you'd better make sure that on Saturday night that you are ready to go.  So Saturday night was kind of laying out a plan for Sunday morning and it was just, it was structure and you understood what the standard was, nobody had to write it on the refrigerator, you understood what the standard was, the standard of conduct, the standard of behavior and the standard of achievement.  You know you could--went to school, either you couldn't bring back failing grades you had to at least come back with a C and so that gets ingrained and when I go off to college I never even worried about grades cause I never got a grade below a C, you know I got A's and B's and a few C's here and there again in those math classes that I seemed to have a few challenges with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93365
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhood in growing up?
Speaker 2: One of the unique sounds that I can remember all the way back to four years old, we lived a block from I guess it would be compared to like the Club Savoy in New York or the Club DeLisa.  We lived a block from there, actually it was like a three-quarters of a block so as a young kid four years old I remember hearing Ike Williams, Lena Horne, Ella Fitzgerald, I mean because that was the only place that they could come and perform in Miami [Florida] was this place called the Harlem Square Club, and I heard them all from my front porch, because my mother [Bertha Mae Jones Scott] would go over there and I was there--they tell me I was the kind of kid that at four I would go stand on the porch and wait for her to come back and nobody could get me in the house because I didn't know where my mother was and I wanted her to come back and I could remember when the music stopped playing and I would hear them throwing whiskey bottles into the trash, okay now she's coming back and I'd look up the street and there she was and I was okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then the other sound was the church bell ringing because the church it's a family--the family worshiped at that church and I would hear that bell on Sunday mornings very distinctly which means "alright get up it's time to go".  Those were the primary sounds of the community that they kind of stick with me.
Story_ID: 93366
Speaker 1: We were talking about growing up in Miami [Florida] and I know you grew up partially in Chicago [Illinois] too so we'll talk about that, but firstly what were race relations like in Miami when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: They weren't good at all in Miami.  My father [Eugene Scott] use to tell me stories about whites riding down the streets of the inner city and threatened to kiss his ass or something you know and just for nothing, just looking-- harassing him.  When I grew up I didn't quite experience some of those things, but I did experience, or could feel the experience of discrimination in jobs, in activities.  I remember as a kid listening to the radio and it was advertising a carnival that was downtown in Miami and I--Oh--we got to go, we got to go, and my father said "no you can't go because it is not for blacks", and I was like just so heartbroken you know, and to leap ahead that was one of the primary reasons that I liked Chicago and disliked Miami because just as I was starting getting a little older, off to Chicago and it was like going to a completely different world.
Story_ID: 93367
Speaker 1: Now, how is it that you moved to Chicago [Illinois] in the first place?  What were the circumstances?
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle was the great educator, the one that went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was not pleased with my education and training in Miami [Florida] and he says to my mother [Bertha Mae Jones Scott], "you got to send that boy up there with me so he can go to school and see some things", and he was absolutely right because my weekends were spent in the Field Museum, the Museum of Science and Industry, the Art Institute, in and out of the Hilton Hotel, just a lot of different things.  I mean at twelve years old, I participated in the 1952 Democratic and Republican National Convention.  How did I do that?  Well, remember my aunt is working at the newspaper so she gets me a press pass, I'm twelve years old and I got this press pass pin on me and I'm able to go into the Hilton Hotel and they're looking at me like I'm crazy (laughter), but I still did it, but my purpose in going in the Hilton was to become a banner carrier for one of the candidates.  That's what I really wanted to do.  So I got a chance to carry--
Speaker 1: Did they pay you for that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they paid me a couple of hamburgers (laughter).  They did not pay me.  I just wanted to do it so badly, so I went down to the Hilton with my little press pass on, got in, went into [W.] Averell Harriman who was then the governor of New York running on a Democratic ticket for President, and they said okay we'll take you, you know, and you know I was little short fellow but they took me and I walked out in front of the Hilton carrying this sign singing "H-A-R-R-I-M-A-N you'll see, he's the man, he's the man for me" something like that.  So made it through the Democratic Convention and then the Republican Convention is in Chicago the same year.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '52 [1952], this is the 1952 Convention.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Don't remember who I campaigned for in the Republican--it seemed like it was--.
Speaker 1: Was Eisenhower running for the Republicans, I mean well he's nominated in '52 [1952] right?
Speaker 2: Right, right but it--.
Speaker 1: Adlai Stevenson was nominated for--.
Speaker 2: But Adlai Stevenson was a Democratic.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  I can't remember--.
Speaker 1: What candidate--.
Speaker 2: It seemed like it was someone out of Minnesota.  It seemed like it was, I want to say [Stuart] Symington, but I don't--I think Symington might have been a Democrat too.
Speaker 1: He's in Missouri I think.
Speaker 2: He's from--yes Symington was from Missouri, you are absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Stuart Simonton.
Speaker 2: But anyway I can't remember who it was--.
Speaker 1: Stassen, Harold Stassen?
Speaker 2: Harold Stassen that may have been who it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Minnesota.
Speaker 2: Minnesota.  I knew it was a Minnesota--yeah, Harold Stassen.
Speaker 1: Yes, he ran over and over again I think.
Speaker 2: Yes he did (laughter), yes he did.  He was a perennial candidate, but it was like I knew that wasn't going to be about anything so I didn't really get into it like I got into Harriman campaign, you know participation.  Then I think they weren't too happy with me, you know I wasn't meeting something for them like the Harriman people just opened up to me, took me upstairs to their suite and then that's when we got the payoff which was big old juicy hamburgers which I thought wasn't a bad deal (laughter), not a bad deal at all for a couple of hours of carrying the sign around the Hilton.  The Hilton was a headquarters, so all the State--all the delegates were hanging in and out of the Hilton.
Speaker 1: This is the Conrad Hilton in Chicago?
Speaker 2: This is the Conrad Hilton.
Speaker 1: The big one? Okay.
Speaker 2: Right and that's how I referred to it for many years as the Conrad Hilton, but it was just--see, those kind of experiences I wasn't getting in Miami so I was just like "hey", although I was separated from my mother and that was the most difficult part about it all, but the experiences.  I went to--I finished eighth grade at A. O. Sexton [Elementary School].  They gave me some kind of leadership award and I'm like "hey man this place is alright".  You know I could go ice--I went ice skating out on the Midway [Plaisance Park], freezing like hell, but you know a guy from Miami now you know, out here in all this cold weather, but I managed, I managed pretty good, but it was just, even the ride on--when I get on the streetcar is what I'd call it, 'cause it was a streetcar going down on Indiana, I could sit anywhere I wanted to.  In Miami I had to sit in the back and uncle would say, "Now when you go back to Miami don't you be jumping your butt up in the front of that car like this", and I'd have to kind of adjust my thinking, you know so Chicago really won out as my favorite place to be because I could--when I heard something on the radio, hey it meant I could go too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93368
Speaker 1: Now let's backtrack a little bit.  Now your uncle, the--who was a successful educator and he was married to one of the Sengstackes right?
Speaker 2: Right he was married to John [H.H.] Sengstacke's sister, [Mary] Florence Sengstacke.
Speaker 1: And John Sengstacke was the CEO of--?
Speaker 2: John Sengstacke was the owner of the Chicago Defender newspaper, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that put you right in the mix.
Speaker 2: That put me right in the mix because, and this was the oldest sister, so they had some type of reverence to what--to her.  They would defer decisions to her.  She sort of blessed the family, she kept the family Bible with everybody's name in it, their birth date and all--you know everything else so they had to defer to her, you know and she was a very compassionate, conservative, steady lady.  She had majored in English down at Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and was a real stickler on writing and the spoken word, and here I am coming up from Miami with my broker Southern English and she cracked on that real quick, like I use to use words like "tote" and she would say "carry" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well they mean the same thing, but one is more country I guess than the other--tote.
Speaker 2: I think so, she couldn't take that so after a few years she had kind of straightened me out with English, both writing and--cause she would take my papers and edit them basically (laughter) you know, and I saw these red marks over them but it helped me you know when I had a chance to start writing, so it gave me a good foundation.
Story_ID: 93369
Speaker 1: Okay so well tell me about high school now.  You started high school here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I started high school at Englewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--my favorite story of Englewood High School is this.  When I go to over Englewood they had optional classes for males.  You could take ROTC or you could take physical education or you could take band, and I think when I got there all the jocks had filled up the P.E. Classes, so they told me you either take--you could take band or ROTC 'cause all the juniors and seniors were in P.E.  They had figured out the system.  So I said--I didn't know what ROTC was, so I said I'll take band 'cause I thought well you know I could beat a drum or something like that, that would be nice.  So I went over to the band room and the bandmaster said, "What instrument do you play"?  I said, "Well I want to play the drums".  He said, "We don't need any drummers".  He said "What other instrument would you like to play", and I'm like you know, "I really don't know if I can't play drums".  He said, "I'll tell you what.  We need some fellows to play the French horn", and I'm like French what?  I never even heard of a French horn (laughter), let alone even dream that I would like to play it.  So he said "Scott, we're gonna put you on the French horn".  So, I remember him asking me to manipulate my fingers a certain way and he said okay you passed it the preliminary test, and so after two weeks on the French Horn and I was probably making some ungodly sounds, I remember distinctly one day he came and tapped me on the shoulder and he said, "Scott, I think you need to go to ROTC", and I'm like "Well okay" you know I didn't really like that French Horn anyway.  So I go over to the junior ROTC Program, unbeknownst that was going to become my career.  Got in the program, had some successes because they had a rifle range at the bottom of Englewood High School, a .22 small bore, a .22 caliber small bore rifle range and I got on the rifle team.  Now this is a freshman, and I don't know where the skill--I learned it.  Well let me you who taught me.  They had these veterans from the Jowl's Post (ph.), the same boys who gave me the award coming out of eighth grade.  They would come over and help out the ROTC instructors, and they taught me how to--the techniques of shooting, how you breathe and how you hold that weapon steady and how you squeeze the trigger, not jerk it, but how to--you know how to squeeze the trigger and I got to be pretty good with that damn weapon cause they were teaching me the fundamentals that had come from the military.  I didn't know that at that time, but I got to be good so I made the rifle team and I enjoyed ROTC.  Well when I left Englewood and went to Miami [Florida] to finish up that senior year, they had no ROTC.  They didn't know what the hell--not for black schools.  It wasn't that big in the South.  Well when I finished high school and head to college, lo and behold the ROTC pops up again, it's the senior ROTC Program.  So I go into that program with a heads up over everybody else in the school because I went to junior ROTC.  I knew how to do a left face.  I knew how to take apart the M1rRifle.  I knew how to shoot on a--I knew a lot of things and of course coming in with that knowledge the Sergeant would say okay, Scott you are going to be the acting platoon sergeant or the acting squad leader.  So I got props, again because of the successes, I liked the program, you know, and that--but it all started at Englewood with the indoctrination and training and the discipline about you know about the military and I, of course, I had no idea when I was going through it like that I would end up leaving college one day and going to the military the next day and staying there for twenty-eight years.
Story_ID: 93370
Speaker 1: Okay now this is like you leave Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois] at '56 [1956] I guess right?  Is that before--?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956] yeah you're right on it.
Speaker 1: And go to Miami [Florida], and what was the name of the high school in Miami?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you graduated from there in '67 [1967] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty seven, yeah, I'm ten years off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) right.
Speaker 1: Yeah I had it right a minute ago--.
Speaker 2: Yeah you had it right (laughter) you had your numbers right.
Speaker 1: But then I fool around and--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay but, so now around this time in high school were you a popular student, were you--?
Speaker 2: I went back to a couple of reunions and they had some clips from the yearbook and I have to say yes I probably was.  One of the reasons is because I was in charge of the lunchroom, so to speak.  So, and my job was to stand in the door of the lunchroom and the way the school was built there was a quadrangle, and I would point up to the different floors.  I had a guy on the third floor, second floor and I would say "send me down one class, two classes", 'cause I was monitoring the flow into the lunchroom.  So I'm standing right there as everybody in the school passes to go to lunch, you know (laughter), so I got to know everybody, you know.  So I would say yeah, I was popular.  I knew a lot of people and a lot of people knew me.
Speaker 1: Now were you a real good student in high school?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say real good because I didn't apply myself.  I was good, but not, I was not an A or B student, I was a strong C student in high school with a few B's scattered in.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject other than ROTC?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was always Social Studies in school from elementary school through high school.  So I ended up majoring in political science when I go to college cause, my real ambition was to become a lawyer.  I was going to go in the [U.S.] Army, stay two years and then go to law school.
Story_ID: 93371
Speaker 1: Now what inspired you to become a lawyer, I mean was it a--someone you knew or--?
Speaker 2: I think I wanted to be a constitutional lawyer.  I think I was in--aspired to be that because of observing Thurgood Marshall as a strong constitutional lawyer, you know not knowing that there's really no money in it but (laughter) I mean not big money, but that's what I wanted to do so that's what I thought I would end up doing being a constitutional lawyer.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet any of the Civil Rights lawyers while you were in Chicago [Illinois] at the [Chicago] Defender or otherwise, you know?
Speaker 2: Most of the folks that I met at the Defender was when I came back to the Defender, I got a chance to meet all of them, you know (laughter).  All the politicians, all the lawyers, all the candidates, you know, I met during the time I returned to the Defender.  I do not remember as a young child, you know meeting these people.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you basically admired Thurgood Marshall because of the events in the news around Civil Rights, Brown v. The Board in '54 [1954] and in subsequent--yeah.
Speaker 2: Board of--right; all that was done on an impressionable--at an impressionable age for me.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956] was Montgomery Bus Boycott going on in--.
Speaker 2: Right, all of that going on so I felt a need to be involved in that process you know, and in order to do that I needed to go to school and get educated and go on to law school, but the law school thing it never happened 'cause I got hooked in the military.
Story_ID: 93372
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to college and where, and how did you decide on a school?
Speaker 2: I went to Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural & Mechanical University, FAMU] in Tallahassee, Florida and I did--my decision to go there was that's where my father [Eugene Scott] went to school, and he had sort of influenced me it was a good school and he would be more than happy to pay the freight, you know if I went there and so it's interesting he went there, I went there and my daughter went there, you know.  She finished in an ROTC program twenty years after I went there, and just last August retired as a Lieutenant Colonel in the [U.S.] Army, right and she was really kind of followed in my footsteps (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Florida A&M like when you were there?
Speaker 2: Some of the things I remember about Florida A&M was they--a beautiful campus.  I remember participating in a student demonstration and march from the campus toward downtown.  We never made it down there because we got tear-gassed and of course everybody broke up, but I do remember participating in some of the civil rights demonstrations because the campus was so far from downtown, of course, the police could turn us around you know before we could even--soon as they'd find out we were gathering, but we got--we got pretty close a few times, we got about, you know a little over halfway downtown before they brought the teargas and the dogs and ran us back, but we were determined.
Speaker 1: Was the administration supportive of what you all were doing?
Speaker 2: The administration was kind of hidden (laughter), you know.  They sort of closed their eyes to it and I'm sure because it's a state institution and they couldn't get nowhere close to that so they just sort of stayed in the background, never interviewed on television.  You would certainly not see them at the gathering.  This was all student organized and ran, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So no support from administration.  I'm sure their jobs were at stake (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so this is--so you're there--.
Speaker 2: This is in the '60s [1960], this is '60 [1960] maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is '60 [1960] '59 [1959] - '60 [1960] is what I'm thinking, right.
Speaker 1: '60 [1960] we had this big presidential election with [John F.] Kennedy and [Richard] Nixon, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right so it was--was that '60 [1960]?  Yeah, it was before--it was before the election so it was probably '59 [1959] when we were doing the demonstrating, right.
Speaker 1: Okay and you majored in political science?
Speaker 2: I majored in political science, right.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you remember from Florida A&M?
Speaker 2: The one I remember most distinctly was my political science instructor, Dr. Howard, and he was--in fact, he was a friend of Margaret Burroughs [HM].  They went to Africa together.  They went to Ethiopia and met Haile Selassie, and he would be wearing his ring with the King of Judah, a King of--yeah, Judah ring and when I met Dr. Burroughs she had one too, and somehow we started talking and she indicated that she had gone to Ethiopia with Dr. Howard, some--I'm not sure what was the purpose of the visit but they did meet Halie Selassie, you know that was prior to his death, but he was one of my most impressionable teachers and he took interest in me and I kind of stayed up under his wing, and college was a complete reversal than high school.  In college I became an A student.  I think part of it because I got married while I was in college, okay.  So while my many fraternity brothers would be out partying, I didn't see that side of it.  I was at home.  There were three places you could find me, at home, the library or at work 'cause I really had to manage my time, so the best thing that ever happened to me was to start this family early 'cause it really took me off the streets, and put some structure to my life.  I didn't have time to be doing anything else.
Story_ID: 93373
Speaker 1: Well you know many young people get married when they're young but they don't have the discipline to do what it takes--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--your family, I don't think the tradition was that you would get married that young, was it?
Speaker 2: No it was not.  In fact my father [Eugene Scott] certainly didn't agree (laughter) with it, but I promised my--I made a commitment to myself, if I do it, I'll make it work--I'll make it work, and so it was a challenge to--I had--when I finished college I had three children.  When I started I had one.  I mean when I got married after I think the first year I had one, and by the time I'd finished I had three.  So I didn't have time to be kind of playing around, and not being where it was supposed to be if it was gonna work cause they had to eat and you know and it wasn't a whole lot of money floating around (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well you're right; it's a serious situation with three children (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, very serious so I worked those three years.  I worked over on Florida State [University]'s campus.  I worked on Florida A&M's campus and you know not, they were enough to keep us going you know, we saw some lean days but we generally got through it 'cause my father, he continued to help out even after I got married.  So that made it--that made it simple.
Speaker 1: So was your wife [Patricia Scott] a student at FAMU?
Speaker 2: She was not a student at FAMU so she--she was able to cover that side of it--that with the kids 'cause she was--that was her total focus dealing with the kids, so it was--you know it worked out pretty good.  I don't think we both could have gone to school at the same time (laughter), no, that wouldn't have worked yeah.  So she made a little sacrifice there, all right.
Story_ID: 93374
Speaker 1: Okay, so now I suppose when you were--you were in ROTC at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural & Mechanical University, FAMU] and you were on a track to become an officer after you graduated?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  They have a four-year ROTC program.  The first two years was a mandatory program for all freshman and sophomores and the last two years was a sort of a volunteer program that would put you out of college and into the [U.S.] Army as a Second Lieutenant and what they did was you know, gear you up to do that.  As I look back the only thing about it was when you got into the Army the people that you primarily had to compete with were a little bit more sophisticated than you were in training and background, particularly the West Point Officers.  I mean, at that time all the West Point Officers were engineers.  They were either double Es, electrical engineers, construction engineers, you had to be an engineer, some kind of an engineer (laughter), so what--the challenges that I remember like I was taking a course as a captain, I was taking a course in nuclear fallout prediction, and those guys were using slider rules to calculate and I was doing it longhand and you know who finished first, and it was a little frustrating, but I didn't have the skill.  I hadn't been trained.  So they were able to whiz through the courses like that when we--in the military you probably in school more than you're out of school as an officer.  I spent probably half of my time going to school, cause every four years you went to a year-long course about leadership and management, so and that's where you run into all these guys again is in the school environment and so I had to work twice as hard in school to stay up with the West Point officers and some of the other big school officers in certain of those skills that they were teaching us, and then that was a challenge coming out of the ROTC program.
Speaker 1: Where were you stationed when you were right out of college?
Speaker 2: My first duty assignment was Fort Riley, Kansas and I was a tank platoon leader and I didn't even know which way the tank was supposed to go (laughter) and they made me a platoon leader and I had five tanks and I did okay 'cause I--the sergeants obviously liked me and it's a unique relationship between platoon leader and the men of the platoon.  There were twenty men in the platoon and about seven sergeants, and they took me under their wing and trained me and I said they liked me because they made--they developed me into a superb tank officer that could compete with any other officer.  I wouldn't care where he went to school.  They gave me all the training I needed to be a good tank leader and as a result of that I continued to command tanks.  I started off with five, then the next time I had seventeen and the next time I had sixty-three and the next time I had over 100; so all that started as a platoon leader with that first tank platoon at Fort Riley.  So I guess the highlights of my career was the two tours in Vietnam.  The first tour with the Vietnamese, learning--just learning another culture and all about another army, you know, how they fight, how they see things, how they eat, how they live.  I did that for a year and I was telling somebody I probably had more rice and fish that I can even imagine.  Every once in a while I have to go home and eat some rice and fish now to sort of take me back.
Story_ID: 93375
Speaker 1: Now from '62 [1962] you went to Fort Riley [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how long were you there and where'd you go from there?
Speaker 2: I--.
Speaker 1: You're a commander of a tank platoon right?
Speaker 2: Yeah when I came I had my five tanks and I had a tank platoon but I stayed at Fort Riley for three years. Those were my first three years in the military and I was very successful because when I --prior to leaving Fort Riley I was now a company commander and had seventeen tanks, three tank platoons and two headquarters tanks.  So I had moved up pretty good you know and a lot of people had been pretty nice to me.  In fact when I went to Fort Riley, I didn't know what to expect back in '62 [1962] cause there was still a very racist element in the [U.S.] Army.  In fact the battalion commander on the interview, they interview all the Officers when they come in.  He says, "I'm gonna send you down to 'C' Company.  I was thinking about send you to 'B' Company but they'd eat you alive", and I--well okay (laughter) I don't want to be eaten alive I'm thinking.  So he says, now there's a little fellow from New York, a Jewish boy that's the company commander down there, and I--you know, I'm gonna entrust you to him".  So I said okay, I you know took his judgment of course of where he should send me, and it did turn out to be that this guy was very fair with me and looked after me and in turn he assigned me to a platoon in his company that he thought, "Yeah, I'm going to put you in the first platoon.  They don't have a platoon leader and I think you'll work out pretty good with them."  And he was absolutely right, I did.  So that really helped me get off to a good start in the military and like I said, I did so well my company ended up receiving an award being the best tank company in the division, and it was called a "Draper Award" and it was a very important award and as company commander I received that award so I had a successful first tour with tanks and knew tanks, you know, knew about the maintenance of them, knew about the gunnery aspect of them and knew my role in supervising that effort so I was like, you couldn't tell me anything about tanks and it was a good feeling 'cause I could--and my contemporaries, many of them didn't have the experiences I had with tanks--to spend my first three years with tanks, you know in a combat training environment so it was, it was a good start, right.
Speaker 1: So did you spend all three of those years at Fort Riley?
Speaker 2: Yes, I spent the full three years at Fort Riley.
Story_ID: 93376
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Now so that takes us to 1965.  Now you do your first tour in Vietnam in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Right I go to Vietnam, and of course, I don't know what to expect.  I did know just from the grapevine there weren't any tanks over there, you know.  So when I got--.
Speaker 1: So tanks wouldn't work out in Vietnam very well because of--.
Speaker 2: Not too well.
Speaker 1: Because of the underbrush and the foliage and the trees?
Speaker 2: And the terrain was a little bit too soft for our heavy tank.  We did--you could work them on the roads but you couldn't maneuver with tanks in Vietnam, not well.  So when I got there I knew there weren't any tanks so I'm like well what the hell are they going to do with me, and I found out real quick.  They told me, "you are an infantryman now," and I'm talking about "but I'm a tanker".  "You don't understand, we can make you whatever we want to make you."  Okay, so that's when they assigned me to a Vietnamese infantry regiment as a battalion advisor, and I learned what it means to be an infantryman.  It's a rough life and its--but it's the closest thing, I mean you're right there in the action, and as a result of my assignment to that Vietnamese Infantry Battalion I received--I didn't receive any medals for valor, but I received the Combat Infantry Badge which is proudly worn by very few people, and that means that you were in combat and came under enemy fire.  That's the prerequisite for the issuance of that medal.  So when anybody see that they know that you weren't in the back you were in the front.  So it's kind of respected throughout the military.  It's even more so respected when a non-Infantrymen gets it.  So that's telling somebody that you were in an infantry position 'cause it's only given to infantrymen, so it has a lot of meaning about what you did during the war, right.
Story_ID: 93377
Speaker 1: My first encounter with fire was a unique experience to say the least.  We were going through the jungle like we'd done many, many times searching for enemy contact.
Speaker 2: Now what part of Vietnam is this (unclear)?
Speaker 1: This is in the central highlands.  We worked out of a place called Bommie Tuk (ph.) which was sort of the vacation spot for the presidents of Vietnam.  It's a nice area, beautiful country, tiger country.  I mean I saw tigers. I didn't expect to bump into tigers but I saw some on two or three occasion.  Beautiful animals you know.  With my first enemy fire contact I was walking through the jungle and then I heard someone screaming.  I heard you know like "rat-tat-tat-rat-tat-tat, boom", and I heard somebody say "contact, contact", and then the next thing that happened when it seemed like the bowels of hell opened up cause all I heard was shooting and mortar rounds going off and some of them were incoming, and--'cause I could see soldiers, Vietnamese soldiers down the line from me getting hit and being shot and falling and that type of thing and see the bullets kicking up dirt around me and I'm like "oh my God!"
Speaker 2: Was there any place to duck behind at that point or were you out in the open?
Speaker 1: We were in the open, but I would call--not an opening but a clearing.  In other words there was nothing to really get behind okay (laugher).  The thing I remember is that I fell to the ground and I tried to almost bore myself into the ground.  I got--you talk about getting low.  I don't think I could have gotten any lower than I was.  Unfortunately, my helmet fell off, I dropped my rifle when I hit the ground so I'm there really without helmet or rifle, and I had a sort of I guess "out of life experience" because seeing all these people shot, I looked out at the group of people and we had a black sergeant--these are Americans--a white Sergeant, and I had a Hispanic sergeant with me and I had a Vietnamese interpreter and we had captured a Vietnamese female prisoner and of course everybody else was Vietnamese.  Just for a moment I could not tell who was who.  I couldn't distinguish the men from the women, the Vietnamese from the Americans, the black from the white, the Hispanic from the woman, they all looked the same and from that experience the one thing I learned that there isn't any difference in people and it take--it took me to be in that moment of desperation and need--I would have taken help from any of them or assistance and I guess that's why I had that phenomenon cause I would have reached for any of them because they were human beings and they could aide for me but you know for that brief moment I could not tell the difference in them and then of course after it was over everybody was back to the same, but that experience has stayed with me so I respect everybody.  I respect women, I respect foreigners, I respect whites, I respect blacks, it don't--I can't--I gotta treat you like a human being.  It was indelible stamped into my soul that when I see you the first thing I see is another person, not a black or white or woman.  You are just another person to me, and it allows me to break through that barrier real quick, 'cause I don't get thrown off by sex or race or nothing like that.
Speaker 2: Now how did you all get out of that situation?  Did they stop shooting or what happened?
Speaker 1: They stopped shooting because the tactic was hit and run you know and instill as much damage as you can and they did.  They killed a few of us and we don't know what we did to them because when we finally got up to the ambush positions all I remember seeing was--there was no bodies, but I did see blood on the ground, on the leaves so I knew that somebody had gotten hit up there but of course I'm sure they'd drug away their dead or evacuated the wounded and that type of thing.  That was the first of several of those kind of encounters, but the second encounter I did a little better I kept my helmet on.  I kept my rifle in my hand and I was able to return fire and do what I was needed to do, so it took that first one sort of to let you know what this is about, and its very earth shattering to get into these combat situations, I mean it's like you don't really have any control of it.  You don't know where it's gonna go, and you just respond based on your training.
Story_ID: 93378
Speaker 1: Now how did you relate to the Vietnamese people?
Speaker 2: They liked me; I did very well because I learned their language.  I hadn't--the [U.S.] Army was sending people to school but they was sending us over there so fast--my group, they didn't--you didn't have time to go to school, you know, "you gotta go now".  So I had to learn the language, I had to learn to be able communicate with the soldiers, and they enjoyed teaching me the Vietnamese.  That was a big kick for them to let me try to pronounce the words and I couldn't you know (laughter), but I learned.  It's out of necessity, I learned.  Like I said I spent a year with them so I learned enough where I could go converse with the civilians and that always helped in any foreign situation when you know the language.  The peoples kind of think you want to be a part of it.
Story_ID: 93379
Speaker 1: Okay now what about the--now how is the--what was the attitude of the United States Military towards you.  You are in the military but was it--what was it--in that situation was--in that crisis kind of situation was it--were things getting better you think or worse or what?
Speaker 2: When you're out there fighting there--the discrimination goes out of the window.  When you go back to the regular structured setting that's when you, you know--during that particular tour in Vietnam based on my combat involvement, I did not receive the normal awards that a soldier that had participated in the War like I would have received.  They were saying "aw he doesn't need one of those".  I remember the major saying that he doesn't need that, you know.  So on my second tour I happened to run into a guy who said, "You know we'll--we'll fix that, you know when we have an opportunity to give you this award to make sure you get it.  So I was able to get some awards I really should have gotten the first time I was there but--awards was something even after I left Fort Riley [Kansas] after having the best company in the division I didn't get no award, and there were people that go awards that had--for lesser, but they wouldn't--the colonel the same colonel, no this is a different one that I left under said, "aw he's going to Vietnam he'll get 'em in Vietnam he doesn't need one" you know so (laughter).  Awards even to this day are still an issue with minorities in the military.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard stories about that of soldiers that have come back from Vietnam that talk about the stuff that they--the situations that they went through and what they did not get (unclear).
Speaker 2: I mean the government made an attempt--see we came out of World War I with no medals of honor.  You came out of World War II with none, I'm trying--[President Ronald] Reagan went back and picked up somebody from World War I and that was several years ago, I mean several years, then [President Bill] Clinton went back and picked up about five or seven from World War II, but so Vietnam became the first war where blacks were given their sort of fair share of medals of honor.  We picked up twenty out of Vietnam.  Milton [L.] Olive [III] from Chicago, eighteen years old, first soldier to receive one.  So medals were an issue and see medals affect promotion.  The Army wants its leaders to be its heroes, so you end up getting slighted at promotion time because you don't--you aren't--don't have the proper medals.  Again I ended up getting the proper one so I was okay, but a lot of young black officers didn't get what they were due.  So it affects you down the road.  They would never make colonel without those medals, especially if you are a combat officer, and you don't have any combat medals?  It doesn't work like that.
Speaker 1: Did the black soldiers ever discuss these matters amongst themselves or did you have very many--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I had a group of--this is years--you mean at that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when, yes.
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you were so few who were you going to discuss it with?  I was the only black officer in every unit I was in (laughter).  There were no more, there weren't any, there weren't any more so I couldn't discuss it with anybody. I just had to take it or leave it, and that was a unique, you know, occurrence, being by yourself.
Story_ID: 93380
Speaker 1: Okay so you did your first tour was just one year in '65 [1965] to '66 [1966] right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you came back to the U.S. and well what did you do back here--?
Speaker 2: I went to school for a year which was an [U.S.] Army what they call an "Advanced Course for Tank Officers".  That's where we did the nuclear training and some other things.  It was to prepare you for, you know, middle-management jobs right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were still training you as a tank officer--training you as a tank officer despite the fact that they weren't going to use you that way in Vietnam (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right, because, but there were other tank assignments worldwide.  They just weren't in Vietnam.  Most of our tanks were in Europe, a lot of tanks in Europe.  So when I left school I went to Europe to a tank unit.
Speaker 1: Okay so that was in--was that in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966] okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry that '67 [1967] you're right '67 [1967] yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so where'd you go to Germany or--.
Speaker 2: I went to Germany, a little place called Erlangen in Germany right outside of Nuremberg, a beautiful city and we had a tank battalion there and I went in, I was a captain.  I had already been a company commander so the only jobs left for me were kind of staff jobs so I became the operations officer which was a pretty important job in a tank unit to be the operations officer, and probably the first black operations the units ever had but--so I did that for a year and then went back to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did they allow your family to travel with you?
Speaker 2: My family went to Europe with me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: So that was a good experience for them.
Speaker 1: So you were there for two years from--?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry I was there for one year.  I said I went back to Vietnam.  I went back to--I went back to Pine Bluff, Arkansas to start up an ROTC program at Arkansas (unclear) College, needed more black officers so we had to start up some programs.
Speaker 1: And then in--well how was that, you spent a year at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then back to Vietnam.  It's actually a little over a year, because I went to Vietnam closer to '70 [1970] you know, so it was a little bit over a year. Alright.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 93381
Speaker 1: So you went back.  You only spent about a year I guess?
Speaker 2: The second tour, right that's correct.  Maybe a month short of a year, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what happened the second time?
Speaker 2: The second time I as--now I'm a major now (laughter).  The first time I was a first lieutenant.  So I'm a major now.  I go back to Vietnam and my first job is a staff job at the [U.S.] Army Headquarters, major four-star headquarters.  I was sort of a paper pusher working in the operations--again, because that become my specialty operations, but I was one of twenty, you know, (laughter) not in charge of anything but my desk.  I stayed there for about four months, and then the field commanders would always be coming up to get briefings from the army commander, and one day one of the field commanders came through and walked through our office and he saw me and he said, "Are you an army officer?  What the hell are you doing up here"?  "I don't know".  He said "Shit we need you out there and you know with the units".  So he talked to somebody (laughter) and the next thing I know I was gone to an American tank unit or it was an a cavalry unit, really that had light tanks and I became the executive officer for a armored cavalry regiment, a squadron, in an armored cavalry regiment, which was top job for a young major, and I did that the rest of my tour in Vietnam, I mean I was right there with the American soldiers, so I know about what went on with American units and the Vietnamese units now, so I kinda wrapped it off with my tour and that helped me also with my career progression because I was with an American cavalry unit, so when I get back into the system they see, "man you really kind of paid your dues, 'cause you were with the--and gained experience with what we do" and they didn't think too much about that Vietnamese duty, but they really respected the duty with the American unit.
Story_ID: 93382
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay, now anything memorable happen out in Vietnam that time?
Speaker 1: With the American unit?  I think the things that--this was the time at height of what we call fraggings where enlisted soldiers would throw hand grenades into the officer's barracks and that type of thing.
Speaker 2: Was there really a lot of that going on?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah that was actually happening and it was just a time of unrest in the [U.S.] Army.  I--so--the images I see are black soldiers doing what they call the dap, clapping hands and elbows and everything else and some of those sessions could go like five minutes and they may be like in the middle of the chow line, daring somebody to say something about it.  Just recalcitrant, almost on the on the --almost to the point of almost like mutinous, but not quite that far, but you could feel the dis--the unrest that was going on with the black soldiers, and I would try to calm em' or talk to em' in groups sometimes, you know, like "Hey, that's not gon' work, you know we got a mission first", but that was a very difficult time because the black soldiers weren't happy.  They weren't--they were just doing things of in-discipline.  They would be out of uniform with some damn bandanna tied around their head instead of their hat.  I'm like, "what the hell is going on fellas, we're still the Army," okay, but it was--those combat units these boys were out, they were out there, you know.  They were doing their own thang.  They figured you know we over here fighting, you know, don't be messin' with us, and so it was a good--the unit was very glad, I mean good to have this black major there that wasn't afraid to mix it up and talk with the soldiers.  Hell I wasn't afraid of em' you know, so a lot of times I would be used to go and find out what's going on to try to calm the group or something like that.  In addition they're trying to fight a war, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now this was some serious and some scary stuff. This fragging and the--
Speaker 1: Yeah that was, that was.
Speaker 2: And the divisions out there in combat, I mean that's really some scary (simultaneous).  How did you feel?  Did you feel that you had a--did you ever feel that you were in danger at all?
Speaker 1: I never felt in danger, I don't know if I was oblivious or what, but I just felt that I was okay cause I had a certain rapport with the soldiers, although I remember one soldier coming into my office one night saying, "You know, you need to have some security out and you shouldn't, you know, you shouldn't be able to get into your office" and he, you know like he came in and pulled out his .45 and he said, "You know somebody can come in here and shoot you", and I'm like yeah but put your .45 back in your case, you know (laughter) don't show me, you know shit, but that was it.  That was the only experience I had, but the soldiers generally listened to me and respected me.  I never had a solider that was discourteous to me the whole time I was in the military, white or black, never.  In Vietnam or Stateside always--I never had to stop a soldier and say, you know "Didn't you see that I was a Major and you didn't salute"?  Never, you know where I thought somebody intentionally wouldn't salute.  I never had that experience.  I think I just got in after those experiences were taking place to the black officers.  I just probably missed it, but I missed that right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then being a combat arms officer too there was a certain expectation, you know from your soldiers to you so you didn't--you didn't--some of the quartermaster guides or the cynical guys may have you know, had their hat off or did something crazy, but the combat guys pretty much knew what day it was.
Story_ID: 93383
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you think the number one complaint was of the black soldiers in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I think the number one complaint was awards and promotions, and I'll just mix the two together.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they really didn't get credit for what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I guess that mixed in with a general feeling that you know that most soldiers had over there that they weren't getting--that people were against the [Vietnam] War--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: and weren't supporting what they--you know.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly yeah so you mix those two together and you got a real potent group you know they feel that they're being mistreated, and then they saw the disproportionate numbers because a lot of them were up front, because again they scored low on the test so they went to combat units.
Speaker 1: You think like maybe the--I guess the deviation from discipline out in the field contributed to people getting killed at a higher rate, black soldiers?
Speaker 2: I don't have that sense cause once you got into a fight all that crap went out of the window (laughter).  You were fighting to save your life and your buddy's life and you didn't care what he was if he could pull the trigger you know and return fire, so all that--that was back in garrison in base camp.
Speaker 1: So they knew how to draw the line.
Speaker 2: Right, there was a distinct line that was drawn.  Once you got outta your base camp where everybody's laying back with their shirt off and you went forward, that stayed back there.  So the base camps became the problem.  That's where all the unrest was.  It wasn't out in the combat zone.  That--I never saw this indiscipline in the combat zone.
Speaker 1: So what's your impression of the overall performance of black soldiers during the War?
Speaker 2: It was outstanding.  That's why they got twenty Medals of Honor.  They took it--they took the bull by the horn and ran with it. That was the first time that they had participated on an equal footing as combat soldiers and combat officers.  They got their fair share of the combat situation and of course in those--in that arena the combat soldiers are given the highest respect, you know, so they got their props, you know they felt that they should've gotten, more but this was the first time that they even got part of the props.  In other wars they hadn't--it didn't happen.
Story_ID: 94068
Speaker 1: Let's see, well I was asking you off-camera what's your impression of the [Vietnam] War was while you were there and did you all ever think and talk about the politics of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now your officers never--I don't even remember one occasion of us debating on the merits of the War.  I mean we were there to fight and we knew that.  We had a job to do and we did it.  We just--it just didn't enter into the discussion to try to figure why we were there, we were basically as soldiers do, you're trying to figure out how to get the hell outta there, you know that's the main thing is for you to survive and get back home and that kind of preoccupied your mind with, you know, how you can do that, how you can be safe in this environment and that was a day-to-day challenge.
Speaker 1: In retrospect, did you have a sense for the nature of the protest against the War that was going on here and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was aware of it, but it didn't--.
Speaker 1: Black leadership's denunciation of it?
Speaker 2: It didn't--it didn't affect me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, it affected me more when I got back to the States than it did in the combat environment with Vietnam.
Story_ID: 94069
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: So you were there until 1971?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you come right back to the [United] States in 1971?
Speaker 2: I came back to the States
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went to Fort Knox, Kentucky and taught leadership at the [U.S.] Army's tank school [United States Army Armor School] for about three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it--did the States seem different when you came back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it always seemed a little different when you came back after being gone, but you were always glad to be back (laughter), you know and it was definitely good to be back from Vietnam so it was like, "y'all can have all the problems you want, but you aren't having the problems they're having (laughter) okay.  Nobody is basically shooting at you, you know although we did have some riots and that kind of thing, but it was a lot safer environment.  It was a hell of a lot safer environment so generally you were glad to be back, then after you'd been back for a while you start getting into the politics of it, right.
Speaker 1: Just briefly one of the big events that was going during that time, during that second Tour I guess was Muhammad Ali's situation in terms of being--.
Speaker 2: The draft?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the draft and so forth.  Did you have any thoughts about that at the time?
Speaker 2: I guess I understood what he was doing, but as a young officer I am trained and conditioned that when your name come up, you got to go.  So I didn't agree with him on it, but I, you know, I understood and sympathized with him but I would not have casted a vote saying that I agree with you.
Story_ID: 94070
Speaker 1: So you're in Kentucky--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in Kentucky.  Fort Knox is right out of Louisville; had a very good assignment at Fort Knox. When I left Vietnam they wanted to send me to the University of Mississippi's ROTC Program [Oxford, Mississippi], and I called my boss and told him "Please, I don't need no more of this shit.  I done played Mr. Integration enough, give me a break".  He said, "Okay, I agree with you, Scott.  They gon' send your ass to the tank school in Fort Knox whether they want to or not.  They can find a space for you", and they actually changed my orders like in mid-air and said, "okay, you're going to Fort Knox and be an instructor", and it was good duty, you know and it was sane duty 'cause they would--I would have been a part of the integrating force at the University of Mississippi at Oxford and that wouldn't have been fun.  It would not have been fun at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: From one conflicting situation to another (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) to another, so they saved me and gave a good tour at Fort Knox where I got a chance to really associate with some future generals and all of that out of--you know they all have to come to Fort Knox to be trained irregardless of what level they are.  If they are majors or colonels or Lieutenants they call come through Fort Knox for some training, so that put me in good company.  So most of the future leaders of the [U.S.] Army I got a chance to meet them at Fort Knox and they remember me as being their instructor and teaching leadership and you know you say, well what can you teach some general or colonel?  Well that was a lot because they lose contact with what's happening down at the grassroot level and I was able to share some of those experiences with them and they were very thankful for it, and then you're teaching sort of a different approach with the middle manage--and the basic guys, so I got a chance to teach from lieutenants to generals-- leadership, so that was one of the best experiences I had I guess, yeah.
Story_ID: 94071
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you taught?  Did--do you remember some of them?
Speaker 2: [H. Norman] Schwarzkopf [Jr.] was one, yeah Schwarzkopf came through.  He was an infantry guy but he somehow ended up at this what we call "General Officer Management Course" at Fort Knox [Kentucky] and we were the only one teaching it at that time so he came through.  I ran into Wes Clark [Wesley Clark], the guy that's running for President now he came through.  Two secretaries, not secretaries but two Chief of Staff of the [U.S.] Army, a guy named [Carl E.] Vuono and a guy named [Dennis J.] Reimer they were--so I got a chance to know all these guys, so as I'm moving up in rank when it comes to get a job, you know, I get the phone call, particularly if they are looking for a black officer, "Hey, why don't you come join me", and that's how I ended up with Schwarzkopf at Fort Stewart [Georgia] and I had worked with him in Germany and then when he got ready to go to Fort Stewart as a commander he asked me to go with him, you know, and we stayed together for years until he went to--the last call I got from him he asked me to go to the Gulf War with him and I told him I was getting ready to retire (laughter), so, "no thank you", 'cause after a while you get tired of being called on.  I mean General Schwarzkopf said to me once he was going to be a core commander out at Fort Lewis [Washington] and he called me and said, "I need you to come out here you know and be on my team, I need a few good horses to ride", and I mean he literally--and he meant that too.  He surrounded himself with people that were--had allegiance to him and they were competent.  You know, you were one of his boys.  I mean he took care of you but you also worked your ass to death, and I just said "hey, I've played this game before I don't think I'll go".  He understood, he said okay.
Speaker 1: So you would get things done right?
Speaker 2: Right, and he knew that you know and that's what he wanted and I knew what he wanted to have done 'cause he and I--I had worked with him four years, yeah four or five years in combat environment, so he knew I knew what needed to be done, and what he ended up doing, there were two of us.  There was a guy named Cal Waller [Calvin Waller] that became a Three-Star General.  So you go over to Iraq, they were going to have me as a colonel, have Waller over there as his assistant so Schwarzkopf's assistant at in Iraq was also his assistant at Fort Stewart, Georgia.  It was Schwarzkopf, Waller and myself and they wanted to transfer the same team to Iraq.  I just said I'm getting to retire. Waller served as his deputy in Iraq--very effective because Schwarzkopf did not even communicate with Colin Powell [HM].  I don't know if they even spoke to each other.
Story_ID: 94072
Speaker 1: Well you know, the general public had--well me and I guess everybody else who reads the paper has an impression that as Chief of Staff, Colin Powell [HM] is regularly communicating with [H. Norman] Schwarzkopf and you know--.
Speaker 2: He was talking to [Calvin] Waller (laughter) okay. 'Cause they were two different type officers.  Schwarzkopf was a field commander, Colin Powell was a politician from Washington [D.C.] that visited, you know he would go and serve in army units and come back to Washington, so he spent most of his time around the White House and Washington so he's different from the field commanders and the field commanders don't want to hear no crazy shit about employing their troops and especially General Schwarzkopf.  He'd tell them in a minute to go straight to hell, you know, but he had Waller there as a sort of leveling, calming force you know, and Waller was a combat tank officer too, so he knew the operations and he could talk to Colin Powell, but Schwarzkopf wasn't going to hear all that politics.  He didn't want to hear it.  His soldiers came first and the mission and the battle and all of that.  So it was some interesting dynamics.  So Waller played an important part in that whole operation in communicating between the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs cause Waller had previously worked for the Secretary of Defense.  So they--it's almost a little inside group you know and you look at it from the outside you think it's one thing, but these are all buddies or antagonists like Powell and Schwarzkopf.  They just--but they made it work, it was kind of transparent.  You couldn't see the conflict from the outside.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to meet Colin Powell?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah and--that's (unclear) why I bring you photos cause I would have bought you photos of Colin Powell and photos of Schwarzkopf and the whole crew you know, and you could see, you know, I was a lieutenant colonel when I first met Schwarzkopf and I was commanding a tank battalion in Germany and Schwarzkopf was the assistant division commander.  He had a one-Star on and he was responsible for the maneuver of forces when you're fighting a battle.  That was his--so I got to be--he got to know that I was--that I'd been in tanks now damn near seventeen/eighteen years so I--you know I know what the hell I'm talking about and what I'm doing and he got to respect that, and somehow had a liking for me so the next thing I know he's taking me to Fort Stewart [Georgia] with him, yeah.  So that's how that all happens, so I ended up commanding the base at Fort Stewart and then because of Schwarzkopf, I ended up commanding the base at Fort Monroe [Virginia].  To command two bases in a row is kind of "what, how did you do that"?  Well, General Schwarzkopf called up here and said Scott's going to Fort Monroe and nobody says nothing (laughter).  The generals are the one who run--they put their people where they want them to go.  That's how it works, especially at the senior level and nobody says no to a four-star general, not anybody I know, you know, you know so you get taken care of pretty good.  So I ended up having a fairly decent career, you know like I said commanding two bases I--that was probably one of the most challenging jobs you know to be the post commander.
Story_ID: 94073
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right well what was the highlight of your [U.S.] Army career would you say?
Speaker 2: I think the highlight was commanding the tank battalion--command, some command commanding the company, commanding the battalion and then again [H. Norman] Schwarzkopf doing--and [Calvin] Waller.  Waller was my brigade commander in Germany so I mean you know (laughter) we're all the same group of people that keep moving around.  They're getting promoted, I'm getting promoted, everybody's getting promoted and doing fine so when I got ready to--when I finished commanding my tank battalion, I got the best job in the division which was the most challenging job in a combat division, not too many blacks even have had the job.  It's the Combat Operations and Plans Officer, 'cause you're responsible for all the training in the division, 23,000 people, you're responsible for all of the combat operations plans and in Germany those were real live combat plans because of the mission that we had in Germany.  Those plans were like top secret plans and we practiced implementation of those plans, so if the Russians crossed the border or whomever, this is what you do.  So it was a challenging job and probably the most challenging job I had.  It was a 24/7 job and I'm walking around with top--I had the plans people working for me.  I had the operations people, I had the training people you know, so I had a pretty good little operation going and learned a lot about how you employ a combat division, so the next step from that if you stay on is probably promotion to general officer 'cause I had all the jobs that would have got me promoted had I not decided to go do something else.
Story_ID: 94074
Speaker 1: Okay, now you retired in 1990?
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], yes.
Speaker 1: Now that's the year the Berlin Wall fell, right, no?  I think so wasn't it?  Wasn't it '90 [1990]?
Speaker 2: Was it '90 [1990]?
Speaker 1: Or '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it may have been '90 [199], yeah I think it was early '90 [1990] [sic, 1989].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was '90 [1990].  How did you feel about that at the time having been in Germany, you know?
Speaker 2: With combat plans it just seemed like it wasn't real to me because I'm just leaving Germany where I had these top secret combat plans that the Russians come through to fill (ph.) the gap and what we do as a division to combat them and then somebody told me that the wall falls down and all that shit and those plans go to hell.  That's not about anything anymore so it was kind of surreal, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you really think at the time that it was gonna come down to a--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah you have to--you have to in order to be effective.  You can't think that what you're doing is not real, you know.  So you're saying, yeah, this could happen and this is what we got to do if it does happen and those plans are trained to where you know where, I mean we've got a container where the charge goes in that's gonna blow bridge, and how much that charge is gonna be--talking about detail now.  We down to the size of the charge that blow the bridge so you are constantly rehearsing those plans with the engineers and the Combat Units and that type of thing, so, no that's real to you, you don't think for one minute that that's not going to happen or couldn't happen someday, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 94075
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you know exactly what you were going to do after you retired?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew exactly what I was going to do (laughter), 'cause Mr. [John H.H.] Sengstacke had been talking about come back to the paper [Chicago Defender], you know, over ten years and I'm like I'm not ready.  So he called me and said--he called me first and said "are you ready now", and "I'll get back with you, said I got to talk to the wife [Patricia Scott]".  What are you thinking if we retire, you know all we knew was the military, I didn't even know how much money to ask Mr. Sengstacke for, you know that's how much I didn't know about civilian life, so I said okay, we're gonna retire, and it was kind of scary and so I called Mr. Sengstacke and said I'm gonna retire.  He said "okay, come on up here to Michigan."  He lived in Michigan and told me to come up there and let's talk about it.  Well, I didn't even know what to talk about you know.  Well what, you know, so we finally got down to money and where I should have been probably been asking for a lot more than I asked for, I just asked for something more than I was making in the military, you know, and immediately he said, "Yeah, okay that's fine", (laughter) so I knew then that I'd hadn't asked for enough you know, but so I go back to Fort Monroe [Virginia] and I announce my retirement and everybody is surprised, "oh gee, I didn't know you were going to retire Colonel".  "Yep", and I retired like on October 30th, no I retired on September 30th and came to work on the 1st for Mr. Sengstacke.  I came up here on a Saturday I think or Sunday and literally started working the next day.  So there really wasn't any transition time between--you know so I hit the paper still in my military framework and what I'm amazed at now, I'm accustomed to having like--as a post commander I had three secretaries, one that took dictation; that was her specialty, one that handled my schedule that she gave to me every morning when I walked in the door and one that sort of acted as like a little deputy, you know, but she was really, her grade was a secretary.  Eventually I got her title changed and I come to The Defender and I'm not even sure anybody in the building knew how to take dictation you know so it was a big change in the decorum and the order, you know like "what the hell is this about", and the attention to detail and everybody seemed a little bit laid back (laughter) you know so that was a little challenge for me to get over initially and nobody was like--I was like there almost a week before I even got a chance to talk to Mr. Sengstacke, you know, like what am I supposed to do?  You know I'm so accustomed in the military to "All right this is your title.  This is what you do, this is okay, here's Colonel Scott, okay he's our new da-da-tada."  That's not the way it went down with The Defender, 'cause he had some family politics he had to deal with his son, so he came in like--I came in that Monday, Friday.  He came in the room and said "okay, this is what your title is going to be.  You are going to be the assistant to me okay?"  And that was really to protect me again from any of these little ankle biters that are running around.  I am working directly for him okay.  So I worked for him in that capacity for about three years and my job primarily was the operations officer for his three other newspapers.  So I stayed on the road going to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania, New Pittsburgh Courier], Memphis [Tennessee, Tri-State Defender] and Detroit [Michigan, Michigan Chronicle].  That's all I did keeping him apprised of the status of those papers, passing guidance to them about the changes that he wanted to implement and basically monitoring their financial operation.  A very eye opening job, so I'm learning the whole operation.
Speaker 1: After three years, I come back and he says, "Okay now I'm going to make you the general manager of The Chicago Defender in addition to running around."  Well I--you know, I'm saying I don't know how well that's gonna work.  The general manager needs to be here every day.  Nope, I don't care but you still--So he wanted to still be able to send me to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and Memphis [Tennessee] when he wanted to and he did, you know, but of course I didn't go nearly as much as I was going before.  I really consumed by The Defender because he really had started to phase out.  His brother [Fred Sengstacke] who was the publisher had started to phase out so de facto I became the general manager and the publisher, because I was running the newsroom in addition to running the circulation, the finance office, the public relations and the classified and the advertising, so I learned the operation inside out, and he knew when he was ready to let me move to the next step.  He--when he figured out you ready to be the general manager, and so I got a chance to learn the operation.  So in addition to teaching me how to be the general manager, I probably learned more from his brother, Fred Sengstacke who was the man that handled the day-to-day operations.  I learned a lot about the newspaper business from him.
Story_ID: 94076
Speaker 1: Mr. [John H.H.] Sengstacke primarily told me the war stories about when he went on the Fahey Commission when he went to monitor the implementation of the discrimination, Executive Order on the discrimination of the military, and the challenges.  You know you get out some command on the wire and they said, "We never even heard of that "you know.  That's how it was cause it take a while for things to get down to the ground units and so he shared some of those stories with me when he went to Hawaii, Japan and some other commands throughout the military, and then he shared with me the Truman story, which was he went to President [Harry S.] Truman and said "Mr. Truman".  Mr. Truman wanted The Defender to endorse him you know.  Truman, Dewey election--Chicago has transitioned into the Democratic Camp from the Republic Camp and he needed, Truman needed Chicago like Chicago, so Mr. Sengstacke went to him and said "Mr. President I'm not sure"--and this is for his second, no his first term.  "So Mr. Senator," yeah he said "Mr. Senator, I don't know if I can support you because you had--you were in the Ku Klux Klan before" and this never made sense to me but he said that Mr.--that Truman said to him "don't judge me on the past, judge me on the future", and we laughed about that many times because how the hell you gon' judge someone on the future, you don't even know what they gonna do but that's what he told him and he sold him, and Sengstacke gets [Mayor Richard J.] Daley and all of those to back Truman and Chicago goes into the Democratic column.  To pay for that Truman came, and I think I mentioned earlier and participated in one of the Bud Billiken Parades.  He rode with Mayor Daley and I think it was--I'm not sure who was the President at that time--.
Speaker 2: This was in '48 [1948] when Truman ran--
Speaker 1: That was in '48 [1948] when Truman ran (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: For president, he (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: He defeated [Thomas] Dewey.
Speaker 2: He had been Vice president before under (unclear) (simultaneous) FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], okay.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so when you go back, when you go to the Truman Library in Missouri it's got all the correspondence between the President and Mr. Sengstacke, you know and his appointment to the Fahey Commission and those kinds of things and they still have a special relationship with The Defender.  I was able to freely go into their archives and there is about five or six letters where they communicated directly between the President and Mr. Sengstacke.  That was the Truman story and I have probably a hundred of those stories that you know Mr. Sengstacke told me about fair treatment of the black press and you know, cause they were coming down about the black press about its' questionable support of the [Vietnam] War.  There were many stories in the black press that could be interpreted as Mr. Sengstacke mentioned as being seditious and 'cause the black press weren't pleased with the treatment of black soldiers.  So that was a little battle, in fact the Secretary of the Army, I think it was [Fort] Knox [Kentucky] had threatened to shut down the black press if they didn't get those stories a little bit more positive.  So that was a kind of gun battle with the black press at that time.  So again Mr. Sengstacke made sure that I knew those stories and could pass em' on at future dates.  He would bring me up to his office and talk for hours and it would be the same stories so I (laughter) got to where I could repeat the stories just like him, knew all the peoples' names and he would animate and I started to animate too as when I told the stories, I told them (laughter) you know (unclear), but I guess that's how it's done, you know. That's how you pass on and get an appreciation for--for the role that the paper has played in the community and in the country really, yeah.
Story_ID: 94077
Speaker 1: Did he, I know one time was a time that [Harry S.] Truman was running for President, The Defender had a tremendous circulation, not only in Chicago [Illinois], but all the South (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Chicago but throughout the nation, the South--.
Speaker 1: The South, you know Memphis [Tennessee] and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] you know.  He [John H.H. Sengstacke] didn't have The [Pittsburgh] Courier then?
Speaker 2: He didn't have The Courier then--.
Speaker 1: Nut he you know, he--but.
Speaker 2: No, he had--the circulation got up to 200,000 at its peak time and it was--you know there was a National Edition and a Local edition, a weekly paper.
Speaker 1: They say that people would pass it around to other people so it got--one paper was read--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: The readership was much greater than that 200,000.  Probably could be close to a million you know when you look at the readership because that was the practice and it is still is to some degree today.  You go into the barbershop and you'll read a paper you know, that type of stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So he brought you in when he was in his late seventies, I guess he knew he was going--.
Speaker 2: No, he was in his eight--yeah, he was in his seventies that's correct, sorry.
Speaker 1: He was going into his eighties.
Speaker 2: Right, right and starting to have some health issues that I didn't really, he never really talked about but I could sense you know that he wasn't doing as great as he would like to be doing.  I think he knew that "hey, I got to tell somebody this", you know and from the very beginning he had a level of confidence in me that as he observed me progress through my military career, you know, like I said he visited me like three or four different times talking about coming to the newspaper and the most serious time was when I was at Fort Stewart [Georgia] as the base commander, he came down and we met in Savannah [Georgia], had dinner and I really wasn't quite ready to leave you know the military at that time, but that's when I think he would have liked me to come, probably would have been more helpful to him at that time.
Speaker 1: So as you took on more responsibility what was the biggest challenge?
Speaker 2: At the newspaper?
Speaker 1: The biggest challenge I had was keeping the organization profitable.  That was the biggest challenge, learning and he would tell me all the time--see in the military, all you had to do was ask for some money (laughter) and they would give it to you.  It doesn't work like that out here, you got to earn it, you got to make it, so the bottom line is the green dollar and you got to figure out ways to get it in, and so that was my biggest challenge to go from living in an appropriated world to living in a business world where you got to--you got to make--you got to find ways to reduce costs, to manage costs and to increase profits.
Story_ID: 93394
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanted to ask you about some of the changes that the [Chicago] Defender has gone through.  The Defender is a Chicago [Illinois] institution--black institution in the country, and yet its I mean readership's declining.  I think probably general readership of newspapers period is declining in the black community.
Speaker 2: Period, in general, right, right, sure.
Speaker 1: Even though literacy supposedly has gone up.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, when I came to The Defender, The Defender had a very strong editorial staff.  Most of the reporters, when I mean in strength, I mean in numbers and in talent.  They had an education reporter that was a journalist.  They had a life time reporter that was a journalist; they had a sports reporter that was a journalist.  So they had--they may have had ten reporters in the newsroom that were all college trained journalists.  So the dynamics in the newsroom were pretty good and they were getting good vibes on local news which should be the cornerstone of the newspaper.  The local news stories because it's community paper basically, and you can't make it anything other than that, but I--during the time I was there I started to see that decline where they kept losing journalists and replacing them with non-journalists.  Maybe you had a college degree in English, okay well that doesn't mean that you were a journalist.  That, those are the things that started happening and the Defender was really out of step with the salary pay scales in the general community.  In fact, I don't think to this day that the pay scales have changed since like the '89 [1989]/'90 [1990] level and--.
Speaker 1: So people are getting paid in 2003 what they were getting paid in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  So what happened to me as the general manager, I was not able to attract the talent because I couldn't pay them, so a couple of things I did was say okay so I can't attract the talent, I'm gonna go and get freelancers, okay?  And demand like they give me three stories a week, and they like, "Okay, that's not bad you know, we're talking one hundred bucks a story, okay, we'll do that".  So I got a chance to get--I had about five freelancers, one giving me community news, one giving me legal news, one giving me sort of socio-family issues and one was in religion.  So I was--I was okay.  I didn't get--I can, you know this was an innovative way for me to offset the inability to hire this top-notch reporter that's sitting behind the desk every day.  So I did that for several years as a general manager and when I became publisher, I stayed with that same game plan because I couldn't--I could not increase salaries--just locked in and I knew that eventually that would spell our doom because it's no--it's no secret why Tampa Bay or St. Louis or the Bulls when Michael Jordan were there were winning--talent.  I don't care what you're doing.  If you don't have talent, it's not going to be first rate.  So to get talent somebody's got to pay for it.  Otherwise you operating with a second-string team and that's what started--in my opinion started to happen to The Defender.  They started operating with less than talented or qualified people, and it just started to go like that over the years because the salaries remaining constant, but your ability to get people is steady you know going below the line.
Story_ID: 93395
Speaker 1: Now there are very few black dailies left, the [Chicago] Defender I think may be--.
Speaker 2: Yeah there may be one up in New York, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, The Amsterdam News?
Speaker 2: Not the Amsterdam, it's another paper and I can't--I can't-- oh, I know whose gone daily, The Philadelphia Tribune, right which is still a profitable, sound, operating newspaper in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because they got talent, you know, they paid the salaries that they needed to attract the right talent.
Speaker 1: Now The Defender went daily at its peak, you know-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's correct back in about 1956 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Started off I mean for fifty years--almost fifty years it was a weekly.
Speaker 2: A weekly, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I always said if I had the decision to make it would remain a weekly.  I'm not sure that there was any scientific business study to go from a weekly to a daily, personally I don't think the market ever really supported a daily paper and that is the advertising market.  I--it just doesn't make sense to me from a business standpoint of view.  When I can put out one paper, and get just about the same advertising, what the hell do I need to put out five or six?  You know, if you look at The Defender the ads are spread out throughout those editions, instead of concentrated in one strong edition, and I had told Mr. [John H.] Sengstacke that I'd make this a damn weekly paper but there was no--the daily paper was his baby. So he was not gonna go, and it would be hard to do I understand, but if you are talking about making money and this is a business, it's the only sensible thing to do.  You can get better talent.  They would have more time to put it together.  That is some kinda drill with the little bit of talent we had to put out a paper every night.  Believe me okay, 'cause I was there many a nights (laughter) and personally taking the paper to the plant out on--out at Southtown for them to publish the paper, you know to make sure it got out there a certain time of night and that the color photos were right, you know, I've gone out there many a nights 'cause I couldn't really ask anybody else to do it you know.  I had one or two guys that did it for me but I mean I did it myself many a nights to make sure it got out there at the right time, 'cause we were at--at the Southtown we were sort of jammed in between their press window with an open window for us to run our paper was a kind of efficient way for them to operate, okay so the press is never idle, so--.
Speaker 1: Yeah you're talking about The Southtown Economist (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The Southtown Economist, right.
Speaker 1: Newspaper on the South--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Southtown Economist, they ran our paper--.
Speaker 1: The Defender use to publish its own (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Defender published their own--.
Speaker 1: Print its own paper.
Speaker 2: Printed and its others papers too right out of the Chicago Office.  Now that was quite an operation.  Again, I thought just from basic management, how can you outsource your primary product, or primary task?  What the hell is going on?  You outsourcing printing, something is fundamentally wrong with that from a business perspective.  You know, 'cause you can't, you can't, you lose flexibility if you outsourcing your primary effort and that is printing the paper.  That's like if you sold water, you had somebody else getting the water for you (laughter) and then you go and sell it.  You know, see how that degrades your profit plus when you're printing you can print other things, you know you can other printing jobs.  The printing press should be a 24-hour operation basically or close to that.  When you're not printing your paper, you should be printing somebody else's, or printing some other city document or state document or something like that.
Speaker 1: Or it could, The Defender I suppose in that scenario The Defender could in some way, I mean print the other black newspapers in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Sure, it should be.
Speaker 1: We've got all these weeklies.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  But Mr. Sengstacke fell out with the Printers Union.  He refused to pay them the wages they wanted so he said, "I'll close this damn thing down before I pay you that", and nobody believed him like (unclear) close your printing press down.  He closed it down, but I don't think they ever were profitable after that.  They spent too much to print papers.  That's their highest cost item is paying for printing.  For all the papers, when you put together that is a substantial sum of money that's eating away at the bottom line of the profits, so it was my thought that in order to make this profitable, I would put it out once a week and I'd start the printing operation up.  He just didn't have the money to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know to get that going again.
Story_ID: 93396
Speaker 1: So economically there is a lot challenges economically to try to publish a daily and (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Advertising revenue we were discussing I think even before we started the interview--declining revenue.
Speaker 2: Way down for the black press, because again the major corporations are demanding that you give them--see they're saying to me per thousand your paper is more expensive than The [Chicago] Sun-Times, the cost of getting 1,000 papers out is basically higher than The Sun-Times.  So you know what makes that is because my numbers are low.  I'm putting out 15,000 they are putting out 500,000 papers.  So I'm up the creek with my damn numbers, I can't match them, so they say well why should we go to you we get a better bang for our buck--I mean just business.  So they just start giving you courtesy ads, basically.  You can't live off of that.  You cannot live off of that.  So there's some systemic things that are wrong before you can operate that as a profitable business in my humble opinion that have to be addressed and the share of advertising dollars that come to the black papers is one of 'em.  You can't get there from here--you cannot get there from here because again, advertising should probably pick up 80 percent of your revenue.  Circulation doesn't make anybody any money selling newspapers.  So, Mr. [Robert Sengstacke] Abbott, that's how he made his money off circulation.  Still couldn't get the advertisement and the same problem is today, you know.   Seventy years later we still have the same issue of trying to get corporate white America to ad in the black newspapers.
Speaker 1: Now back in the old days the circulation was less of a problem because the only place to see black news was in The Defender.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Or, well black paper.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But not it's--.
Speaker 2: It's everywhere (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, integration is kind of--.
Speaker 2: Right, right's it's a self-fulfilling--.
Speaker 1: Weaken the impact I guess of a black paper--
Speaker 2: Right, right had a significant impact on the black paper, not only on your revenue, but on your--the quality of your staff.  I had one young lady that was super. I was paying her like $18,000 per year.  She went to The [Chicago] Tribune and got $40,000, just like that.  She's still there (laughter), you know.  I got talent and what I did--what I usually accomplished was I served as a training ground for the major dailies.  I've got people who have left The Defender and gone to the LA Times and--cause we were the only daily game.  See the dynamics are the same trying to crank out an article.  In fact they had to give me an article a day but at The Sun-Times maybe an article every three days 'cause they gotta research it.  I don't have time for that.  I got to fill up this paper so I want it at five o'clock, okay?  That put them under a lot of pressure which and training that turned out to be good for them personally because they developed their skills in a year that they could go and market somewhere else.  So we had a lot of folks that started at The Defender and ended up somewhere else, and they were good reporters.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that pressure may account for a story that might need a little more research or something (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah no question about it.  It needed some more research, you know, so it was kind of sloppy but when six o'clock in the evening comes your focus is on filing up that spot.  You gotta get the paper out, cause the public will be upset if the paper doesn't come out.  They wouldn't be--they're not gonna be that upset about the quality of the story not as much, but you can't keep doing that 'cause you gradually end up putting out this inferior product, you know, so you have to be careful about just getting the paper out.
Speaker 1: Now that aspect of it's become kind of a--kind of one of the little inside jokes on the Black community--The Defender.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's how you got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You got there with a lack of proper resources to do the job and living with it, you know, you know.  My position is come, okay if you're gonna play football, that means you got to have a football team and the goal is to win.  Okay?  The goal is to put out an error-free, relevant paper to the community, can't do it with this team, you know, and unfortunately, I'm not sure they are in any better shape today than they were a year or five years ago.  In fact, they may be in worse shape as far as having that talent.
Story_ID: 93397
Speaker 1: Now to switch gears a little bit, now on the positive side we still have a paper that can take an issue that the white press won't touch and hammer at it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's happened a few times with The [Chicago] Defender even in recent years and I think that the loyalty that does exist you know around The Defender comes from that.
Speaker 2: Right that's what The Defender has to do.  I know under my regime one story that we took and got resolution on was the Becker case [People v. Becker].  The Becker-Gould the homeless guy [Joseph Gould] that was killed by the off-duty policeman [Gregory Becker]--white policeman.
Speaker 1: Explain what happened in that case (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah what happened in that case was--and I can't remember Becker's first name, but he was an off-duty policeman coming out of a bar in downtown Chicago [Illinois] with his black--white officer with his black girlfriend and the homeless guy comes up, and I don't know what his demeanor was but he asked to clean off the windshield and he said "get the hell out of here (unclear)", and the guy was a little persistent about "come on, let me clean your windshield," and "didn't I tell you to get the hell out of here", and some type of struggle came on he says, "I'm a damn policeman" and pulls out his gun, and his story is that he accidentally shot Gould in the head and the only witness was the girl and she wasn't a very good witness anyway, she don't know what happened, but in the confusion like that, that could happen--you don't know what hell happened and the next thing you know somebody has fallen to the ground, so she couldn't--she wasn't, she didn't prove to be any good about that.  The Defender got involved in it because [Jack] O'Malley who was the [Cook County] State's Attorney was an ex-policeman and he sort of whitewashed it and said okay, they came to a conclusion that there would be no charges, it was an accident, da-da-da and so he pretty much backed off of that case.  That case went nowhere.  They didn't find enough evidence to charge Becker.  Well, we kept that story on the front page and kept harassing O'Malley.  Well, O'Malley unexpectedly lost the election to Dick Devine [Richard Devine], and that was the first thing that we--during the editorial boards when the candidates would come in, that's one of the things I asked Dick Devine to reopen that Becker-Gould case and he said he would if he was elected and he opened the case and they found, and they charged Becker and they found Becker guilty and Becker went to jail.  I think he may be have since gotten out for some reason.
Speaker 1: He's been released since just last--this past year I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, but he went to jail.  Those are the things that The Defender must do for the community.  Those are inherent responsibilities that they have, and the further that they get away from that the further they get away from their base.  Those stories must appear almost daily.  Some story that the other press doesn't want to touch, but is very important to the black community.
Speaker 1: That's right, does that--without that kind of information there's really no use for the Defender is it?
Speaker 2: There is no use for it if it is not serving that purpose, and that's a--so that's an important role for the entire community not just for the black community.  The black community is just a subset of the entire community.  If the entire community--if one part of that community is not working properly the whole thing is not working, so it's in the best interest of the entire community to have this counter-balanced black press over here that can sound out issues that the general press can't but the general community need to hear in order to let justice and fairness and right prevail so they got to, have to understand that role.
Story_ID: 93398
Speaker 1: Okay, now you've given us some of the strategies that you tried to employ when you were CEO of the [Chicago] Defender, is there anything--other things you can share with us about what you tried to do?
Speaker 2: You remember the things I talked to you about was cutting costs, and you know increasing profits and managing costs and that type of thing.  I looked at duplications in the operation.  Again, there was too much duplication between the newspapers.  For example, health insurance, I could have gotten a better deal on health insurance if I would have insured everyone in the corporation, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Memphis [Tennessee], Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois], put them under an umbrella policy.  Those are the kinds of things that I tried to do but for different reasons wasn't able to implement, but you got to go out and find all these things that--you're a newspaper so you're doing the same thing.  One of the things I did accomplish was to get certain computer equipment for everybody, and I went and did the business office first and came out to the editorial and so finally I think at this date everybody's got updated, operating off the same equipment so when the girl at Chicago in the corporate office pulls up the general ledger, everybody's talking about the same sheet of music as opposed to somebody giving her this and somebody giving her that.  She's almost got her general ledger already put together for her, you know because of the program that we got the other companies on.  So those are some of the things.  I implemented for the corporate office what we call sponsorships, like for example in Detroit we had Co-America Bank sponsor the business section at a tune of like $100,000 a year, we put their name over it, "Sponsored by Mid-America".  Every once and a while we'd run some of their stories, some of their PR stories from the Bank on that, had a little bit more difficulty doing it here in Chicago and the reason was I could play with the other papers, but it was hands-off The Defender with Mr. [John H.H.] Sengstacke.  I had to convince him first.  I didn't have to convince nobody over there (laughter), so we got--they got a lot of things accomplished.  They were able to get like Detroit using that sponsorship technique increase their annual revenue about a million dollars, 'cause we got like ten or fifteen sponsors cracking at $100,000 per year.  We got somebody sponsoring the health section, somebody sponsoring the business section, somebody sponsoring the youth section, all of that was done back in the early '90s [1990s], mid-'90s when we went to the sponsorship program.  It just--it was just always a little harder to implement it in Chicago because Mr. Sengstacke felt that that was his baby, and how could I possibly know more than he did about this (laughter), but so that was always interesting in Chicago.  We--I went to--and Mr. Sengstacke use to send me to all the American, the National Newspaper Association meetings for the major dailies and I would be, me and Jake (unclear) would be the only blacks there, but they had some good ideas and one of them was youth section.  So they always would put out these ideas at these conventions.  I brought that back to Chicago and we put the youth section in Detroit, and we put it in The Defender and that's ten years old now, and it's profitable.  McDonald's sponsors the one in Chicago, I can't recall now who does Detroit, but we're talking about sponsorships of over $100,000 annually.  Those are the kinds of things you need to do to stay afloat.  So we got the University of Chicago [Illinois] to sponsor our health section another hundred grand a year so their stuff is splattered all over the health section, University of Chicago Hospitals.  So you got to change your approach as times change.  You know, the University of Chicago is getting in more black patients and more Medicaid patients and more of this so you know they were interested in going out after this different audience with some preventative health information and that kind of stuff, so that to me is the way to go. Unfortunately, the new guys haven't asked me, but I don't what they--how to help out but I certainly think that's the way to go, yeah.
Story_ID: 93399
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about endorsement of candidates and that sort of thing?  Is there--do you have some rules on how that ought to be done you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--you got to be careful about candidates 'cause that's one of the things that got Mr. [John H.] Sengstacke in trouble.  He formed some--they're good, just like everything else there's bad and there's good.  He formed some alliances with Mayor [Richard] Daley that later on--further on up the road became liabilities and assets from the people.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: You know they started to look at "hey, you in his pocket, or what the hell is going on?  You keep endorsing this guy as the mayor", but the mayor had done a lot of things for Mr. Sengstacke and The Defender and he couldn't--he was trapped.  He could not endorse him even if he wanted to because in the game you got to pay--you gotta pay back some kind of way for things that are done for you.  So he had gotten himself in what I termed entangling alliances that was my word for it, and you're trapped.  There's nothing you can do you know.  So you have to as a newspaper stay as independent as possible and independence means don't let anybody do anything for you, you know and you got to--it's a very tight rope to walk, but you must walk it or you must give the appearance that you're walking it to your community.  Now that's a harder one to pull off (laughter).  You know, not be walking it but to make the people think you're walking it and I use to do like that (hand gestures) you know but so I concluded the best way to go was don't go it.  Don't get in any entanglements now, and during my three years as the publisher I made sure--I didn't want--there is nothing I need you to do for me.  We'll do it ourselves, so at that time during those three years, is I think when we were treated best by the community because I made a purpose to go out to the grass-root organizations, bring them into The Defender and let them talk about their issues and they liked that.  In fact, they see me now and say they don't understand what happened.  They don't that anymore.
Speaker 1: So are these sort of like editorial board meetings or community--?
Speaker 2: They're not doing 'em.
Speaker 1: They're not doing 'em?
Speaker 2: I use to have one every day.  Not only did it satisfy the connection to the community, but it provided me a source for news 'cause I always had a reporter up there.  They didn't have to travel.  The people came to us.  They'd run downstairs and crank me a story out.
Speaker 1: And they were newsmakers?
Speaker 2: They were newsmakers that's right, right, and there were varied issues.  I listened to all of 'em Reverend Williams, Reverend so and so, I know 'em all but I gave 'em an audience and some of the issues were more legitimate than others and some of the issues, I'm sure City Hall didn't want us writing about--about like contracts, you know the number of contracts that the blacks are getting in the community, that type of thing.  We had all that going for us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember that was a big story, I mean the contracts.
Speaker 2: Right, right those are the kind of stories that we published.
Story_ID: 94078
Speaker 1: Just a couple of other questions about The [Chicago] Defender.  What about some of the writers of The Defender that you've worked with over the years?  Who have been some of the more memorable ones, I guess?
Speaker 2: When I came well Ethel Payne wasn't--she wasn't there.  Many of the top writers have gone but when I got there, LaTicia Greggs who went on to be the publisher, who went on to be the managing editor of the newsroom, she was an excellent writer.  Ethan Michaeli he's now running the Residents' Journal for CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], he's an excellent writer.  Ken Green was the sportswriter, he did a superb job, and Scott Noblitt (ph.) was a reporter and he did a super job.  So there's been several good writers during my tenure at the paper, and of course Vernon Jarrett [HM].  I brought Vernon into the paper to write for us and he's--.
Speaker 1: Okay so that's how he got back to it, The Defender right.
Speaker 2: Right that's how he got back.  Mr. [John H.] Sengstacke wouldn't dare bring him back (laughter), but I did after Mr. Sengstacke died.  I brought Vernon back 'cause they had a lot of battles.  Vernon started at the Defender.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I brought Vernon back thinking he could add, you know a perspective to historical coverage of events that took place.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right he's so respected
Speaker 2: Right, right
Speaker 1: Throughout the journalistic world, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Throughout the journalistic world, so I thought that was--he was one of those freelancers in the freelance concept that I had to come back.  I forgot about him when I talked about it earlier.  So you just got to go out there and find the good reporters and try some way to get them back.  Work out some kind of arrangement and the best arrangement I was able to do was a freelance arrangement where they didn't have to be there every day and they could live with the one hundred dollars a story.
Speaker 1: There are so many good ones out there that, you know (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: There are so many good ones out there, there's so many that's why it's all--especially in the Chicago area.  There's no reason not to have talent there at the newspaper, there's no reason at all, right.
Story_ID: 94079
Speaker 1: Okay, now what --tell us about the sale of the paper [Chicago Defender].  Mr. John [H.H.] Sengstacke died in '96 [1996] or was it '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-Seven [1997].
Speaker 1: Ninety-Seven [1997] okay, right and the--there's no provision left in his will to take care of--.
Speaker 2: Right, when Mr. Sengstacke died of course he had a trust, and Northern Trust Bank was the trustee.  It wasn't a bad deal having the sort of biggest trustee out there in the financial world in Chicago being the trustee for your little small account basically, and they had committed themselves to it.  They really didn't want to do it but they had committed themselves to it so they did it, they executed the trust.  After about a year into managing the trust, the granddaughter [Myiti Sengstacke] who had a provision in the trust that she could change trustees.  Well it really wouldn't make sense to change from the best trustee to anybody else, so she tried to float that trust to other banks.  Well their position was if Northern is not going to do it, we damn sure are not going to do it.  So she couldn't find a trustee, another bank.  So she found an individual trustee, it was--I have trouble thinking his name.  It wasn't, yeah Jerome Burke, Jerome working for him--Jim Lowry [James Lowry] was the Trustee.  Of course Jim Lowry doesn't have nearly the resources that Northern Trust has, for example, the charities inherited the property, Mr. Sengstacke's property in Michigan which is about $2.5 million, his estate 183 acres, 83 acres of that is lake, full of bass and other fish, good fishing.  Well when Northern Trust was managing the trust they could afford to keep insurance on that property, pay the taxes, whatever was needed, that wasn't the problem with them, provide security for it everything, but when she was able to get the trust away from Northern Trust it became problematic for Jim Lowry to be able to handle all.  He had no resources, you know.  Northern Trust throw you up under one of those umbrella policies and you are on your way.  So she made a tactical error by getting the trust--taking the trust away from Northern Trust, but Northern Trust knew they had to sell it, and this was all about "no we don't want to sell" we want to keep the paper.  You can't, you don't have any money, she didn't have any money, how is she gonna keep the paper?  The only answer was to sell and they should have sold then because they would have gotten--Northern Trust is a reputable seller, if Northern Trust is selling it is must be worth what they've said it's worth okay?  So you had all the apparatus for a good sale.  She dismantled that when she took it away from Northern Trust, and they were out there flying by the seat of their pants, flying in the wind, and they ended up instead of a sale at Northern Trust wanted to do for $12 million, they ended up doing something for $8 million of which they only got $3, and that $3 was used to pay the lawyers and the trustee and everybody else and they ended up not really getting much of that money themselves.  I think when Northern was selling it they had the potential to get $2 million dollars apiece, the beneficiaries because there were six of them, something where close to $2 not $2 but one point something.  See if Northern had sold it right away you could get rid of--you wouldn't have all those attorneys' fees.  You know who made out after seven years?  The attorneys got all the money (laughter).  It's a crime.  I think each one of them may have gotten $15,000 out the deal.  The rest of the money--they got $3 million dollars upfront and $5 million was put in a note to the beneficiaries.  They'll never see that money.  They will never see it.  Why they would agree to something like that, I have no earthly idea, and I just don't think the new guys have the wherewithal to create those kind of dollars, I know they don't.  I mean how you gon' take a company that's been struggling, but you so good you gon' turn it around.  They've been there a year and it hasn't happened to date, in fact they may slipped a notch or two, so it's not going anywhere as I can see it.  I don't know where it's going to end up; whether it's going to be receivership or what, but I don't think this sale is gonna fly.
Story_ID: 94080
Speaker 1: If you were still in charge of things and they (unclear) what would you do?
Speaker 2: Well I would go back to some of those techniques that I talked about early about sponsorships, about really trying to get some money to buy a press and to consider, seriously consider cutting back to that weekly paper, at least for a short period of time, I mean until--see it's my philosophy, "Why in the hell should I be publishing a daily paper if I can't pay for it?  It's gotta pay for itself if it's a business and then you got a little profit but it is not doing that so something is wrong.  You got to change it.  You can't continue to operate a business losing money.  What the hell is that about, you know (laughter), and I'm sure that's what's happening.  I am not into the details of it now, but I'm just you know looking at it from the outside and I don't like what I see, you know.
Story_ID: 94081
Speaker 1: Okay, now you retired in 19--from 2000, yeah from The [Chicago] Defender (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: From the paper is 2000, actually 2003 yeah, this year.
Speaker 1: This year, all right, all right, and you're now--?
Speaker 2: I'm now the president of the Chicago Defender Charities, right.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little something about the Chicago Defender Charities?
Speaker 2: The Charities is the organization--they've been in business since about 1946 and their primary task was to raise money for the needy in Chicago and their primary vehicle that they use to do was the Bud Billiken Parade.  That generated quite a few dollars for 'em and they would take those dollars--give scholarships to black community, have a Christmas basket giveaway, that's one of their biggest events.  They give Christmas baskets to about 2,000 people annually and they're all people who have met the economic threshold, low income families.  Many of them from the Chicago Housing Projects and Communities, so that's one of the projects that we are working on now, but it's contributing to organizations that are working with youth, South Shore Drill Team, Jesse White Tumblers, those kind of organizations we give to and then providing of scholarships for the needy, low income kids throughout the community.
Story_ID: 94082
Speaker 1: Okay, now Bud Billiken Day Parade is the--now the largest parade in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about the largest parade in the country (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That's what they say, yeah.
Speaker 2: It starts at 10:00 and doesn't end until 4:00 and it's got over 50,000 participants in the parade and it's a community parade and it goes on and on and on.  There are very few people we turn down to be in the parade but everybody complains about being in the back and I'm saying, everybody can't be in the front (laughter) when you've 260 units, but you know it's a constant struggle trying to explain to people why they have to be in the back.
Speaker 1: It's a huge operation.
Speaker 2: It's a huge operation, it really is.
Speaker 1: But now it's televised nationally I think and it's (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes it's televised nationally on Channel 7--Channel 9.
Speaker 1: WGN, yeah.  It plays all over the country you know, really, I know I was surprised when I heard this, the largest parade in the country, but then it is if you really look at it.  It has to be.
Speaker 2: Yeah it is.  So and we add--about two or three years ago, we added a concert and last year I think we ended up biting off more than we could chew because we had B2K as the--its too much.
Speaker 1: The most popular group amongst black teenage girls in the country, right.
Speaker 2: It did not work.  We just didn't have the resources to support it.  I mean I-- you know I took all of the policemen that the police department had just to maintain control.  It used up all the city resources and it just was not a profitable event.  It was great for the young kids they got a chance to see B2K free.  They've never would--they would never seen him, but it's just a bit much when you get those, you get the--I didn't realize who they were you know, until it was too late (laughter) you know.  We couldn't turn it off so we put out the resources to try to handle this as well as we can, but the city was reeling from the E2 incident so they were concerned about--.
Speaker 1: That's the nightclub disaster yeah.
Speaker 2: The nightclub disaster when the kids started pushing up near the front, they "Oh my God, we're gonna have another E2", so after--they made what I thought was a poor decision.  They canceled the concert after B2K, and I'm saying "Why it's over you know, there's nobody gon' be pushing for anybody else.   You let B2K complete it and you continue on and everything is calm".  I guarantee you half of the crowd would have left.  They were for B2K and I mean they were out in record numbers.  We probably had 500,000 young people out there to see B2K, and I'll be a little more prudent next year (laughter) when someone says "concert".
Speaker 1: Have somebody that is not as popular (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right and we did that for a couple of years and it was okay, but you know I thought you know we have--we had an arrangement with the radio station. I said, "well, hell let's go for it".  It was too much, too much, don't have the resources in the city to handle it.  A free concert, there were people that came from Michigan and Indiana, they were out there early in the morning and that's what some of the problems we had with dehydration and that type of stuff 'cause some of those girls were in there at 9:00 a.m. in the morning for a 2:00 show, not drinking water, not doing the things that you should do to stay hydrated.
Story_ID: 94083
Speaker 1: What's the most rewarding aspect of being associated with The [Chicago] Defender?
Speaker 2: To me it was knowing that you were helping the community.  You were sort of the eyes and ears of the community and you could resolve issues and take it back to the community, help them resolve the issues because they were the operatives.  We just put it out there, but you put it out there enough somebody downtown will pay attention to it 'cause they don't want their department being highlighted out there, because I am sure that there are clippings that go in front of the Mayor [Richard] Daley and "What's going on here", you know the question (laughter), you don't want to be the one (laughter), you don't to--I mean the (unclear) would call me personally, "Colonel, you know you gon' have to back off on some of this (laughter), I don't want to be the one (laughter), and nobody, Department of Sewers and Waters and everything, so when you highlight it somebody's paying attention to it downtown.  "Is this a legitimate issue" or some question that would cause the department head to have to respond, and nobody wanted to be to have to do that.
Story_ID: 94084
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well I think the black community is going to survive because they are survivors, but there has to be this greatest emphasis on educating black males.  Educating and training, and this is not--I'm talking about basic education, I'm not talking about college education, I'm talking about you gotta train these black youth to either train or educate them to be a high school graduate or come out of school with some type of skill that can be transferred to the job market.  That's how they have to come out of high school, you know.  So you come out of high school with a certain percentage that are gonna go to college, that's almost a given.  You come out with a certain amount that are going to go immediately into the work force and never see anybody's college.  I'm not sure that you can change those numbers significantly, so you focus on 'em.  The ones that are going to college, college prep, all these kinds of things.  The one that is gonna go out to the job market, training skills that are gonna put them out into the market, and try to increase that number that graduate from high school, and I think that's how you will help and save the entire community, because they guys become a detriment to the entire system.  I mean you know they're talking about it costs more for somebody to go to jail than to go to college.  That makes a lot of sense, but that's the facts of it, you know, so you gotta keep black males out of jail and you do that by training them to be good citizens, and participating in the community as opposed to participating against the community, that type of thing and that's what I'd like to see happen.  In fact the property that Mr. [John H.] Sengstacke has up in Michigan, one of my dreams is to take that property and make it like a camp for inner-city youth where they come up a certain period of the year, summer school, we haven't go to those details and really teach them fundamental skills of--life skills, okay?  It may be as simple as what you do in the morning as you get up.  You may do some exercises, you may go wash up, brush your teeth and then you come have breakfast, you know, that's the routine we run.  Those types of things, kind of pattern it after a little military modeling.  See if we can take some twelve to fifteen-year-olds and get them ready for manhood basically, that's one of the things I'd like to do with that property instead of turning it into a resort or retreat or something like that.  You know, do something with it that's going to benefit the community.
Story_ID: 94085
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, when you look back on your career in the military and with the illustrious Chicago Defender, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope I did the same thing in the military that I would have done at The Defender and that is helping the organization, the [U.S.] Army by making all of its soldiers better, but particularly focusing on its black soldiers to kind of uplift them a little bit and let them fit into the puzzle a lot better, making sure that they were treated fairly, recognized when they made accomplishments, got the right jobs and those kinds of things what I tried to do in the military to make sure that both--you know when I retired from the military, I had civilians--military department and Army civilians and military working for me and I (unclear) want to see a representative number of blacks in positions of leadership and authority on this base from the civilian side and also from the military side, and that's what I tried to do and the same thing with The Defender is to try to improve the lot of the community by publishing, you know, relevant issues in the newspaper that help provide more jobs, better education and those kinds of things for the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on all the things you've done, is there anything that you would do differently that stands out?
Speaker 2: Not significantly different.  I think I've done it, I did it how I would liked to have done it, you know to be compassionate and concerned about my fellow human beings and I wouldn't you know have tried to put self over the good of the general community, so I would pretty much do it the same.
Story_ID: 94086
Speaker 1: And the last question is how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: A person that cared, cared for the soldier, cared for the community and that's good enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No accolades.  I tell people now I've got enough medals and plaques to cover two offices so I don't need any more recognition for anything.  The recognition I get now is to make sure that young people are taken care of that are out there that are kind of wandering, lost and aimlessly.  That would make me feel good if some of them were saved.
Story_ID: 94087
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, there is one last thing and that's the [National] African American Military Museum and the Old Chicago Army on Giles, yeah and the high school that that's become [Chicago Military Academy] and you're involved in that.
Speaker 2: Right, again that museum is to sort chronicle, collect and display those relevant items and artifacts that portray the contribution of black Americans to the armed services.  So they can kind of look back with pride and know the contributions that blacks have made to the military.  We've been involved in every conflict that this country has had from the Indian Wars with the colonies to Desert Storm.  It's always been about a certain proportionate numbers that kind of reflect our population.  The number that we kill, the number that participated so we need to know that so they can grow up proud of where they were and kind of look to the future knowing that Blacks have been honored for their military service, and in many case weren't but they still--still came back and participated irregardless of some of the discriminatory practices here in America, they still signed up and went to fight and young people need to know that and now that and know what that struggle was about like when I met, I'm not sure of the gentlemen's name that was with the Tenth Cav [cavalry].  I mean these people continually pay prices for people that come after them and they need to know that.  I mean I didn't become a tank battalion Commander without somebody paying a price at some earlier time and he was the guy that paid his price that enabled me to be able to go and do the things that I was able to do and I want young, I want all youth to see that, but I want particularly the black youths to understand it, but there comes a time when everybody in Chicago [Illinois] must go into the African American Military Museum to help make them better people about a group of people that have made a significant contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much, Sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, my pleasure.
Speaker 1: Alright.
