Story_ID: 19719
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm Interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm Eugene Sawyer, E-U-G-E-N-E, S-A-W-Y-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 9/3/34 [September 3, 1934]..
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Greensboro, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm presently retired now.  I was formerly--the last job I had, I was working at Crown Energy [Technologies] on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And you are formerly?
Speaker 2: Formerly the Mayor of the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, that's a big (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And a member of the City Council also.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: For eighteen years--seventeen years, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 29th of January, 2003.
Speaker 1: Right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: 7801 S. Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], my basement.
Story_ID: 19720
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I like--I have so many favorites, you know, but I'm trying to see.  I like macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Mexico.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That's a difficult--I guess I like the Golden Rule, "As you would man do for you, do you so to them".
Story_ID: 19721
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family tree and see how far you can go back.  How far can you trace your family back?  I mean how far do they go?  Do they go back into the 19th century?  Do you have any information like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--my dad [Eugene Sawyer Sr.] tells us that we are part of the Black Crete Indian tribe.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Creeks, that's C-R-E-E-K?
Speaker 2: C-R-E-T-E, I think, Black Crete Indians.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandparents or your parents pass on any stories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, both of my--not too much.  Both of my parents passed.  But I did get some things probably--I don't remember them now, from my granddaddy.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they talk about what your family was doing during, prior to the Civil War or after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were your ancestors farmers or were they--
Speaker 2: My dad was a mortician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, he did, also did Interior Decorating also.  And my grandfather had a great book that's in the, still--I guess it's still in the family someplace.  I don't know where it is now.  But he used to be an artist. He drew pictures and it was really amazing.  I used to look at those pictures for a long time.  But when he, when he passed and my dad passed, my aunt came and got the book.  His sister came and got the book.  And we never saw it anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, is your aunt still alive?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she's got it basically.
Speaker 2: Well, she might have passed it on to another aunt, another sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandfather and my grandmother.
Speaker 1: On your father's side or mother's side?
Speaker 2: Father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did they tell you anything about the family history or--
Speaker 2: Not much.  No.  Unfortunately, during those years, we didn't really get much into the history of the black America.  We sort of just hung together.
Story_ID: 19722
Speaker 1: Could you give us your father's name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My dad's name is the same as mine [Eugene Sawyer], but he's a Senior and I'm a Junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was he born or--
Speaker 2: My dad was born in nineteen three.
Speaker 1: 1903?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in Alabama, that same part [Greensboro]?
Speaker 2: Born in the same place, right.  And Mama [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer] was born in the same place.
Speaker 1: All right, now what was your father like, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My dad was a mortician and he did Interior Decorating on the side.  But he was a very, very strong person, direct and didn't take any nonsense from us, definitely, and, of course, from anybody else.  Of course, that was a time that you really didn't expect things in the South, you know.  It was during those early years, and segregation was very prevalent during those years, but my dad was a very well respected man in town.
Speaker 1: Now, did he talk about how he became mortician?  Do you know how he became a mortician?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't, and I didn't like (laughter) the profession anyway, you know, but my dad used to tease us all the time and say, a lot of people just--cemetery people, they're dying to get in there, you know (laughter).  He had a thing in the morgue of, I think it said, what did it say--it was something about a guy who was--I don't really remember that joke.  It was really a crazy joke, but it was really funny.  But he was a mortician and he did decorating work also.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you know, being a mortician in the South in those days, oftentimes a black mortician was the biggest guy in town in terms of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, either the preacher or the mortician.  So I mean, you know, was he fairly well off?
Speaker 2: He would do--we did pretty good.  Now, funny my daughter is a mortician and my uncle is also a mortician, from my, my mother's brother.  He was also a mortician.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, you know, and from what I know, that's pretty good, you know, being a mortician in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, in those years people down South, they sort of took the burial insurance, but it was a different type thing for morticians.  You don't really make that kind of money that you would make here in Chicago [Illinois], say.  You remember [Smith and] Gaston's Funeral Home in the South, A.G. Gaston?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He had an insurance company, and he insured people for 5 cents a, for 5 cents a week or something like that, 2 cents a week.  And when a person died, he had to use that insurance, that policy.  And they also bought the casket.  And it was just a normal little casket.  It wasn't really--and people didn't spend extra money on it, you know, on the funeral.  So it sort of kept the costs of the funeral down for the, kind of affordable for people, a lot of people, particularly a lot of people in the South because there were a lot of farmers in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your father never talked about where he went to school or how he got--how he decided to become a mortician?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.  We didn't--we didn't get into that unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you grandfather do?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a decorator.  But he didn't, really explain a lot of things to us in that respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he had his own business?  He was a contractor or he would like decorate places?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Painting and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Just painting, right.
Story_ID: 19723
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about mother.  What is her name and--
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Bernice, maiden name was Bernice Mauldin.  And she was a very quiet and calm person.
Speaker 1: Now, can you spell her name for us and give her--
Speaker 2: B-E-R-I-
Speaker 1: --give us her birth date too, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: B-E-R-N-I-C-E, M-A-U-L-D-I-N.  She was born January 16th, and mother was 79 years old when she passed.  But she was born, I believe, in 1911, I think it was.  She passed here in Chicago [Illinois] at Rush [Presbyterian] Hospital, had colon cancer.  But she was very, she was a lunchroom manager.  She did go to the lunchroom.  She was a housewife for a number of years.  And later on, she went to the--my dad had several strokes.  And, of course, he passed.  And she went to the lunchroom to work.  And she worked as a Lunchroom Manager at the school, local school.  And she worked in the lunchroom for a number of years.  And she later on became the manager of the lunchroom.  And, once she worked there, she kind of finally came back to Chicago and lived the rest of her life, when she passed.  But she was a very quiet person, direct, didn't take any nonsense from us, but a very soft-spoken person, just like I am.  I think I took more from my mother than I did from my dad [Eugene Sawyer Sr.].  My brother Charles [Sawyer] took more from my dad, but, of course, Dad was a gruff, you know, he was rough, didn't take any nonsense.  But my, Mom was very quiet, easy going.
Story_ID: 19724
Speaker 1: Did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: We never got into that, never talked about it.  I kind of wish a lot of things we had talked about, but, you know, we were born in the South.  You know, they said children should be, be--what is that old saying?  Children shouldn't be--
Speaker 1: Should be seen and not heard?
Speaker 2: Seen and not heard, right.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that too.  I mean a lot of families do that.
Speaker 2: And they don't--didn't take any nonsense in that respect, you know.  You didn't talk when adults were talking.  You didn't move around.  You just sat there and be quiet.
Speaker 1: Is this policy that you've changed, you know, in your life since you've--or do you think it's a--what do you think about in retrospect?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's a good policy, you know.  I, I've--with my kids, I began to talk more to them and explain to them, different things.  We discuss things.  My sons--I have two boys and one girl.  And I have four grandkids, four girl--three girls and one boy.  I finally got a grandson.  And he's just two and a half years old.  But we talk about things and issues.  They discuss things.  And they give me their opinion, and I give them mine.  And we, so we try to hit a balance as to what we feel is the proper direction to take.
Story_ID: 19725
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up--and you grew up in Greensboro [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, give us an idea of what it was like.  What were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up in the South was a difficult time, you know.  You had to grow up--you know, we, during the time you grew up, you know, you probably couldn't walk on the same sidewalk with a white person.  They didn't--we were in a small, rural town.  And you acted the way, whatever the area mandated, that's what you did.  I went to a local high school.  The, on the, this side of town was the black kids.  On the other side of town was the white high school.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to take you to high school yet.  I want to talk about your early life first before we get you to high school.
Speaker 2: Well, my early life was going to Sunday school on Sundays and helping with the chores of the household around the house.  We all pitched in, and worked together.  My sister, Melanie, who's next to me.  She washed the dishes, and, of course, I did the garbage and stuff like that.  But we all made sure that things run smoothly in the household.
Speaker 1: Now, how many brothers and sisters and were there?
Speaker 2: There were 4 boys and 2 girls.
Speaker 1: Four boys and two girls?  And where do you fall in the--
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  My sister's next to me.
Speaker 1: Do you mind naming them all for us?
Speaker 2: My sister, Melanie is next to me.  My sis--my brother, John is next to her, and my brother, Ernest is next to him.  My brother Charles is next to her.  My sister, Shirley, is the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Go ahead, now, what did you like to do as a kid other than--I mean I know you liked chores and everything (laughter), but what--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't like chores, but play.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of things did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Skate.  During those years, I used to love to skate.
Speaker 1: Just sidewalk skating--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Trying to find a smooth surface somewhere, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, was the black community paved?
Speaker 2: Well, the main streets were, but, because I know next to our house, the main street was paved.  We lived on the corner.  And one street going to, just say south of our house, one side of the house, it wasn't paved.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I know in a lot of the places in the South, even now, the black community is not paved, you know, even today?
Speaker 2: I heard a story the other night, a guy was telling a story about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and said, he said, I want you to do one thing when you get to Heaven, when you get up here, I want to do one thing for me.  Tell all of black people in the South to start naming all those unpaved streets after me (laughter).  There are a lot of unpaved streets still.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So you would skate, like to skate.
Speaker 2: Liked to skate.
Speaker 1: And what else?
Speaker 2: That's about it.  I used to like to ride my bike.  See, we didn't have the problem that the kids have here, you know.  Kids would take your bike, you know, you could leave your bike outside in front of your house, in the yard.  It could stay out there all night.  The next morning your bike is still there.  But I used to love to ride my bike.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a lot of friends in the neighborhood to play with?
Speaker 2: Yes, I lived next door to white people, all around me were white people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, therefore--
Speaker 2: I had a lot of black friends, though.  I loved them.
Speaker 1: So your family kind of had to, really kind of stay tight, I guess, in that situation--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of being surrounded like that.
Story_ID: 19726
Speaker 1: What was the name of your father's funeral parlor?
Speaker 2: Sawyer Funeral Home.
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: And did you ever hang out at the funeral home?
Speaker 2: Un-un, never did.  I remember once my dad [Eugene Sawyer Sr.] had told, he said, I'm gonna leave, I'll leave you $25 if you go and change the embalming fluid in the vault.  I said, "No, Dad, un-un, can't do that."  I said, "I'm afraid to do that."  I didn't want to do that.
Speaker 1: So you wanted nothing to do with it?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  But strangely, I wanted to be a doctor, though.  In fact, when I went to college, I took a pre-med course.  But I didn't want to do that.
Story_ID: 19727
Speaker 1: You lived in an area where you the only black family surrounded by white families, were you--was the black, well, it was small town, I guess the black community was close by, right?
Speaker 2: It was some blacks that lived right on this side of the white people and some blacks lived behind us.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up, did you ever experience any dramatic forms of racial prejudice or anything?  Like did you see anybody really violated, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was, we were, a group of us was coming home one night, and a guy, the guys were coming down the street in a truck.  And they threw a--we thought it was urine, but it wasn't.  It was water.  They threw it on us, you know, and kept going.  I came home steaming one night.  My dad [Eugene Sawyer Sr.] said, calm down.  And that was the end of it.  We never, I hadn't experienced any other difficulty at all.
Speaker 1: So people in that town basically kind of got along with other fairly well--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: In fact, I used to tutor one of the little white girls next door in math.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there was no big deal made out of that?
Speaker 2: No.  Not at all.
Story_ID: 19728
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Where did you go to school and--
Speaker 2: I went Hale County Training [High] School [Greensboro, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Hale County?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went to go, to a place called Stephen Memorial, the grammar school.
Speaker 1: It was called, what?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Stephen Memorial Grammar School [NOT FOUND].
Speaker 1: Stephen Memorial, okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I got paddled.  I got spanked, and I was a naughty kid, you know.
Speaker 1: Were you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit, you know.  I remember throwing tacks on the guys, you know, and stuff like that, you know, childhood pranks, you know.  But I got a good education, had good teachers, good disciplinarians.  They didn't take any nonsense.
Speaker 1: Did you like to read when you coming up?
Speaker 2: Love to read, still like to read.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: I guess math and science--biology.
Speaker 1: Now, and were there any teachers that took a particular interest in you that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember one lady.  I can't remember her name was Ms. Day, in grammar school.  She didn't take any nonsense from anybody.  And she paddled me quite a bit, you know.  But then I had that lady named Ms. Hope, who was our math teacher.  She was a very interesting person.  I think she's still teaching.
Speaker 1: Really, now, she's still teacher?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  From the last time I talked to my brother, she was still teaching.
Speaker 1: So you still have relatives in Alabama now?
Speaker 2: I have, my aunt's the only one.  She lives in Tuscaloosa [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Now, are there any, is there anything in grade school that happened that you remember?  What was the biggest thing to happen to you in grade school?  Can you think of anything?
Speaker 2: In high school, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay, but not in grade school?
Speaker 2: No, nothing grade school.
Speaker 1: So you were in trouble a lot in grade, but you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --like science.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well tell me about high school then.  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Hale County Training School.  There was a lot of activity in high school.
Speaker 1: Now, I know you played football.  I heard, I read--
Speaker 2: Yes, I played football.  I wish I could have played basketball, but I didn't.  I played football.
Speaker 1: But did you like football a lot?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you were a quarterback, I understand (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played quarterback, yeah.  In fact, the fellow who used to be the, the wide receiver--of course, they changed the name of all that stuff now, but he was an end.  And I went, he like lived out in the suburbs, I went out to see him at a program once.  And he's still active and, but he talks a lot about football.  And we had an opportunity to, to visit each other and talk about our years in college.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Robert Wiggins.
Speaker 1: So he lives here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He lives in--oh, boy, what's--it's out south, I mean west, that is.
Speaker 1: Bellwood [Illinois], Maywood [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: When this new, when they got the, the first Crystal Creme--Krispy Kreme Donut place.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I know what you're talking about.  I can't--
Speaker 2: He lives--
Speaker 1: Berwyn [Illinois], or, it's almost in Berwyn, yeah--
Speaker 2: Where that, Krispy Kreme, that's where he lives.
Speaker 1: --down the street, West, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a quarterback in high school on the football team?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you all have a good team?
Speaker 2: We had a pretty good football team.  We had a real rival which was U. S. Jones High School in a place Demopolis, Alabama.  They used to give us a tough time.  But we were able to beat them, I believe once, in my 3 or--3 or 4 years playing football.
Speaker 1: Now, why didn't you play basketball?  You wanted to play, you said, but you didn't play.
Speaker 2: I didn't play.  We didn't have a very good basketball team.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, but why didn't you play though?  I mean did you--I mean did you try out for the team or did you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't try out.
Speaker 1: Okay, what other activities did you engage in in high school?  What other things were you doing?
Speaker 2: That was about it, football.  That was about it.  We didn't--I didn't play anything else.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in any clubs or anything or any social activities in high school?
Speaker 2: Most kids in Southern schools were on the Voice Clubs.  And I was a part of that activity.  And it's been so long ago, you know, I hate to think how many years it's been since I graduated from high school, been a long time, been almost 50 years.
Speaker 1: It seems though, as you look over it, there's a pattern of--I mean you're a quarterback on the football team.  Did you run for any offices in high school?
Speaker 2: I was president of the class.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's significant.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I think that's significant, you know, that you were president of the class.  And you seem to always be in a leadership role, you know.
Speaker 2: And I was salutatorian of my senior class, graduating class.
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: A good friend of mine who was also wide receiver, Willie Ballard, who was the valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, how many people were in your school?
Speaker 2: How many in that class--I don't really remember exactly how many were in that class.  I guess it was somewhere over a hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about a hundred people graduated from--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: That's a decent size.
Speaker 2: It was a nice sized class.
Speaker 1: All right, and they had like a black high school and a white high school?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so how did you become president of the school?  Now, this is--can you remember what the process was and what you did?  Were you drafted by the students or did you, or did you want to do it?
Speaker 2: It's been so long.  I don't really remember the process.  I remember we used to, used to, when, you know, kids come to school at the beginning of the school year, kids come from rural areas and come into the high school there.  And we used to hang out on the corners and watch and see what pretty girls was gonna come to school and which ones were we gonna want to target in class.  You know, we had a lot of pretty girls in this school.
Speaker 1: That's a sideline to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --political ambition.  How did you manage to run for president of the student class, I mean the student body?  I mean how did that happen?  Do you remember at all?
Speaker 2: I think there was proc--a nomination process.  I think that was, that was the way and elected by the simple majority.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did--you seem awful shy about it, but I suppose you were, people thought highly of you, I guess, if they nominated you, huh?
Speaker 2: You're right.  You know, we were--usually people picked individuals based on the fact that they were students who were good students, you know, had good grades and decent character.  And we didn't have much opposition because the students who ran for president didn't have any opposition at all.
Speaker 1: So you ran unopposed--
Speaker 2: Unopposed, right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, so what other activities were you engaged in?  Now, you ran for--we've covered the big one, your running for the student body president, but what else, what else did you do?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Were you involved in music or anything?
Speaker 2: No, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Did they have any clubs associated with the sciences that you were in?
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Story_ID: 19729
Speaker 1: Are there any high school administrators or teachers that stand out in your development at that time or, or coaches or anybody like that?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a coach named Warren Baugh--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: W-A-R-R-E-N, B-A-U-G-H.  And one guy who came to Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama], we used to call him Ox Sullivan.  He was a big, tall, husky guy.
Speaker 1: Ox Sullivan?  How do you spell his name, his first name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember Sullivan's first name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just remember the guys used to call him Ox Sullivan.  He was so big and tall.
Speaker 1: Oh, Ox, O-X.
Speaker 2: O-X, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I had another coach.  His name was William Perkins.  Those were some very interesting coaches, very dedicated.  And we were--we used to travel sometimes in the coach's car.  I remember once we went to north Alabama, and on a bus going to a football game.  And we had to get out of the bus.  And the football players had to push the bus up this, up the hill.  The bus couldn't make it up the hill with a, with a full load of students.  We traveled quite a bit.
Story_ID: 19730
Speaker 1: We went to play a football team that was pretty rough.  And that was the one time that I got roughed up pretty good.  I got the, my whole elbows all skinned up and skinned up my face.  And my mom [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer] got angry cause she didn't want me to play football anymore.  But that was just part of the, part of the game.
Speaker 2: Now, what kind of equipment did you all play in in those days?
Speaker 1: We had shoulder pads, kidney pads and we pretty much had the normal equipment.
Speaker 2: That people have now?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: What kind of helmet was it?  Were you all wearing those soft helmets or you're wearing those, the hard helmets?
Speaker 1: We wore the hard helmets.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you have face guards?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head, no)
Speaker 2: That's the difference--
Speaker 1: That really makes a difference--
Speaker 2: That's a big difference.
Speaker 1: I didn't have the face guards cause I got skinned up all over, all around there.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And what were your school colors?
Speaker 1: Black and gold, same as my fraternity colors up there.
Speaker 2: Okay, A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, in high school, it was--can you remember anything else about high school you want to tell us?
Speaker 1: That's about it.  It was a pleasant experience.
Story_ID: 19731
Speaker 1: You were in high school being the student body president, the salutatorian and what were you thinking about doing when you, on graduation class day?  What did you think you would do with, next?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I really wanted to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But my dad [Eugene Sawyer, Sr.] and my, my mom [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer] wanted me close to home, naturally.  And I wanted to be close to home, naturally, because my mom was a good cook.  And I liked to eat.  And Montgomery [Alabama] seemed to be a closer place.  So my mom's--we applied and we got accepted at Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And that's where we went.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was Montgomery like?  Was that a lot different from Greensboro [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: A lot different.
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: Well, because it was the capital. The capital was right down the street from Alabama State College.
Story_ID: 19732
Speaker 1: That was the beginning of the, in my second, third year in college, when we really got involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  We really had to, the capital [Montgomery, Alabama] being right down the street, we had Dr. [Martin Luther] King's house being right down the street from the capital, so we had to do our best to try to protect his house.
Speaker 2: Now, I heard or read that the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church was right--
Speaker 1: Right down the street from the capital, right.  And right up the, up the hill is the capital.  Right down at the bottom of the hill is the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: All right, and that's the scene for the organizing of the Montgomery Bus Boycott?
Speaker 1: Right.  That church and Reverend [Ralph] Abernathy's church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so tell us about that.  I mean how did--when did you find out or get, become aware that all that was going on in Montgomery?
Speaker 1: I think that a radio station is what I'm told, you know, and I was there, but I wasn't listening to the radio.  But they said that they decided to boycott the buses.  And they wanted really to try to figure how to get the word out.  And they had no way of getting the word out.  They couldn't pass out any leaflets like that.  But I think some maid heard the, heard, heard about the boycott.  And she told her boss that the black folks were gonna boycott the buses the next day.  And, of course, the lady called the radio station right away, and that's how we got the word out that the boycott was gonna happen the next day.  And, you know, it was really amazing to see people walking.  I mean I could--I got up the next morning.  I saw people walking, tradesmen carrying their tools on the side and people walking with him, and people really committed.  They really were committed to doing whatever their leaders told them they wanted done.  That was one time that black folks really stuck together.  And they were--and people walking everywhere.
Speaker 2: Now, what were you students talking about when this was going on, and what was the word on campus?
Speaker 1: Well, during the time on campus, we had a boycott going on, on the dining hall, the dining hall and the, you know, toilets in the washrooms and paper towels and things.  All those kinds of things were happening.  And we didn't really get the amount of attention that we would have gotten because the boycott was going on.  So we were able to actively do our boycotting at, and at a certain point in time we were able to successfully achieve what we set out to do.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the students got better food and toilet paper and all the things that--
Speaker 1: (Nodding yes) Got all the things they wanted.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that was occurring just as the Montgomery bus boycott--
Speaker 1: Right, was going on, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did the school administration give you all advice about the boycott?  Did they try to keep you from participating or--
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: --did they encourage you to participate or--
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: We had the good sense that it was best that we stay away from the boycott.  And we didn't want to get kicked out of school.  That was the thing because this was a state-supported school.  So we didn't involve too much in it, but quietly--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but did the school tell you that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did the school administrators say you will be kicked out of school if you participate?
Speaker 1: No, no, they didn't tell us that.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you figured it might--
Speaker 1: Figured it.
Speaker 2: Just kind of figured that might be the case?
Speaker 1: Figured it might be the case, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, so what happened next?  I mean did you all get involved in it at all?
Speaker 1: Quietly, yes.
Speaker 2: And what happened?  What was that involvement about?
Speaker 1: Well, there were some friends of mine who were students and ministers, T. Y. Rogers and Harold Carter, they were ministers.  And they were ministers and they got involved with the, Dr. King.  In fact, T. Y. Rogers was killed in Atlanta [Georgia] driving to work.  He worked with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  But that was after we graduated from college.  But during the time we went to college, we were all members of the same fraternity, and we all stuck together.  And they say, you hang, hang together or hang separately, whatever you choose.  And we figured it's best to hang together.  So we worked with T. Y. and Harold Carter.  And we were sort of acted, somewhat as a--taking Dr. King to the post office and places like that, but not the sit-ins.  But we didn't, well, unfortunately, we were not with him when they blew up his house.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, now, describe what happened when his house was bombed?
Speaker 1: Well, we were in our rooms in the dormitory, and we heard the--the news travels very quickly there, you know.  And, of course, he didn't want anybody to act or do anything silly.  He just said to the people, just go home.  Things will be okay.  And we followed his advice.
Speaker 2: So you all went over to his house after you heard it had been bombed?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And he talked to you all directly?
Speaker 1: He talked to a crowd of people.
Speaker 2: Now, did anybody just leave?  Did anybody like try to protect him or protect his house?  Were there people with--armed people around trying to protect or, you know,--
Speaker 1: I'm not aware of any, but we followed his advice.
Speaker 2: Okay, so students went back--
Speaker 1: Went home.
Speaker 2: Okay, is that the, is that the most dangerous part of the experience in Montgomery, do you think?
Speaker 1: I think so.  I do remember students turning over a car, coming through the campus.
Speaker 2: Now, what students, you mean the students at Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama]--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --turned over a car?  Whose car was it, and why--
Speaker 1: I, I don't know, very frankly.  I really don't know.  But I remember seeing the car turned over.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you don't know who it was?
Speaker 1: I really don't know who it was.
Speaker 2: Did students do anything else to help with the boycott, the bus boycott, besides serving as bodyguards?  I mean did students do other things?
Speaker 1: There were fundraising campaigns going on and (unclear) on the streets.  We worked stopping cars, getting contributions.  We did that.
Speaker 2: Did any of you all have cars that you used to help?
Speaker 1: No, we didn't have any cars?
Speaker 2: The days--before black students had cars on campus (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  No, we weren't that lucky.
Speaker 2: Now, they all have cars.
Speaker 1: Now, they all have cars, right.
Speaker 2: So, did you attend Dexter Avenue Baptist Church or did you ever go over there for a meeting?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hum, used to love to hear Dr. King speak.  He was such a, just an orator, I mean he was good.
Speaker 2: Now, Abernathy's church was First Baptist [Church], is that what it was?
Speaker 1: I think it was First Baptist.
Speaker 2: And I think when Dexter came out of that church in the old days, and that's how they got two Baptist churches.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Did you ever go to his church?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, in 1956, now, you graduated in '56, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Now, that was a, one exciting year, I guess.
Speaker 1: Right, it was.
Speaker 2: You graduated from college and--how did that make you feel, you know, all of that activity?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I was particularly happy one year when Dr. King first came to the campus, you know, we used to have to go to vespers, that is evening service that the student usually prepare to go to sleep in the afternoon because you can't spend the time with your girlfriend on the campus sitting on the lawn.  So we had to go to vespers that day.  And they said, Dr. Martin Luther King was gonna be a speaker.  And we all got together and our, with our friends.  And Dr. King came up to the rostrum, and he looked down at the crowd, you know, and he stood and paused for a few minutes.  And he said, when Jesus was on the mountain and tempted by the devil, he said, cast yourself down and, and I know you can do it because you're of the Lord.  And he turned these stones to bread.  It was a moment of difficult decision.  And he started to expound from there on.  He spoke elo--very eloquently.  And it's interesting, he was fine orator.  He kept our attention.  We couldn't hardly--we were on the end of our seats at the end of his speech.
Speaker 2: So he transformed a sleepy experience into a--
Speaker 1: A wide awake experience, wide awake.
Speaker 2: Now, did you run for any offices in college?  Were you the head of anything in college?
Speaker 1: No, I really wasn't.
Speaker 2: But you're a member of the Alphas and--
Speaker 1: Member of the Alpha Phi [Alpha] fraternity.
Speaker 2: Alpha Phi, okay.  Now, can you remember what stage the boycott was in when you graduated?  Had they finished their negotiations yet or where was it?
Speaker 1: Let's see, I came out in the summer of '56.  I'm not sure if they were--they were practically, almost through with the boycott by then I think.
Speaker 2: Now, did you--how did you feel about all the media attention Montgomery was getting on T.V. cause I know when you weren't--I mean not being in Montgomery as a kid, I saw it on T.V. all the time, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's the whole, you know, if it didn't get the attention, we wouldn't have been able to achieve what we achieved in Montgomery.
Speaker 2: Were there a lot of reporters in town at that time?  Did you see a lot of T.V.--
Speaker 1: Not around the campus, but they were, I'm sure in town.  And we didn't get down, down to the courthouse to the hearings, you know.  But I'm sure they were there.
Speaker 2: Okay, is there anything else you want to tell us about that time?
Speaker 1: No, it was just an exciting time.
Speaker 2: Did you have a sense that things were changes in the country then, that--
Speaker 1: Hopefully, they were.  But I found out later, they weren't.  And it still haven't changed that much.
Story_ID: 19733
Speaker 1: What did you do when you graduated from Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, I went home and my wife [Veronica Sawyer] was expecting at the time--
Speaker 1: Did you meet your wife in school?
Speaker 2: She was queen of campus, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was what?
Speaker 2: Queen of campus.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's significant.  I always find these things out after we (laughter)--well, that's significant, I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, she--
Speaker 1: And did you get married in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was Ms. Alabama State.  And I applied for--I didn't really apply for--I applied for a job in Montgomery, but--they called me, but they called me a week too late cause I got a call from another school in Mont--in Mississippi.  And that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Now, you went there to teach?
Speaker 2: Right, I taught math.
Speaker 1: Okay, to teach math.  All right, so where did you go in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Prentiss, Mississippi, Prentiss Institute.
Speaker 1: And what was that like?  Was that different from Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes, totally different.  The children weren't as desirable as you'd like them to be.  It was a private school.  And they had a dormitory.  And the men stayed with the students.  And it wasn't the most--I remember coming home one night after going to Alabama for a weekend, come back--well, I was going to New Orleans [Louisiana] cause my wife was in New Orleans, so I went to New Orleans and I came back home for the weekend.  And I had the walk, say from here to, to Dominick's.  Pitch black.  You couldn't see anything because there were no street lights.  I mean I was shaky and scared to death.
Speaker 1: So Mississippi, that part of Mississippi was a lot different from--
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes.)
Speaker 1: --your small hometown [Greensboro, Alabama] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  It was a lot different from my small hometown.  This place is smaller than my hometown.  And it wasn't a desirable situation.
Speaker 1: You said the teachers had to live with the students?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes.)
Speaker 1: Okay, which meant, that meant your wife couldn't be there with you?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no.)
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No, she stayed at home with my mother [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer].  And then she went home with her mother.
Speaker 1: And that was in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you all really never got a break.  You were with the students twenty-four hours a day, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And the way you described it, I don't think you liked it very much?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it took a lot of getting used to, you know.  But I finally got used to it.
Speaker 1: Did you have some good experiences there as a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, other than the fact the kids didn't like math.  I found that out.  But we worked it out.
Speaker 1: So, well, what did you do next after you--how long did you stay in Prentiss?
Speaker 2: Just a year.
Story_ID: 19734
Speaker 1: And I went down to, back to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And we just decided to come to Chicago [Illinois].  I had my mom's [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer]--my aunt and my uncle were here.  And I used to come here during the summer anyway.  And I had some cousins.  And we got a small apartment at 52nd and Wells.  And, you know, you had the community bathrooms and all that stuff, you know.  So that, you know, that took a lot of getting used to my--again, for me because, you know--
Speaker 2: It was like a rooming house situation?
Speaker 1: Right.  Community kitchen and everything, you know.  So I worked through it.  And I applied for a job as a chemist.  And the lady told me--she was very honest, she said, you probably are qualified.  But I'm might--might as well tell you the truth.  We don't have any vacancies for you.
Speaker 2: For you?
Speaker 1: (Nodding yes) You know, I thanked, you know, and went on about my business to the next place.  And finally I applied for a job at Rockwood Sprinkler Corporation.  That's where I worked for two years.
Speaker 2: What's that called again?
Speaker 1: Rockwood Sprinkler Corporation.
Speaker 2: Rockwood Sprinkler--
Speaker 1: They made automatic sprinkler systems.  Yeah, put them together, threading and from a quarter inch to 8-inch pipes.
Speaker 2: And so you're basically doing like plumbing-type work, right, or--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Was it underground sprinkler systems that they installed at people's houses or--
Speaker 1: Overhead sprinkler systems.
Speaker 2: For buildings?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We put those systems together, and we didn't--they would, did the prefabrication work, you know.  We'd thread the pipe and whatever length, we cut the pipe and thread it, bundled it, throw it on the truck and send it on about its business.  Whatever the job called for, that's what we did.  It was a lot of manual labor.
Speaker 2: Okay, so and then the two years, and then did you finally get a job with a chemist?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to, where there was labor in the filtration plant.  And there was a guy, strange enough, from Mississippi.  His name was John R. Bayliss.  He was an expert in water purification.  And the other guy James Vaughn.  They were both experts in water purification.  So Vaughn grabbed me up one day and said, say you're a college graduate.  I'm gonna put you, put these books together for us in the library upstairs, you know.  There's things just been lingering around here, and we haven't had anybody to spend any time with it.  So I'm gonna put you in the library.  They put me in the library working with putting the library together.  And finally, he said, well, got a spot in laboratory now.  You want to try it out?  They put me in the lab.  That's where I worked until I ran for alderman.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--now, what was the name of it?  This is the--see, I thought you were a city chemist with the city?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Water, in water purification.
Speaker 2: Water purification, okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Have you ever visited the filtration plant?
Speaker 2: No, not--I think it's--
Speaker 1: That's an interesting--
Speaker 2: --not where I've gone through--
Speaker 1: That's an interesting trip, very interesting.
Speaker 2: Is that the one over here in the 4th ward, where the--
Speaker 1: It's the one on--
Speaker 2: South Chicago?
Speaker 1: On Cheltenham Place.
Speaker 2: Shelter?
Speaker 1: 78th and Cheltenham.  And there's one at Jardine Plant downtown.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there're two of them?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, the Cheltenham one is not too far from here, east of here--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --near the lake [Lake Michigan].  Did you work at that one or did you work at--
Speaker 1: Only at that one.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Yeah, it's right there at Rainbow Beach.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So you were there for two years.  And then you--this takes us to 1970, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '71, I ran for alderman.
Story_ID: 19735
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in politics?
Speaker 2: I had a cousin, since that time we'd moved to 847 East 64th Street.  And I had a cousin who was a precinct captain in that area.  And he was working with Bob Miller, who was the alderman.  But he was the ward committeeman, he wasn't the alderman and Sidney Jones was the alderman.  Bob Miller was the ward committeeman.  And I began to work with Bob Miller.  And he put me in charge of the Young Democrats.  I worked with the Young Democrats.  And then he later gave me the responsibility of keeping the books of the ward organization.  I used to keep the books, set up a system, dues-paying system.  And ward organizations at that time, people had to pay dues, two percent of your income went toward dues.  That's how ward organizations were able to keep itself.  And I went on from there.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us the path, I mean, well, what--now that's 64th and--you were living I guess in, was it Woodlawn or--
Speaker 2: In Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: 64th and Maryland.  That was in the 6th ward.
Story_ID: 19736
Speaker 1: You got like a ground-floor knowledge about how city government worked--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you worked for the city at the same time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you could see both ends of it.  Now, I mean what were you thinking then?
Speaker 2: Well, the people in my ward, in the organization, sort of nudged on, said, maybe you ought to run for alderman.  At that time, [A. A.] Rayner was the alderman.  So they say, let's take him on.  I said, well, it might be a tough job for us, but we took it on.
Speaker 1: Now, Rayner was a Republican, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was Republican, but he was--
Speaker 1: He was the last of the Republicans almost, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: In those days cause the city was becoming increasingly Democratic because of Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, the first Mayor Daley.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And see there wasn't--what was it in the council when I went?  It was--it got to be 48 to--you had [John] Hoellen, you had Sperling--
Speaker 1: Who's that now?
Speaker 2: Sperling, Jack Sperling, you had Leon Despres and, who else?  Sammy Rayner.  Two independents, two Republicans.  And Sperling and another one passed away.  You got Democrats in all the wards.  And, and 5 and 6, you still had Independent, Larry Bloom, and I was elected, Democrat.  So it was 49 to 1.
Speaker 1: Those were pretty good odds to get what you wanted done, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 49 to 1.  Well, tell me about the campaign against Rayner.  I mean how--
Speaker 2: It was a spirited campaign.  We had debates and Miller ran against Rayner first.  Then I ran against him, Rayner, the second time.  We had a spirited campaign.  We had debates.
Speaker 1: Now, Rayner was pretty popular, right?
Speaker 2: But we went around to all the blocks and--block clubs.  This ward had, this ward, the 6th ward was really a ward of block clubs.  And you just had to win the block clubs.  So we targeted certain areas and we were able to successfully win the campaign and we went on from there, and--
Speaker 1: Now, just one second.  I just wanted to ask you this.  What was your message, you know, to people, as to why they should vote for you instead of Rayner?
Speaker 2: That's 30 years ago.  I don't know totally what my message was, but I do know that I encouraged people to, to join block clubs, to--I'd say, invite me to your block club.  If you got a complaint, I'm the one, you come and leave it with.  So invite me out and if you want to complain, complain to me.  I'm the person who is gonna be charged with the responsibility of trying to help you with your problems.  But I want to know what the problems are first, you know, I'll try to get, you know, a solution to your problems.  And I offered myself up to them, and they were able to support me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, from my sketchy knowledge of Chicago [Illinois] politics, I'm just asking you.  Now, could Rayner get things done as the only black Republican in the city council?
Speaker 2: No, it's difficult, really difficult.
Speaker 1: I could imagine (laughter) and the Daley Machine, he's the only black Republican.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, so basically your campaign was, if you want something done, you'd better get, you'd better vote for Eugene Sawyer.
Speaker 2: That was basically it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it makes sense.
Speaker 2: Right, well.
Speaker 1: All right, I mean I learned something about Chicago politics.  But so people basically could, they voted for you to get the stuff done.
Story_ID: 19737
Speaker 1: I know in the 6th ward, the 6th ward is a middle-class, highly-organized people.  They want things done--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they want them done right.  And they're very critical.
Speaker 2: They're very, very critical.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you had to be on your toes, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's why we were able to--when Harold [Washington] ran, we cast in the 6th ward--what was it, 15 or a 100, 15,000 (unclear) about 20, in the primary.
Speaker 1: So the votes--I mean you all couldn't organize a turnout in the 6th ward?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes.)
Speaker 1: So, now, you said [Bob] Miller was a committeeman?
Speaker 2: Right, he was the committeeman, but--
Speaker 1: Was this Bob Miller, you said?
Speaker 2: Bob Miller, yeah.  Sidney Jones was the alderman.  But then Bob Miller just resigned.  And I became the committeeman.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you became committeeman and alderman for about--
Speaker 2: I was nominated by committeeman in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a committeeman first before you became alderman?
Speaker 2: That's right.  John [H.] Stroger got to be committeeman the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was committeeman of the 8th ward?
Speaker 2: Eight ward, right.
Speaker 1: Which is similar in composition in terms of the people.
Speaker 2: Right, and we used to do battle in the 6th and 8th in terms of who could get the most votes out.
Speaker 1: Who used to win those battles?
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: The 6th ward.
Speaker 2: Then the 21st ward came in.  And the 21st is now--they have more people registered than we do.  But we, at that time had--I had 83 precincts and a little over 40,000 registered voters.  And at that particular time, we could turn out probably somewhere around 70, 80 percent in general elections; in a primary, maybe 40, 50 or 50, 60 percent.
Speaker 1: Now, did this make you valuable to the mayor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in terms of numbers.
Speaker 1: I can imagine.  Okay.  So, well, what were the, were there any--what were the issues in those days?  When you came in '71 [1971], what was the biggest issue in the 6th ward?  Can you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, we started out with--you know, in the 6th ward, there are no high rises, none.  We started out with a request by a group in Chesterfield to build a high rise, prefab high rise for senior citizens.  That building is now sitting at about 82nd and--no 83rd and Langley, 7 stories, senior citizen building.  Since that building was constructed, another one has come on board at 76th and, I believe it's around Maryland.
Speaker 1: Right, right near the park, near Grand Crossing--
Speaker 2: Right.  But we had a meeting.  We had hearings.  We had a meeting one night in the, in the area.  That's where we voted, and they let us do the counting.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the 6th ward.  I mean I know some of the things, but I want you to tell us about--now, who lived in the 6th ward?  Who were some of the people that lived there?  What are some of the institutions of the 6th ward cause it's, it's an interesting point.
Speaker 2: Dempsey Travis, you know, Travis' office down here on 82nd.  Police Superintendent Terry Hilliard, lived in the 6th ward.
Speaker 1: Terry Hilliard, right.
Speaker 2: Several members of the Board of Education--it's been 10 years since I've been up, but I know some members of the board.  And a lot the--Abernathy Cab Company, lives right down the street here.  [John H. H.] Sengstacke lived right down the street on Michigan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, of the [Chicago] Defender.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, even though they sold it the Defender--but Sengstacke lives down the street.  I'm trying to see who, who all lived--there're so many people who live out here.
Speaker 1: I know you had the Chatham Businessmen's Association.
Speaker 2: Chatham Business Association, right.
Speaker 1: And Bill Miller.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Miller and the guy who's the publisher of the Chatham Citizen.
Speaker 1: So there's the Pioneer Building--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Pioneer Building for the Muslims.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where the 'Muhammad Speaks' is published.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The restaurant was 6th ward too, wasn't it. Salaam--
Speaker 2: Salaam.
Speaker 1: --Salaam when they first opened up.
Speaker 2: When they first opened up, but now it's over here on 79th and--over West.  But I understand that's closed now.
Speaker 1: It looks like it is.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: But I don't see any activity in there.
Speaker 2: That place was--
Speaker 1: But the one that we used to see in the paper around the country is the one on Cottage Grove.  And that was right there in the middle of the 6th ward.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Chatham Village.
Speaker 2: Chatham Village is just what (unclear) when the building started.
Speaker 1: That's like a kind of exclusive kind of a situation where, you know, people vote you in to live there or they vote you out.
Speaker 2: Out, right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) A little reservation--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're pretty strong.  And basically, you have the--things resolves on block clubs, Chatham Community Council, in part, my neighbors.  Those groups, they really are very strong.
Speaker 1: And they're still, problematic neighbors in Chatham, you're right--
Speaker 2: But my neighbors were the first blacks to move in the area, that came in through Park Manor.
Speaker 1: So a lot of professionals, you know,--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --live here, you know, in Chatham.  All right, so, you know--
Speaker 2: Business people.
Speaker 1: At one time, I've been told--now, tell me if this is true, that a lot of the black sports figures used to live in Chatham at one time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --before they all started living out--
Speaker 2: Ernie Banks used to live out here.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, Ernie Banks.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to see who else lived out here.  I was with one of the guys yesterday.  I'm trying to think about--I know somebody else lived out here, several baseball players.
Speaker 1: Did Billy Williams at all?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Billy Williams, nah.  I don't remember now, but they were baseball players.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're talking a real thriving--
Speaker 2: It's a thriving area.
Speaker 1: So the issues around here have more to do with the infrastructure and, I guess, city services and--
Speaker 2: City services and crime.
Speaker 1: And crime.
Speaker 2: You know, one of the problems we are faced with right now is that they have started moving in some of the Section 8 people in this area.
Speaker 1: Oh, in Chatham, yeah.
Speaker 2: See, we never had public housing buildings here at all.
Speaker 1: And every few apartments here.
Speaker 2: Very few apartment buildings cause when somebody moves out, they tell somebody else about it and pass the word of mouth.  But now they're moving some Section 8 people in here.  I think they moved about 900 people.
Speaker 1: Are they moving into houses or what?
Speaker 2: Both, houses and apartment buildings.  Same thing in South Shore.  They moved about 1,000 in South Shore.
Speaker 1: South Shore has apartment buildings, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right.
Speaker 1: But here it's hard to find an apartment, so--
Speaker 2: It really is.
Speaker 1: Mostly single-family homes.
Speaker 2: A lot of two-flats.
Speaker 1: So, now, so you're alderman here throughout the '70s [1970s], throughout the--
Speaker 2: '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 19738
Speaker 1: The city started going through some changes when Richard J. Daley died.  All right, and tell me about that.
Speaker 2: It was a tough time.  When Frost thought he should have been the mayor.  And, from what I understand, they locked the door and said, hold.
Speaker 1: And this is the alderman Wilson Frost of the 34th ward?
Speaker 2: 34th ward, right.
Speaker 1: And he was a--what was he?  What was his position?
Speaker 2: President Pro Tem.  And he figured that he should have succeeded the mayor.
Speaker 1: Well, wasn't that according to the procedure of what's supposed to happen, for--at least temporarily, he's supposed to succeed the mayor and take over.
Speaker 2: Until the council met and picked an interim mayor.
Speaker 1: Now, but did he have a reasonable expectation that he would be the mayor for a couple of days or weeks?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what happened?
Speaker 2: It didn't happen that way.  The council, they went to the legislature and got a new law passed.  And the law provided for an acting mayor.  And the council had to vote on that matter.  And, of course, Frost accepted the Chairman of Finance, which was, like the second, controlling the money.  He got an idea as to what this was happening, was gonna happen in the council.  So he chose to take Chairman of Finance and Bilandic took the acting mayor.
Speaker 1: You mean Michael Bilandic.
Speaker 2: Michael Bilandic.
Speaker 1: He was the alderman for the 11th--
Speaker 2: 11th ward, right.
Speaker 1: That's Bridgeport.  That's the mayor's--
Speaker 2: His ward, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he later became a Supreme Court judge.
Speaker 1: At this time, his tenure as mayor was, it didn't last very long, right?
Speaker 2: No, Jane Byrne was elected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--the legend is the snow did Bilandic in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not--again, city services was the issue.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And not getting the snow fast enough.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, Jane Byrne was mayor now.
Story_ID: 19739
Speaker 1: What are your reflections on the administration of Richard J. Daley, I mean in terms of the black community, how they related to him and how he related to the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, it took some time, you know.  Mayor Daley was a very strong mayor.  He wanted to--but he didn't give enough to the black community.  William L. Dawson was another force in that, when there were jobs dispensed to the white--black community, he would say, look, give me two laborers instead of giving me a front-office job because I can fill those jobs much easier than I can, even though, you know, those people qualified in many areas, you could find people to deal with that.  But he'd rather have the labor jobs.  But--
Speaker 1: There's a story--not to interrupt, but just the, I think the, I read somewhere that if they had $50,000 in jobs, rather than have two $25,000 jobs or one $50,000 job, he would say give me 5 $10,000 jobs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Five $10,000 a year jobs, right.  So he, you're better off in numbers and with lower salaries.  But not recognizing that at some point in time, you're gonna have people who can fill any job you bring them.  You, you advertise.  And it really didn't happen until [Michael] Bilandic became mayor.  But that was, that was a real fight in that people wanted better jobs and better-paying jobs.  They didn't look for a commitment to get four $10,000 a year jobs.  Give me two $25,000 a year jobs.  I can remember during the time I started being committeeman, I, I went to Ed Quigley, and I got--I must have had about 6 bricklayers.  And I got them on in the sewer department.  Those guys are now making probably about $30 an hour.  I just got a young man a job in, handling heavy equipment.  He makes $34 an hour.  But we're beginning to learn better now, to get better jobs.  But Daley was just a strong mayor.  And he organized his whole organization, the patronage system, which they never struck down.  And that's probably why the ward organizations in the black community are not as strong anymore because we don't have the jobs or people to put in these jobs.
Speaker 1: No way to reward people anymore.
Speaker 2: I can't, I couldn't help anybody if I wanted to.  And it's difficult now.  I think probably the only strong ward organizations that are in existence are the 8th ward, 21st, that's about it.  I mean we don't stay like the 14th ward people stay, the 10th ward, the--[Michael] Madigan's ward, the 12th, no, the 12th--13th, [William O.] Lipinski.  See, white people are grateful and so they stay and continue to support the committeeman.  But black people don't.  Once you tell a person they don't have to ring doorbells any longer.  Bye.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a difference in proportion too in terms of what black folks were actually getting in those day, even in those days.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean there're probably many, many more of the white people that's gotten that much, much more, you know.  So that might account for the difference.
Speaker 2: Of course, there's the other side of the coin; you got a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so the Daley Machine, you know, had its rewards.  And if you played the game right, you could get, you know--
Speaker 2: That's why John [H.] Stroger's been so successful.  He plays the game, and he knows how to play it.
Speaker 1: Now, who's in 21?  What's the--
Speaker 2: The minister.  Ah--
Speaker 1: I'm drawing a blank here myself, 21?  I don't know why.  I should know, but--
Speaker 2: That's where Jesse Evans used to be.  He's a Baptist minister.  Protg of Clay Evans.
Story_ID: 19740
Speaker 1: When [Richard J.] Daley died, did that affect the system, the Machine any?
Speaker 2: No, because they had a system set up with [Thomas R.] Tom Donovan who went to the Board of Trade later on, but he was the patronage chief.  And, of course, he kept the thing in, the system in motion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I've read that Donovan was really the key when--
Speaker 2: [Michael] Bilandic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when Bilandic was mayor.  Donovan was in place, and he made sure everything--
Speaker 2: Everything's--right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they ran just like, right on schedule.
Speaker 2: Right, right on schedule, cause Donovan was the patronage chief.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he was a close confidante of old man Daley before he died, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  See, it used to be Neil Hartigan.
Speaker 1: Neil Hartigan, did he ever become governor or did he just run?
Speaker 2: No, Lieutenant Governor, that was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about--during the Bilandic administration, it was about the same you say.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Except for that--he kind of dropped the ball with the snow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Donovan was the--and I'm fairly certain that Donovan didn't know that or wasn't aware of what was happening with the snow at the time, you know, cause he would have fixed it very quickly.  But having the expertise of the old man, you know, but it was too late.
Speaker 1: It was an act of nature that--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --surprised everybody.
Speaker 2: Surprised everybody, even us.
Speaker 1: We're talking about 1978 [sic, 1979]--suddenly, it was snow up to people's ear's right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And people were--you could hear on the street people complain--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that if the old man Daley had been in office, all the snow--
Speaker 2: The snow would be removed.
Speaker 1: --would have been removed out.
Speaker 2: And he'd take it and move it out the city.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They did it one year.
Speaker 1: They'd give it to Gary [Indiana] or somebody (laughter).
Speaker 2: They carted--they took it out.  Took it out of the city, put it on trucks.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well what about Jane Byrne now?  Did she, did things stay intact under Jane Byrne?
Speaker 2: Jane Byrne, well, she tried to, to use Daley's operation, but she wanted change.  And sometimes you don't make drastic changes right away, you know, because in a city as large as Chicago [Illinois], you're gonna need to keep things in place until you get your fingers on, on a lot of things.
Speaker 1: I think it was that she--if I remember correctly, she announced when she was elected that the city was being run by an evil cabal, right.  And she was going to smash that--
Speaker 2: Smash the evil cabal, right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: The (unclear) and [Edward] Vrdolyak, [Edward] Burke--
Speaker 1: [Charles] Swibel and--
Speaker 2: Swibel, right.  And then--
Speaker 1: Did she smash it?  Did she smash the evil cabal?
Speaker 2: No, she got smashed (laughter).  And with the, with the Board of Education, the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], I mean she moved in people and took black folk out.
Speaker 1: Now, the black community kind of surprised and insulted by this, if I--
Speaker 2: Right, especially CHA and the Board of Ed.
Speaker 1: She had one of her first confrontations was over the school board.  I mean, well, what--the biggest, I guess, confrontation was over the school board, the people on the school board--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that she--when she fired Kenneth Smith and somebody else.  I can't think of who the other one was.
Speaker 2: No, I don't really remember, but I remember, I remember voting against them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and she replaced them with two white women--
Speaker 2: white women.
Speaker 1: --from [William J.] Bogan High School who were fighting against the integration of Bogan High School.
Story_ID: 19741
Speaker 1: We were talking about the School Board crisis with Jane Byrne and what came to be known as the Bogan Broads and the vote on their acceptance into city council.  Now, you say you voted against them, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes.)
Speaker 1: And do you remember the new alderman from the 17th Ward that Jane Byrne had installed, who was a mild-mannered young man, like yourself, who--I think he was, he worked for the Water Department too, I think.  Streeter.
Speaker 2: Streeter, Allan Streeter, right.  He was selected by Byrne to fulfill the seat of an alderman who lost his seat, some kind of--
Speaker 1: Bill (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I don't know how it happened now.  But he, he was selected to fulfill that, to fill that seat.  And the rumor got out that he was gonna vote in favor of Jane Byrne's selections.  And people started calling him up, and he decided--he had a change of heart and decided to vote against it, which caused Jane Byrne to vow to, you know--rather than support him as her own choice, to run somebody else against him.  And she did that, and that was like a test of her strength.  Do you remember that, you know, that time?  I don't really remember that--she didn't win.  I know that.
Speaker 1: No, her candidates lost.  It was a guy named Stewart in the 17th Ward.  I mean people were actually fighting out in the streets around the pollsters of them.  I mean it was really rough.  [Lutrelle] Lu Palmer talked about it on the radio every day, you know.  And, he started saying, we will see, in--In '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And so that was like a defeat for her.  And, it seemed like--well, what's your assessment of Jane Byrne, cause I know she made these dramatic overtures to the black community on the one hand, you know, moving in the projects and all of that, I mean--
Speaker 1: I don't think she stayed all night there at all (laughter).
Speaker 2: You don't think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: I don't believe so.
Speaker 2: Now, you all at city council are supposed to know if she did or not, right?
Speaker 1: No, we don't--
Speaker 2: You don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Un-un, we didn't know.  But I don't believe she did, though, very frankly.
Speaker 2: That she and Jay [McMullen], you know--
Speaker 1: No, it was just good grandstanding and she made every effort to try correct some of her mistakes, but it was too late.  That advantage we had that time was that [Richard M.] Daley got in the race and stayed.  And that, that's what made Harold [Washington] win.
Story_ID: 19742
Speaker 1: Harold Washington ran for mayor one other time, I mean before.  It was like, he didn't think he was gonna win, I don't believe, but he ran--
Speaker 2: Right, testing, testing the waters.
Speaker 1: You know, what are your thoughts?  Did you think that there was a, it was time for a black mayor?
Speaker 2: Not at that time, it wasn't, but the waters needed to be tested.  And he tested the waters.  So the next time he came, he won.  But the fact is that, that two of them being in the race, the split the vote up.
Speaker 1: Now, Jane Byrne and Richard [M.] Daley, right.  Now, how did you feel?  I mean what were you doing during that time period?  Did you, were you one that was actively seeking a black mayoral candidate or--
Speaker 2: I was the first black committeeman to endorse Harold.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: Plus, I was at a swearing-in when Jane Byrne, on a Senior Citizen building at 83rd and Saint--84th and St. Lawrence--84th and Champ--Langley.  And we left the swearing-in, and she drove me, gave me a ride over to the office in the limousine.  And, of course, I thanked her.  And by the time I got in the office, they had announced that Harold was gonna run for mayor and announced that I was gonna be supporting him.  And Jane Byrne called me right then.
Speaker 1: Well, what did she say?
Speaker 2: She said, I just dropped you off from my limo.  What happened?  I said, nothing.  She said, I understand, you're gonna support Harold.  I said, right.  I said, look, my community is very adamant about this, and I'm gonna follow my community.  I'm going to support Harold.  That was it.  She hung up.
Speaker 1: Well, did your relationship with her change any after that?
Speaker 2: Sort of, a little bit, yeah.  I could tell the difference.  But, you know, I spent probably about 4 or 5 weeks going to Block Club meetings on Sundays, just doing sort of a poll among people in the area.  You know 90 percent of the people in this area were supporting Harold.  And I said, I mean I'd be stupid to support anybody else.  And I was talking with one of my ministers about it.  And he was telling me about Jane Byrne's gonna crush--I said, you watch and see.  She won't crush anybody out here.  And it happened that way.  I think 95 percent of the people in this ward voted for Harold.  And the numbers show that.  The numbers show that.
Speaker 1: And it was said in '83 [1983], I think somebody said this on the news that 90, 95 percent of the black community voted for Harold Washington.  And they were looking for the other 5 percent.  (Laughter)  Right, we were trying to find the other 5 percent, wherever they were.
Speaker 2: Right, so it was a movement, a big--
Speaker 1: Right.  We had two things happen, the, the race with [Charles A.] Charlie Hayes and [Lutrelle] Lu Palmer.  Then, of course, Harold Washington, Jane Byrne and [Richard M.] Daley.  Those are two elections that we had opposing views, but we won.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, during the Harold Washington campaign, what were some of the--I know there had to be some dramatic moments in that campaign that you can, you know, probably relate to us.  What were some of those moments?
Speaker 1: Well, it was--Harold was so busy, you know, it was really difficult to catch up with him.  But I remember one Saturday morning, I was going to a ward meeting.  And I happened to see his limo parked at Independence Bank.  And I thought, oh, he's in there, but I had a friend of mine, he wanted to give Harold $10,000.  I said, I'm gonna call him up.  So I called down to [Alvin J.] Boutte's office, and--the president of the bank.  And I said, is the mayor there?  He said, yes.  I said, I'd like to speak to him for a minute.
Speaker 2: This was before he was mayor, right, or after, was it--
Speaker 1: No, before he was mayor.
Speaker 2: Before, okay, got you.  And they put him on the phone.  I said, Mr. Mayor, I said, I've got a man down here who wants to give you $10,000.  He said, what?  He said, I'm up here trying to get some money right now.  I'll be right down there.  He came down there.  He came down.  And, man, the picture that, that--I don't where that picture is now; man, his eyes were that big.  He's looking at the check for $10,000.  He was a friend of mine, Horace Smith.  And there were a lot of other monies from a lot of people out here that he got.  And it was just difficult to get him because, I mean, there were so many demands on his time.  But we were able to get him out here a couple of times.  And people responded in kind, they really did.  And we cast, in the general election, I think between Daley and Jane Byrne, there were maybe 40 or 50 votes maybe, between the two of them.  And Harold got the lion's share of the votes.  I'm not sure of the exact numbers.  I should keep those numbers with me because I always remember those--I should always remember those numbers because they were mind blowing.
Speaker 1: Is that a bigger plurality of votes than Richard Daley received over here?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes)  And when he ran against [Jeff] Epton, it was awful.  It was only about 15 votes for Epton and the rest all for Harold.
Speaker 1: And people are scratching their heads now wondering who voted for Epton, right?
Speaker 2: Right, wondering who the 15 were.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Who were they?  So, well, you know, how did you feel on election night?  I mean what was your--I mean when that night approached, did you know that Harold was gonna win, cause I've asked some other people in the campaign, and I get various answers.  But did you really--how did you feel?
Speaker 2: I say if any numbers are like mine, there's no reason why he shouldn't do anything but win.  But there were areas, you know, in the white areas, they were pushing up the numbers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause in those days, the black and the white population was almost the same.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But then the Latino population was a swing, so--
Speaker 2: And, you know, black folks were not coming out like the thought, but they did.  They came out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, pollsters thought that the black community just wouldn't turn out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --like they traditionally don't.
Speaker 2: They came out then, buddy, in massive numbers.
Speaker 1: So, why do you think that they all came out in such strong numbers for Harold Washington?  He wasn't the only, you know, black person, you know, that ever ran for office, but, you know, why do you think that they did that?
Speaker 2: Well, Harold was a very, very charming guy; tell me he could charm a snake, man.  He was so smooth, just very smooth.  And he had given to black folks what they hadn't heard before.  I'm gonna be so fair, you know, to everybody.  And he was able to get the white community to understand that he was gonna be fair with them, as he was in the black community.  And he was.  He later lived up to his promises.  He really did.
Speaker 1: Now, there's--people have even criticized Harold Washington for "being fair".  I know in '87 when we were--when people met to discuss the campaign, they often--one criticism you often heard in the black community that he was too fair to white people.  And they've never been fair with us, so, you know, why should--I mean he should, shouldn't he do the same thing to, or, you know.  What do you think about that kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's really--you're gonna be defeated by doing that.  But if you, if you're fair with everybody, you can't argue--you can argue against it, but you won't win.  I think he was right in being fair with everybody.  You give this side of town so many feet of curbing; you give the other side of town so many feet of curbing.  That's right.  They can't argue against that.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the difference in the black community by him just, I mean simply being fair?
Speaker 2: We got more, we got a lot more of everything, curbing, sidewalks.
Speaker 1: Now, there was an impression that streets were fixed faster when Harold Washington was the mayor?  They were.
Speaker 2: How can you account for that?  I mean what was he doing differently?
Speaker 1: Being fair.  It was just, just a case of being fair.
Speaker 2: I know it used to take a long time to get a hole fixed in the street, you know.  I mean it did at one time take months for (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --a hole.  I mean there'd be a horse with a light put on top of it.  It could stay there for months.
Speaker 1: And it didn't take that much time to fix that hole.
Speaker 2: So what was going on?  What was really going on?
Speaker 1: They were working in the white community.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that, now, the light was a promise that they'd get back to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  They knew that there was a hole there, but it just never got fixed.
Story_ID: 19743
Speaker 1: What special role did you play in the Harold Washington administration?  I mean what did he depend on you for?
Speaker 2: I was the president pro-tem and the chairman of the Rules Committee.
Speaker 1: Over what committee?
Speaker 2: Rules.
Speaker 1: Rules, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the burying ground.  That's where they bury stuff you don't want to deal with.  You send it to Rules.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the son of a Mortician.  Did you know how to bury stuff and make sure it didn't come (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yep.  I had some experience there.  But I was the president pro-tem.  So when Harold left the city council chambers, I took over for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you would take the gavel and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, somewhat of what alderman, the late alderman Lorraine Dixon used to do, in starting out for this current mayor--
Speaker 2: [Wilson] Frost, right.
Speaker 1: And who's the one, who's the--
Speaker 2: [Daniel S.] Danny Solis, I think.
Speaker 1: Danny Solis.  Okay, is the current president pro-tem.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were president pro-tem, in charge of the Rules Committee where bad rules got buried (laughter).
Speaker 2: Then assign all of them to different office, and Committee Chairmanships.
Speaker 1: So, in your opinion, was Harold a good politician and good administrator in terms of--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --getting his own system together.
Speaker 2: Right.  He did a great job at that.
Speaker 1: Did he have any difficulty in trying to keep some of the black aldermen in his camp because it, just to set this up, I mean eventually, by 1987, all the black aldermen were lined up behind Harold 100 percent.  But it didn't really start off that way, did it?
Speaker 2: Well, once we got past that 21, 29 break-out in the council, and he won that suit, the election suit, it came out 25, 25.
Speaker 1: But sir, I'm talking about when he was first elected in '83 [1983] there was, I think he had to, he had to do some, I guess negotiating with certain alderman to get them lined up, you know, with him.  Even though they were the minority, they seemed to be a block and he had to develop them on some level, right?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, that's where the 21, 29 came up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When it got to be 25, 25, he had to make sure he didn't have any defections at all.  When it became 25, 25.
Speaker 2: But in the original 21, though, was it hard to get certain people to, to be involved in that?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  They knew that Harold pretty much controlled their, their lifeblood, their lifestyle, they controlled whatever happened for them.  They had to stay with him.  They didn't have any place to go.
Story_ID: 19744
Speaker 1: In the beginning of his [Harold Washington] administration, there was a federal sting operation and some aldermen got busted.  And one could think, on some level, that Harold Washington's coalition was the target of the sting basically because I don't think--I can't think of anyone from the other side that got stung, you know.  But there was Perry Hutchinson, Marian Humes, Cliff Kelley--I don't know.  It was quite a few people who got stung, you know.  And what was your, how did you view that?  Did you really--I mean just looking at it from the outside, I mean we didn't--people felt that the government was trying to sting Harold's administration.
Speaker 2: Well, you'd think they were because it was a really, and geared toward black folks.
Speaker 1: Yeah, are black politicians the most corrupt ones in town or--
Speaker 2: Nah, they're the ones that get caught first.
Speaker 1: That's a, well, I would guess that.  But I had to ask the question, you know, cause this sting and all, only black people going to, you know,--
Speaker 2: Getting caught.
Speaker 1: Getting caught, yeah, and it's videotaped.  I mean, you know, it's hard to get out of it cause everybody had their hand out and were taking money on tape.  So I think--yeah, but I mean that, before that even there were like some of the alderman even kind of--there was talk, I remember in the paper of people not exactly being on board with Harold all the time.  You know, I think Perry Hutchinson out in--
Speaker 2: Out in nine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, out in nine, he, he started to buck a little bit.  And some other--I think Humes and, you know--  Well, I remember Humes had a thing with Harold about that congressional spot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she wanted to be the congresswoman.  In fact, she ran, but she lost.
Speaker 1: And she seemed to be upset about that, but there was, it was a time in the black community where people were thinking that if you were elected during the time that Harold was elected, you were a reform candidate on some level.  You know, that's the tune that Hutchinson ran on in nine against the Shaw Brothers--or [Robert] Bob Shaw, rather.  And the same way I think in the 8th when Marian Humes won.  You know, she was supposed to be a reformer.  And both of these individuals ended up--but not only the federal sting, but they got stung on other crimes too, you know, along the way.
Story_ID: 19745
Speaker 1: I think he [Harold Washington] left that decision to the people.  He pretty much directed the ward committeemen to keep a check on it for him and just advise when you need to talk to him about putting somebody in line.  I'll tell you whether they should be hooked in line or not.  But he left that up to the ward committeemen.
Speaker 2: Now, I've heard stories--maybe you can confirm these, but I've heard from the wards, especially the 9th Ward, I think a couple of times, Perry Hutchinson decided he wasn't gonna go along with what the mayor's policy was.  And I heard, there's this rumor in the neighborhood, that people called his office and persuaded him (laughter) to, you know, with some very strong language, I mean--and I'm talking about hundreds of people calling--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --and using, using basically the same language.  And he, he, you know, decided he should change his tune a little bit.  I mean it was a lot of pressure on politicians, black politicians to be part of that 21.  Am I right about that?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Do you have any anecdotes about that kind of pressure that you could share with us?
Speaker 1: I didn't experience any of that kind of pressure.  I really didn't.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you jumped on it from the very beginning.
Speaker 1: I was on, yeah.  I jumped on from the beginning.
Speaker 2: Right, so you didn't have to have--you can just imagine if you hadn't here, you know, it probably would have been--
Speaker 1: Whew, man, it would have been awful over here.  I would have probably had 3 times the calls that he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's much more organized here than in the 9.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh, right.
Story_ID: 19746
Speaker 1: Do you have any anecdotes about those days at all, about how--because the politics in the city [Chicago, Illinois] changed completely.  I mean what are your thoughts on that whole--
Speaker 2: Well, politics did change, but they changed for the better.  We--I can remember during the second time Harold [Washington] ran, that John [H.] Stroger called me up and said, look, man, we've got to meet.  We've got--they took the thing away from [Timothy C.] Tim Evans and gave it to John Stroger, Harold did.  He had been paying, he had paid Tim to keep the structure together.  But he had to get John Stroger so--.  And we used to meet on Thursday mornings at 8:00 o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: Now, Tim Evans was supposed the whip of, the majority whip or something or the minority whip, in the city council in a sense or, or what would you call him (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He was Chairman of Finance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  And then he was supposed to be heading the group to keep the Harold Washington Movement moving.  But see, if the election had been a week longer, Harold would have lost.
Speaker 1: In '87 [1987]?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes) A week longer.
Speaker 1: Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: Because it wasn't organized.  We had to reorganize and restructure things and really get the precinct captains back into the mood.  And [Edward] Vrdolyak was moving fast.  But he wasn't moving fast enough because we got some, there were some people who were, I think, thinking about defecting, but they didn't have an opportunity to do it.  But that was part and parcel to the structure we had, we had set up, to John Stroger and myself because Harold would have lost the election.
Speaker 1: So if Vrdolyak had, had had just a little more time--
Speaker 2: Another week.
Speaker 1: Another week.  Wow, that's something.  That's something.  So, in a second election was the strategy different than the first time around?
Speaker 2: There was more enthusiasm in the first election.  And then there were, there was a feeling among people that we've, we won.  And they don't work anymore.  But you've got to keep working and keep--the whole thing is work, work, work cause it, you've got to work.  And there was a lot of lackadaisical attitudes going around.  People didn't really spend the time they should have spent, doing what they were supposed to do.  But we got them back in line.  And people were working more.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '87, when Harold wins the second time, he is in the enviable position of having the majority of city council by one vote, I guess, his own vote, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was split 25, 25.  Twenty five and he'd break ties.
Speaker 2: And he's a tie-breaker.  All right, so, but how did you feel then?  Did you feel now we're at the--I mean what did you feel about the prospects of the city at that point?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I was optimistic about it.  You know, the only thing was just, you had to pray that Harold was able to, to make all the council meetings because, cause if I had to vote, I would--we're still in 25, 25, and if I'm in the chair, you know, I can't break any ties.
Speaker 2: And so the president pro-tem can't vote in the stead of the mayor cause you're still, you still have your own (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Nodding, yes).  And I didn't want to, to lose that opportunity ever.  I had to keep Harold in, in the majority.  So I was just hoping that he would make all the meetings, and he did.  (Unclear) with him when he passed, when Harold died.
Story_ID: 19747
Speaker 1: I was asking you about '87 [1987], you know, what you, how you felt in '87, going into the new year--that, after the election of Harold [Washington] with the majority and what you thought the prospects were for the city [Chicago, Illinois], I think, at that point, and the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the prospects or the opportunity for the black community was very, very, very positive, I think.  We could all move ahead.  And there were a lot of things that Harold wanted to do in the community that meant some, some positive activities for the black community.  And--
Speaker 1: I know, we were talking about the day that Harold died.  That's what it was, and your personal reflections of that day?  What happened?
Speaker 2: That was a very emotional time when they called me up and told me to get over to the Civic Center, over to the Daley Plaza.  And I asked them, why?  They said the mayor just died.  And, of course, I just put up--it was a tough time for me because I was very tied to Harold.  He was a very, very close friend of mine.  And I went over to the Daley Center, and I think I was there, [Timothy C.] Tim Evans and Larry Bloom--let's see, who else was there?  There were 4 or 5--Tim Wright was there.  There were 4 or 5 people in there, you know.  And we, we were trying to make contact with the hospital.  And the information we had gotten was that they wanted--there wasn't anything definite yet.  So I got a call from Ed Burke.  And he told me the mayor had died.  I said, well, how do you know?  He said, well, the fireman told me.  I said, well, that's not what I'm getting.  He said, well, that's what I got.  And we went on, went back in the room.  And finally we got the call that he really had passed.  It was a very emotional thing.  So we all just got together and said a prayer and left, went back to the offices.  And there was a lot of activities happening and the guys in the city hall was suggesting that we do this and that.  I said, look, man, we ain't gonna do nothing.  Well, we're just gonna go back down to the council floor and say a prayer for the mayor's family and for the mayor, and that's it.  And that was my suggestion that we do that.  And, of course, we did that.  And there--not to my knowledge, some of the other members were calling for a special meeting, which I didn't really want.  But they called it anyway.  And then we went into a meeting, and we went to that, beginning of that long night.  And it wasn't a pleasant time at all.
Speaker 1: Now, just to put it in perspective, time wise, the death of Mayor Washington occurred on, it was a weekday, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Was it on a Tuesday or--cause it was just before Thanksgiving, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was a--was it the Wednesday before Thanksgiving?
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: Thanksgiving is always on a Thursday so I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 2: It must have been a Tuesday, I think.
Speaker 1: And, cause his body laid in state for all of Thanksgiving, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 19748
Speaker 1: During that time, I think there--we kept hearing on the news reports of things that were taking place at City Hall, you know.  People were trying to get a handle on what exactly was going on.  But so, now what were they--after you all did the meeting at city council when you just, you know, prayed for his family and that sort of thing, I mean what happened next?  Did people approach you about becoming the mayor?
Speaker 2: Well, there was talk, but I didn't want to talk about it.  I said, the man hasn't even been buried yet.  So let's do that first.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember when the funeral took place actually?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Cause I'm thinking, I should have this written down in front me, but I'm thinking the time period that it lasted between the time that Mayor Washington died and you were installed was, it was maybe a little less than a week, but it was about, almost a week.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it didn't happen just right away.  There was time.  There was the funeral--the funeral happened first, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, so there were all kind of--cause we were, I think people we shocked on the South Side that there was even discussion about who was gonna take the mayor's place.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, in so short--but that very afternoon, when he died, there was, you know, speculation on the news about who was gonna be the next mayor.  I think [Edward] Burke and others had made comments on it, you know.  And we said, well, how can they even--how can this discussed, you know?
Speaker 2: And he hadn't been buried yet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  All this, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember somebody told me some time ago that they were at a wake and Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was standing next to the body, and a guy walked up to him, and said, look, I want to take his place.  He said, the mayor said, if it's all right with him, it's all right with me (laughter).  That's how cold people are.
Speaker 1: So, what, how--keep going.  Give us the progression of events here.  I mean I know it's very emotional because, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to remember the exact days, but I do know that we were holed up in the, my offices--I had two--had [William] Bill Henry next to me because Harold told me to put Bill Henry's office next to mine because he wanted, he wanted to control Bill because--
Speaker 1: That was like putting the bad boy in school next to the teacher or something (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughs) He said, you know, you keep Bill next to you, keep him close to you.  And I had Bill--but I called up my pastor, Reverend, Reverend [Addie L.] Wyatt and Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow came down, Reverend [James] Meeks.  And I had more people in the office than the law allows.  And I was telling people, look I don't, I don't think that we should do this right now.  We should give this some time.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the day of the special election?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes).
Speaker 1: Okay, now even before that, though, I think there was even a--there was a, I think it was a rally at UIC [University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois] for people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was down there, Reverend--Fourth Church--and Vernon Jarrett was ranting and raving over there, lying, telling people I was meeting with [Edward] Vrdolyak.
Speaker 1: Right, that's what the talk was.  People--
Speaker 2: I didn't even meet with anybody.  I was meeting with Ford, Bishop Ford.  And he will tell you that.  And a lot of ministers will tell you that.  They had a lot of ministers in Bishop Ford's office.  And I was there just talking to them.
Speaker 1: And what they were saying then is that you had like, of the coalition, the Harold Washington coalition, the 25, that 6 alderman, and they included you in it, were going to vote with the other 25 for the next mayor.  And you were gonna cast your votes for whoever it was that you all chose.  And the rumor was that it was gonna be you.  And people, you know, the 6, I think Anna Langford and Bill Henry, I guess,--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I can't think of everybody, but there was--
Speaker 2: Marlene Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in the 34th--
Speaker 1: Lemuel Austin.
Speaker 2: Lemuel Austin, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so there were--right.
Speaker 2: And 29, the woman, there was a woman.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I know, Sheneather [Y.] Butler.
Speaker 2: Sheneather Butler.
Speaker 1: Right, she was a young woman who was the daughter of the Reverend Butler that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: -- took Wallace Davis' seat.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, okay.  So, yeah, but that was the talk on the radio and in the community.  And I know there was a meeting that was called by the Task Force for Black Political Empowerment to discuss, you know, trying to--because they, what people thought they were seeing was the resurgence of the old, you know, 29 and just sort of, with a figurehead, a front, you know, that's what they thought they were seeing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And they couldn't understand.  They felt betrayed.  They said, well how could these 6 black alderman, you know, vote with the evil side here, you know, this, that has opposed the mayor all these many years.  And, you know, and people were very upset about that.  And did you have a sense of that's what people were saying and talking about?
Speaker 2: But we weren't in any way guided by the 20--by the, the white alderman.  We weren't.
Speaker 1: Was there a strategy that you had?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did you all have your own strategy together, for what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, my, my whole idea was to put off the election.  But I didn't have the votes for that though.  I only had 6 votes for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I guess a logical question would be like why couldn't the coalition, the Harold Washington coalition, stay together really, and why would this 6 break off?  That was the question I think a lot of people couldn't figure out.
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't break away from them, they broke away from us cause initially all of them had decided to vote for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's what the initial thing was.  And Tim couldn't get--at first he only got 2 votes.  But he couldn't--I told him, I said, look if you get 25, I'll give you the 26.  I'll give you my vote.  I told him that several times.  But he couldn't get over, over, the number he needed.  He needed 26 votes.  That was the magic number.  I could get--I had 26 very easily, but--
Speaker 1: Now, did the 20--the other 25 let you know that they would vote with you all if, with your 6, if--you know, to get you the majority or--how did that, I mean how did they--I guess they had to tell you that at some point?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: So that was a--well, tell me about it.
Speaker 2: And then they were saying that, several, several aldermen told me that, that they had gotten calls.  They'd gotten threats, their mothers had been threatened, the par--the, their wives had been threatened.  I said, you're elected officials.  What, you gonna take a threat?  So--
Speaker 1: These are the aldermen that were just--
Speaker 2: The black aldermen.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they were the--were they part of the 6 or the other part?
Speaker 2: The other part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the 6 too.  They were threatened.  They had threats.  And the 8th ward alderman had threats.  Keith Caldwell had threats.  I'm trying to see who else had threats--cause they had been demanding bodyguards.
Speaker 1: Now, I know it was tense time--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: -- very tense in this city.  People were in shock and in grief and it was tense, very tense.  But I couldn't--I can't imagine somebody calling and threatening, and, you know,--
Speaker 2: That's what they were doing.  That's what they were saying, they were threatened.  And--of course, I hadn't gotten any threats, you know, but my security people answered the phones.  So I didn't have to answer any threats.  But they said they got threats, and I had to take them on their word.
Story_ID: 19749
Speaker 1: I think the day before or night before [the vote for acting mayor of Chicago], there was a rally at, I think it was at University of Illinois [at Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: And then, it was so packed people couldn't get in there.  And then the next night was the vote.  And City Hall was surrounded, right--
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: --by thousands of people, who then decided that, had decided at that point that [Timothy C.] Tim Evans was the choice of the Harold Washington coalition to be the next mayor, I guess, or, or--
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't for them to decide though.  That's the issue.  It wasn't for them to decide.  They had to understand.  A lot of people didn't understand the process.  It was for only the 50 aldermen on the floor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they had hoped to influence that vote by being out there.  So, I guess--
Speaker 2: That ain't the way they do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there was, it was, it was a--and not only outside of City Hall, but all the way up the stairs and all the way to the council chambers, the chambers were packed with people--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And they weren't all friendly.  So, now, I'm just setting the stage for this vote.  And this, so the vote takes place after--how did you all deliberate that day?  I think the city council meeting started at, what about 3:00 o'clock or something?
Speaker 2: Three or 4:00 o'clock.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it--there were testimonials by different aldermen or different--I mean everybody had something to say or they had a speech to make, you know, before the vote.  Am I correct?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: I want to confirm this cause you were there.  I wasn't even in there.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: I think they said on the radio--
Speaker 2: Everybody spoke.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they all spoke.  And it lasted, it was drawn out how long?
Speaker 2: Um, it was after 2:00 or 3:00 o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: And how were you feeling?  You're the, the bulls eye of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, many times I tried to get them to put off the vote.  And certain people kept saying if you don't vote--if you vote, if you put it off, they'll have time to reorganize, and eventually they'll get people to change their--it would have been, but whatever happens, it won't be Tim.  That's what they told me.  It's gonna be somebody else.  Now, if I hadn't taken it, it would have been Lipinski--not Lipinski, but Gabinski.
Speaker 1: Terry Gabinski, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what it would have been.
Speaker 1: Now, were you wondering at the time, why, that coalition would back you anyway cause you hadn't been, one of their loyalest, you know, during the [Harold] Washington administration.  So why would they--I mean did you think about that, maybe?
Speaker 2: Well, I had the votes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like 6 with you that would make sure--
Speaker 2: (No audible response)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew most of the guys in the coalition.  And most of them knew me, but I don't know why they turned on me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you felt kind of betrayed by the other side--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: Because a lot of friends of mine said to me, why would they do this?  Like Harold Washington--I mean Al Johnson tried to get guys to--said, listen, you don't have anything to do with this.  That's for the 50 members in City Council.  Jacky Grimshaw and people who organized this whole thing.  I could have been a very rotten Negro man.  I could have been evil.  I could have put the feds on a lot of people because they abused federal dollars to get those buses and stuff.  I could have made this a stinky situation.  I really could have.  But I didn't want to do that.  I just stayed away from it.  I said, why don't we just postpone the vote?  They said, no.  We'll go ahead without you.  Well, I figured the only way I could do this is to, is to get myself elected, and I can direct the, the whole process after, the environment.  If I wanted the, Harold Washington's agenda to continue, I will be the one who keeps it going.  And that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's a moment in this, the proceedings where things really got ugly.  And I wasn't inside, but the reporters, you know, I was listening to the radio during the time period, it's been written about since, umpteen times.  And there's one incident where I think people were throwing coins at Sheneatha Butler.  Do you remember that at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I might not have been in the room at the time.
Speaker 1: That's true.  That happened, and then there's a story--now, the moment that accepted, there's so many stories about this.  And so much has been written about it.  Alton Miller, and his book on Harold Washington has a story about it and the [Chicago] Tribune had a story about it, you know.  And everybody had a story about, you know, and everybody had a story about it.  Public radio was giving a story, and they said, that at a certain point during the proceedings when the moment of truth was hitting, you didn't want to do it, and [Edward] Burke basically, is staying on you and Richard [F.] Mell and other people are urging you to do this.  And you're--you retired I think to your office, and you got a call from Addie Wyatt, I think, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: And would you tell us about, I mean tell us, talk about that?
Speaker 2: Reverend Wyatt had called me several times that night.  And she said, she quoted a portion of scripture that said, Harold, my servant's dead and went through when God says "Moses, my servant's dead".  She said, you've got to go ahead with it.
Speaker 1: She actually, she said, she actually saw verses in the Bible, changed from Moses to Harold and from, and with the implication that you ought to take the, go on and take this opportunity--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --'Cause it's ordained or something like that.
Speaker 2: --because I wasn't gonna do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cause I thought that, the people figured they didn't have, something to say in it.  And I was gonna agree with them, you know, try to work it out.  But I knew that Tim couldn't get it.  That's my problem.  That was why I had no problem with it cause I didn't want it to go to the other--it wouldn't, wouldn't go to a black person.  It would not have gone to a black person.  It would have gone to a white.  I know that because Terry couldn't get, get the 26.  And Solis would, Juan Solis who had campaigned for it, he couldn't 26 either.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true, I mean, that's very true.  And I know Juan Solis couldn't have gotten it.  So, well, so at that moment after you, I mean after you talked to Reverend Wyatt, you were convinced you should do it.
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: And, well, what was it like, you know, to do that?
Speaker 2: It was tough.  But she had been my religious mentor, religious advisor.  She'd been true to me for a long time.  And I appointed Addie to the RTA [regional transportation authority] and CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] board, and she's always been my minister for a long time.
Speaker 1: Now, Addie Wyatt, well, tell us about her too.  I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: She's a very, very, very good, religious leader and good union organizer in the labor movement.  She worked very hard for years, going from one part of the state to the other on behalf of labor.  And she's become one of the 10 most-admired people in the United States.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And she said, you should go ahead and do it.  And I kept arguing with her and Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow didn't--she was down there as Reverend Wyatt's representative--
Speaker 1: This is Reverend Willie Chaplain Barrow--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Willie--
Speaker 1: --of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  She was down there.  And the whole thing, man, it really--Jesse [Jackson] was one of the problems.
Speaker 1: Who was this?
Speaker 2: Jesse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When he came back here at the airport, he had a meeting in the, a small office in the airport.  And they wanted to meet with Tim.  I had the votes though.  He wanted to meet with Tim.  So I just let him meet with Tim.  And people were very--my side, were very upset about that, but we couldn't, with the Reverend--you can't control him.
Speaker 1: Any other figures who met with you or talked to you, that tried to influence, that you, you know, that you can remember?
Speaker 2: A lot of people met with me, a lot of folk were in my office, Ed Gardner, a lot of business people.
Speaker 1: What were their thoughts basically?  Were they trying to urge you to do it or not to do it?
Speaker 2: Some, some who were Tim supporters were urging me not to do it.  And a lot of who were supporting me, were urging me to do to it.
Speaker 1: But you're saying that Tim couldn't run anyway at the time, the way things were deployed.
Speaker 2: They would have given it to Terry Gabinski.  And the white guys were very, very happy to do that.  And they probably would have gotten some more black votes to it.
Speaker 1: They would have had some more time to organize?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: Now, this leads to an interesting question about the Harold Washington coalition and, I mean I, I've often reflected on those days, and I don't think I'm the only one that's caught this, is that there was a coalition definitely behind Harold Washington.  But not all the black politicians in it were of it, you know, that's why--well, what are your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: You're probably right.  I don't want to single anybody out, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think on some, that a lot of people were in it because their constituents pushed them--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --hard, you know, or they had, they had really no choice in some ways to not be in it.  Now, yeah, that's what, I always thought that many in it--I figured that all the white ones in it wanted to be in it, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --'cause they, they didn't really, were forbidden to be in it otherwise.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I knew that all the, not all the black ones in it were in it for the ideology of it, you know.  So at any rate, in this--when you accept, and there's a vote taken, there's a--well, what was that moment like for you?
Speaker 2: Very emotional, very emotional.  Just the thought of, succeeding Harold was a tough thing.
Speaker 1: Now, did you notice at all, this scene that other people saw on television and heard on the radio (noise interruption)--
Speaker 2: Pause a few minutes.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you about the scene of Richard Mell getting up on the desk, talking about "We got us a mayor", which he said, he stood up on--he got up on the city council table and stretched his arms out, and he said, "We got us a mayor, we got us a mayor".  And you know what that looked like to black people--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know.  That's what, you know, they said, we're seeing that.  We said, hum, Richard Mell's that happy, you know, we must be in for it, you know.  That's what people thought.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, unfortunately, I mean fortunately, it wasn't true, you know, but, you know, it took us a while to figure that out, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I made sure it wasn't true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, because at time, I mean, you know, you very vilified.  People thought that you were, you know, the worst betrayer that ever, you know, it was really a--I mean I thought so too.  I said, well, this guy has betrayed the Harold Washington legacy.  And--
Speaker 2: I'm the first person that endorsed Harold.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I know, and you said that to the press then.  I said, was this really true?  And people said, yeah, he was because I was talking to Bob Starks.  And Bob said, yeah, yeah, he was.  I said, well, all this stuff doesn't seem to make sense, you know.  Shouldn't he have an enemy?  (Laughter).  I mean politics in Chicago is more complicated --
Speaker 2: It really is.  It really is.
Story_ID: 19750
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the moment right after you were voted in, in city hall and Richard [F.] Mell got up on a desk and reached his arms skyward and said, "We've got us a mayor, we've got us a mayor".  And black folks all over the city saw this, and other people too saw it.  And, you know, you know what the impression was?
Speaker 2: Right, disgusting.
Speaker 1: So, here's--Dorothy [J.] Tillman's calling you Uncle Tom--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you got Richard Mell talking about, "We got us a mayor", and it looks like, you know, it looks like you're fitting the bill for us, you know, in terms of that role.  And it made people, you know, very upset, and all around the city, being the impression, but what did you feel and what did you decide to do?
Speaker 2: I didn't really see Dick doing it cause I had my back turned to him, but I thought it was disgusting for that kind of thing to be happening in the city council, especially he's a multi-millionaire, you know, got a mattress factory in my home state, got the next governor as his son-in-law.  Disgusting.
Speaker 1: The way you appeared on television at that time, that you seemed almost stunned, like, you know, throughout the whole proceeding, it seemed like you had, you know, you were there, but you weren't there.  Is that how you felt?
Speaker 2: That's how I felt.  That's really how I felt because there were so many things I heard like, somebody said I, I--we were coming in the council chambers and people were just--the whole front entrances was just packed with people.  And we had to push our way through.  And I was picked up almost off my feet by the crowd surging forward.  And then all of a sudden the crowd opened just like that, and I almost fell, you know, when the, when the crowd moved away.  And they, depicted it as if my knees were buckling which wasn't the case, you know, which wasn't true, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is something that people said.  They said that, yeah.
Speaker 2: That wasn't true.  This is a crowd of people, pushing, shoving, you know, and when they finally moved away, I almost tripped, stumbled.  But it was a tough time.
Speaker 1: So it's probably, I would guess this is probably the unhappiest mayor selection in the history of the city [Chicago, Illinois].  I can't imagine anybody being unhappy being mayor or, but you seemed like an unwilling and an unhappy kind of candidate, you know, at the time, at the very moment.  I can't think of anybody, you know, usually you associate these things with smiles and--
Speaker 2: Well, usually you want people to love and think positive about you, you know.  But it didn't happen at the time, but now people are totally different.
Speaker 1: And that day probably--I know I've never seen a larger demonstration by black people in the city for anything than what we saw around city hall that day.
Story_ID: 19751
Speaker 1: What did you decided to do cause I was saying, you know, that it's different, you know, than this image that people had of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I just basically decided that I was gonna move the Harold Washington agenda; whatever I thought Harold would do, I would do, like the Gay Rights Ordinance, you know.  Harold wanted that passed.
Speaker 1: That's a progressive-type ordinance?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I, the only thing I did was change the name of it, the Human Rights Ordinance.  That's all I did.  And it passed, even though some people didn't want to vote for it.  And I had to threaten them.  I even made a threat to Sheneather Butler.  But I just decided to follow the agenda that Harold had set out.
Speaker 1: Now, your acceptance speech, basically was just what you just described.  I mean you just, you said, you basically pledged to Harold Washington, you know, in your inaugural speech, that you would continue his programs and policies--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --the best you could and with all the strength you had.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it worked.  And I didn't sit in that chair for a month.  I sat on the side of my desk cause that's just the respect that I had for Harold.
Speaker 1: Now, were all the 29, I mean the member of the old 29, who were now 25, were they disappointed with your performance as mayor?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Some people in that city council wanted to be right.  Some might have wanted to stick with the, the attitudes of people that are racist, I want--you want to call them, but--
Speaker 1: Racists.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's basically what it is.  But I think some people wanted to be right, and tried to do right.  But you have to understand that certain people have to follow the feelings of their constituents and other people, until you get people in the frame of mind where they want to think like you think and do what's right, and a lot of people want to do that.  But sometimes you can't give in to people.  And the majority of the people want to push in another direction.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think a politician should always go with his constituents?
Speaker 2: Sometimes you need to push your constituents to go with you if you think it's right.
Speaker 1: So, there's some education that has to be done--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --on some level too.
Speaker 2: --you've got to do some educating.
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess it depends on what's at stake.
Speaker 2: Like [George W.] Bush needs some education right now.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your administration.  There's some--you're starting in a real tough situation, you know, the black mayor with a split black community.  Some people are for you, some people are against you.  Some people--a lot of people though, who were initially against you being the mayor just because of the, you know, some of the things that happened right after Harold died, they came around to thinking, well, we have a black mayor now.  So that's important, you know.  And he seems to be doing, following the agenda, so that's important.  There were others didn't--said they, basically, said, they'd never support you cause they saw you as a--had a real emotional reaction to you as someone who had betrayed, you know, the whole cause.  So I mean how did you--what steps did you make?  Did you feel you had to do anything to get those people, get that coalition back together?  Did, I mean what did you try to do to pull it back?
Speaker 2: Well, we did a lot of things.  We had--going around the city [Chicago, Illinois].  We had the programs going around to make the city, one city.  One people, working together.  We went around on Sundays to different churches, but I saw that we weren't really making the amount of progress I thought we ought to be making, particularly in the white areas.  So I just relegated myself to the black community, and tried to work with them because people are more forgiving in a sense in our community than they are in others, much more forgiving.  And it worked.
Speaker 1: Well, you were able to get some people back (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Some people came back, right.
Speaker 1: All right, but not everybody, right, cause--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 19752
Speaker 1: One of the incidents when you were mayor that really, that--it hurt your credibility in the white community, was the incident with Steve Cokely.  Can you talk about that?  Now, who was Steve Cokely and what happened?
Speaker 2: Steve was a member of my staff and a young man I tried to help.  I know that a lot of times young black people don't get the amount of support that they need.  And they tried, even though they're trying, and I thought Steve was one of those people who was gonna try to improve himself.  We sent, we sent him to the barbershop.  We sent him to the clothing store for some clothes.  And we did everything we could.  I made sure that his insurance was in force by putting him on the city payroll.  Then he gets the insurance.  I did everything I could to help him out because I remember when I first started out, I was helped by somebody else.  And I just got disappointed time and time again by Steve making silly statements.  And even then I, I didn't fire him fast enough for some people.
Speaker 1: Now, there's one big incident that hit the news, but you're saying that there were more things that, you know, where he--it wasn't just this one incident.  There were other incidents where he said something that really wasn't quite--
Speaker 2: I, I very honestly don't remember all the things he said.  But I know he said some things more than once.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the incident he got in trouble for, he made a remark about--now, he's, prior to his association with you, he was known as a speaker around town, you know, at various events he would speak, usually before the small groups--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He was known as a researcher and a person who was kind of a gadfly of the establishment and that sort of thing and a conspiracy theorist on some level too, a very bright man.  But, now, this particular incident where he hit the headlines, I think he was speaking at the, before the Nation of Islam and made a remark that Jewish doctors were injecting black babies with AIDS [Auto-Immune Deficiency Virus].  And that was, that was the--and someone, a reporter got a hold of it from a tape and seemed to recognize that Steve Cokely was a staff member, you know, of yours.  And it's the kind of thing that's kind--when I--well, you know, when people heard about it that knew him, they felt it was almost accidental that somebody found out cause usually there are no white reporters at the events that a person like Steve would speak at, you know.  But, you know, when it hit the news, it was a big, you know, they had a big deal.  And I mean what did, how did all that--did you think it was gonna be as big a deal as it was when it first hit?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And why not?  Didn't you--
Speaker 2: Cause I didn't think enough people knew Steve.  But I can understand how they would feel, I really can.
Speaker 1: Did you think the remarks were just so wild that nobody would believe anybody would really--
Speaker 2: I was hoping so, but apparently not.  Particularly, I knew that AIDS is such a thing that's prevalent in our community.  And we didn't know if, the ones who were killed by it, but it was just one of those situations where I, made a mistake.
Speaker 1: So--what, some of us thought, who observed this from outside of city government, and, you know, and just looking at it in the community, we thought that probably what Steve should have done was resign--
Speaker 2: I thought he would.
Speaker 1: --right away.  And--
Speaker 2: I had another job for him.  I had another place for him, where nobody would have known--private industry.
Speaker 1: But he didn't resign.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: He kind of kept the spotlight on himself for over a week.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, so I had to fire him.
Speaker 1: And this thing being broadcast over and over on the news and associated with you.  But you had to keep denying that you, you know, which,--so you had to end up firing him, which was, which looked, it makes an ugly scene for everybody.
Speaker 2: Right, and which it also blew the opportunity for the private industry job.
Speaker 1: So did you have any idea why he--
Speaker 2: I don't know, because at one time, he was with Marian Humes, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's where he started out at.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And when he lost his (unclear) I thought I was helping him.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I forgot that.  He was working for Marian Humes in the 8th ward, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this, you know, this incident stirred up a black and Jewish debate and going around the city [Chicago, Illinois].  And so much so, it spread out into the nation and became national news.  And prominent Jewish people from around the country come to Chicago to help defeat you in the next election, which is, you know, it's hard to imagine, you know, a scenario stronger, you know, than people coming all way into town just to defeat you, I mean in a Chicago election, but--because of what Steve Cokely said.  But it didn't reflect what you--
Speaker 2: What I felt or what I said.
Story_ID: 19753
Speaker 1: You ran for re-election, I mean you were an interim mayor.  And you had to like run for election, right, in a special election?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which black people filed a suit on.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Black people filed a suit to that election.
Speaker 1: Oh, to have--
Speaker 2: Because George Nunne had said there wouldn't be an election.  So white people couldn't file a suit.  They couldn't file a suit, had to get black people to do it.
Speaker 1: So who filed it actually?
Speaker 2: Nancy Jefferson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was head of the Midwest Community Council and she's since passed.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So she's someone that you couldn't reach, apparently, you couldn't really get to her.
Speaker 2: I (unclear)--
Speaker 1: But you couldn't reach her in terms of explaining  what was going on or--but you, well, it's strange, you know.  I mean, that sounds, now, I don't remember everything about, but it seemed to me that you were following the Harold Washington agenda (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Me and [Addie L.] Wyatt talked to her.  But it was too late then.  She had already filed it, cause I remember [William] Bill Henry had pulled some money from Nancy Jefferson that he had given her out of that discretionary money you have.  And I got a call about it.  And I finally talked to Bill about it.  And Bill didn't want to do it.  And I said, well, Bill, you're not hurting Nancy.  You're hurting the kids cause this is, this a program for kids.  And you aren't hurting Nancy.  She, she didn't care anything about this.  But the kids do.  They need the, they need that.  He backed down and I restored the money.  See a lot of people don't know a lot of things that happened.
Story_ID: 19754
Speaker 1: What we kept hearing, I think, out in the community is that more and more, and even the [Chicago] Tribune had ripped off of this when they, they did a feature about you, was that you are a nice person, you know.  And you were a good person.  And unfortunately, vilified, you know, in this whole fiasco after the mayor's [Harold Washington] death.  But, I mean, they didn't say you were the most effective politician, which you obviously would have had to been or you would have never been alderman from the 6th ward--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they, you know, all this stuff about you being a nice guy, you know, and not necessarily the most effective mayor.  But how did you feel about that assessment of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I read the stuff from the papers, like nice guys finish last, that I guess in some--and it might ring to be true.  I don't know, but I'm just who I am, and I have to remain who I am.  And that's, that's what I am.  I try to make sure that I do things to make people right--to do right by people, to help people, not to hurt them, all the time.  But I guess people want somebody to just, move their fist up like this, and I'm not that kind of person.
Story_ID: 19755
Speaker 1: Now tell me about this special election, how many candidates were there, and what did you think your prospects were?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was a lot of talk about black people having two, two shots at it.  It didn't make sense.  You know, we know that once, if you win the primary in Chicago [Illinois], you've won the election.  And I thought that Tim [Timothy C. Evans] was silly to, to grab all that.  I mean that's grabbing hold of straws and you won't make it.
Speaker 1: So, did you have discussions with him?  Did you try--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I mean we spent many hours together, but I understand it wasn't his idea--I don't know who it was, but I heard people say that it was his wife [Dr. Thelma Evans] who insisted that he run.  But that's what business people would bring to me.  They said they talked till they were blue in the face to Tim, trying to get him to understand that you let him have it for, to finish this term and one more term, then you can take it.  It'll be yours.  There won't be anybody to run against you by that time we would have organized effectively to make sure that you could, to win the next election.  I had $4 million worth of campaign funds I squandered away.  But I could have probably had maybe $10 million worth of campaign funds if I had stayed in that amount of--all the way through.  And then one more term as mayor.  And then I would turn it over to Tim.  I mean I didn't want to be mayor forever.
Speaker 1: Not like Harold (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I just wanted one more time, that was all.  Then I would have turned it over to Tim.  The fact of the matter is, when I was still a committeeman, we had a meeting in Bobby Rush's office.  I nominated Tim for judge and voted for him.  And that's when aldermen (unclear) had the power to nominate a judge.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it's probably--the general public who lived through that time would probably be shocked to find out how actually close you and Tim Evans are.  And it's not a enmity or anything going on.
Speaker 2: I don't carry grudges.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Unless people, a lot of people think I should hate Dorothy Tillman.  I don't hate Dorothy.  I don't carry grudges.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this special election took place in--
Speaker 2: '89.
Speaker 1: 1989, and basically, in the city of Chicago [Illinois] you've got to cut it like, it's the white community that basically decided on [Richard M.] Richie Daley as a candidate, who was then state's attorney, right.  And this time, Jane Byrne was not in it--
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: There's no other candi--Tom [C.] Hynes or [Edward] Vrdolyak or anybody else.  It's just Richie Daley.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, was there any other white challenger to him at all?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: Okay, it was him, and, now, tell me this, as a politician that knows the inside story, I mean was the Bridgeport coalition still ogether and tight then?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Daley was still living in Bridgeport.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  So, they were organizing from the Daley Machine still--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --hitting all, you know, still hitting it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and contrasted to that, in our community we have like a split community.  Some people saying they're for [Eugene] Sawyer, some saying they're for Evans, and some are saying, I'm voting for Sawyer the first time.  If he loses, I'll vote for Evans in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The next time, right.  It's, it's stupid.
Speaker 1: Yeah, three different positions.
Speaker 2: It doesn't work in politics, not in Chicago.  You win the primary, you win the election.
Speaker 1: The only way it can work is that people all turned out and voted at the same time for somebody (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Um, right.
Speaker 1: --which apparently, they didn't do.
Speaker 2: They didn't do, right.
Speaker 1: So what do you account that lack of turnout really, lack of turnout, and I don't know, did you detect a kind of depressed kind of condition in the community around that--
Speaker 2: Not really a depressed condition, but, you know, Dorothy Tillman was telling people to go fishing and stuff, I mean all that kind of nonsense, you know, from people, telling people don't vote this time, vote next time.  I mean under no circumstances do you tell people to vote--not to vote at any time.  I don't think so.  I don't think it's wise.  You should vote every time you get the opportunity to do it.
Speaker 1: So you think, there's a lot of confusion out here, that people are--and that's why--
Speaker 2: Right, right, a lot of confusion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that confusion ended up with what result?
Speaker 2: With a negative result.
Speaker 1: And so, you lost the election?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Tim lost.
Speaker 1: Tim lost too.
Speaker 2: Now, Daley is stronger than ever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the community lost basically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Daley wouldn't  say that.
Speaker 2: Now, we done lost a $50 billion corporation.
Speaker 1: It's the city of Chicago.
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes) That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when that election was done, how did you feel?
Speaker 2: Well, I could say relieved, but I don't like to think of a person abandoning our city, you know.  I still have love for Chicago and its people and want things to be right for my people to take it all in.  I want it to be right for all people.
Story_ID: 19756
Speaker 1: What were the highlights of your mayoralty?  What were the highlights?  I mean is there something--it's got to be good stuff out of all of this.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were good times, you know.  There were things happening in the city that--this might be insignificant for a lot of people, but lights for Wrigley [Field, Chicago, Illinois] was a lot, a lot of things for folk, baseball fans anyway.
Speaker 1: That was a big deal, lights in Wrigley Field.  That was something that hadn't occurred since the creation of Wrigley Field--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So it was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got the lights done there at Wrigley Field.  We got the gay rights ordinance done.  We got contracts for police and firemen which they hadn't had contract.  We got school reform started, and I didn't finish it.  It was finished by--it went on for quite a while.  I don't know who finished it.  But we tried.
Speaker 1: Okay, you all were experimenting with, your administration was experimenting with police reform too, I think, community policing in the various wards--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right.
Speaker 1: That's now a policy in the city--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that you--and it started under your administration.
Speaker 2: Right.  The 911 Center started.
Speaker 1: So when you look back on all of this now, I mean what do you see as your legacy as mayor?  I mean is that, are those the things that basically--
Speaker 2: Some of them, right, the first black woman appointed administrative assistant [Sharon Gist-Gillian].
Story_ID: 19757
Speaker 1: Throughout your term as mayor, a criticism has emerged of you that didn't emerge previously.  You know, nobody talked about your personality when you were an alderman.  And I don't know, it seemed to be an issue for all of the politicians too, you know.  But for mayor, for some reason, there was a lot of talk about you being too low-keyed for the spot and too low energy, appearing anyway, and your appearance was too relaxed and too, you know, subdued basically.  What was your reaction to all of that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that Harold [Washington] probably set the stage for any future mayor.  And I think people were looking for a guy, you know, gonna be doing this (shaking fist upwards) you know, and I wasn't that type of person.
Speaker 1: But, if you pardon me for saying this, I mean who they elected is not either (laughs) --
Speaker 2: Oh, right--
Speaker 1: The current mayor is not either.  He's not really the most--
Speaker 2: Right, he's different this (points at skin).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Different standards for different people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 19758
Speaker 1: You've been retired, but you actually worked, you have another, you were involved with an energy [CEI International, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: I used to be, but we had to close up cause we got embezzled for $450,000.
Speaker 1: Right, and I heard that somebody called the, they had a special name for the person that did this in the paper, they called him the Cashmere [Countess]--what was that--
Speaker 2: Something, something like--
Speaker 1: Well, it was a woman that--
Speaker 2: A woman, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- that was hired by your company.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: She [Stephanette E. Walker] ended up--embezzled you all for over $400,000, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: How did this happen?
Speaker 2: Well, she was the comptroller.  And she paid the bills.  So we didn't look in her desk and follow behind her, you know, and she bought a 400--500 SEL--
Speaker 1: Mercedes--
Speaker 2: Benz.
Speaker 1: Mercedes Benz, all right.
Speaker 2: Paid cash for it.  It looked like they would have asked some questions about it or would have called us, you know, but she had the money.  She had shifted the money to, to her account.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she, yeah, as I recall now, she set up an account for a non-existent company that had a name that sounded like a supplier of yours, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were writing checks to the supplier, that was really going right to her.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: She actually bought two cars, she bought a lot of furs.  And what's that woman on Oak Street, Contessa.
Speaker 1: Oh, they were calling her the Cashmere Countess or something, right?
Speaker 2: Contessa [sic].
Speaker 1: Contessa or something right.  So that was a disappointing experience, I know.  And the news article about it, I mean you were really kind of shocked and kind of rocked by it.
Speaker 2: Right.  But what could I do, you know.  We got one check on restitution for $140 (laughs)  against five, about $500,000.
Speaker 1: And so have you regained your trust in human beings since then?
Speaker 2: I look at them with a close eye now (laughs), very close eye.
Story_ID: 19759
Speaker 1: What are your some of your hopes and concerns for the black community now?
Speaker 2: Well, I just hope we can at some point and time come together and move in a concerted effort to change things.  Things are not good yet.  They still have a long way to go, but we've come a long way.  But we've still got a long way to go.  And I just hope that we can work things out somehow, come together and stay together.
Speaker 1: What can a politician do--well, what are some of the, I guess some of the rewards and pitfalls of being a politician in the black community these days?  I mean you've got a, you know, you can look back and probably see the bulk of it, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's just that I'd like to think that politicians would always tell the truth, no matter what, how it might hurt.  I'm not the one who would advocate not telling the truth.  You've got to tell the truth.  And we can, we can achieve whatever goal we set for ourselves but we're gonna have to be truthful with people.
Speaker 1: So you think that's the key really.
Speaker 2: That's the key.
Speaker 1: So whatever happens--
Speaker 2: And always talk to people.  You might not be able to solve people's problems, but at least listen to them.  You're gonna have to listen.
Story_ID: 19760
Speaker 1: Do you think that people today understand, you know, what happened during those turbulent days?
Speaker 2: Not totally.  Not totally.  I don't think they completely understand.
Speaker 1: Do you think they understand a little bit better now than they used to?
Speaker 2: I hope so.  I hope so.
Speaker 1: And how do you feel about the gap between your intentions and the perception that people have of what you're doing--or what you've done, you know?
Speaker 2: It's very hard to say.  I think that we ought to really look at a person's heart and try to get a feel for what they're trying to do and try to understand, as they say, try to walk a mile in their shoes.
Story_ID: 19761
Speaker 1: Were your parents alive at all when you became mayor.
Speaker 2: Only my mother [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer].
Speaker 1: Okay, how did she feel about it?
Speaker 2: My mother was in the South.  You know, she just thought that--she didn't really know much about what a mayor does in a city this size, you know.  But she was happy and surprised.  I went there when I was mayor, and having all the security and all this stuff, you know.  They had a parade and stuff, you know, and--but she was happy.
Speaker 1: She was proud.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 19762
Speaker 1: You have children, right?
Speaker 2: I have 3.
Speaker 1: Three--
Speaker 2: Two boys and a girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, are any of them involved in politics at all?
Speaker 2: My son, who's a lawyer, he's advising the alderman of the 5th Ward.  And I have a nephew whose running for alderman of the 3rd Ward.
Story_ID: 19763
Speaker 1: When you look back on things, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, you could say that, I can say you didn't really support someone who had your interests totally at heart.  I tried to do what was right.  And I don't think I failed.  I think that I might have failed to communicate properly to people.  I hope that at some, one time, people will understand better.  But in the interim, I'm gonna continue to try to do what's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, this is slightly different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I guess I would still like to be remembered in that vein, that people--that I tried to do what was right, and I tried to help somebody.
