Story_ID: 625759
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Earl Wardell Stafford [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], E-A-R-L, W-A-R-D-E-L-L, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 14, 1948, and I was born in Mount Holly, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a businessman.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 30, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my residence in McLean, Virginia.
Story_ID: 625760
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, all, no (laughter).  I like southern cooking.  I, I, some of it is not as healthy for you as it should be, I guess, but I like, I like good comfort foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I, I prefer the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like Europe.  I, I do, I, I like France in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I say, "God bless you," a lot to people, or bless you, or be blessed, something along those lines.
Story_ID: 625761
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Stafford] side, but we're going to ask about them separately.  Then, I'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Put them together, okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mabel Evelyn Willis, M-A-B-E-L, E-V-E-L-Y-N, W-I-L-L-I-S [Mabel Willis Stafford].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on March 10, 1912 in Ruther Glen, Caroline County, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Ruther Glen?
Speaker 2: R-U-T-H-E-R, G-L-E-N, two words.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, Virginia, I'm sorry, Virginia. Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Can you go back to the 19th century with them or, and, and what were they doing in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I, I have.  I've actually done some initial genealogical research.  And I can go back to my mother's grandmother, thus far, who was born in 1850, I believe it was, in slavery.  And I can go back to my mother's father, Henry Willis [William H. Willis], who was born in Culpeper, Virginia in 1873, I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from slavery from your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, we, we, we haven't been able to get much information from my older uncles and aunt who are still living now.  And so, most of what we have gotten has come through research at the National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] or on the Internet.  The one uncle who still is cogent, I speak with, he's ninety something, and we, we, we chat once in a while.  He affirms some of the information that I've had, but they, we weren't able to purge a lot of that before many of the older people passed on unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there are no stories about what kind of work they did during slavery or what their (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, unfortunately, I, I don't have any of that information.  And, again, most of what we get, and I've gotten, has come from the Ancestry.com, the National Archives, and some other records.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know if your ancestors on your mother's side or, or were farmers, or did they work in the city or--
Speaker 2: They were pretty much laborers.  I will tell you at the turn of the century in the, in the industrial area when many of the agrarians, and those who'd worked on farms started coming north to Chicago [Illinois] and, and those areas.  My grandfather or my mother's father came from Ruther Glen, and went to New Jersey seeking work, and finally found work at Campbell Soup Company [Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And eventually migrated my family, my mother's side, her brothers and sisters, and her mother, to New Jersey.
Story_ID: 625762
Speaker 1: Does your mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] remember rural life and did she remember rural life in Ruther Glen [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: She just remembers it being a happy time, and she was young when she, she came to New Jersey.  But she just talks about it being a happy time going to church.  Evidently, I found out that my grandfather [William H. Willis] and my grandmother [Jennie Willis] went to separate churches in the same town.  And she recalls going to each of those churches.  They would have services every other Sunday.  And the other church would have church is when the first church wasn't having services.  So, she remembers always being in church and going to different churches, and just having a good time, but don't recall anything specific.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, then your mother, did she, she grow up in Mount Holly [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Camden--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --area where, where my grandfather lived, Camden, New Jersey until she met my father [Robert Stafford].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, okay, now what did your mother say about growing up?  And did she have any stories about growing up or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that she, the emphasis was on working back then and supporting the family.  I believed there were thirteen in my mother's family, and they had a big house on 304 Mickle Street [Mickle Boulevard; Dr. Martin Luther King Boulevard] in Camden, New Jersey. And it was on three or four different levels, and different families lived on different levels in, within her family.  And she recalls always having had to work to the extent that after the sixth grade, my mother dropped out of school to, I'm sorry, after the ninth grade, she dropped out of school to, to work.  And at that time, the emphasis wasn't on education for females.  It was on working, and you would get married, and your husband would take care of you, and you would take care of the house and the children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, was she married by that time or--
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't married by that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She wasn't married by that time.  My understanding is that she met my father, who was attending a church right next door to the house, this large house where my mother was raised.  And she was looking out the window, and she saw this dapper man and she said, going into the church, and she told her sister, "That's going to be my husband."  And they were, they were laughing and joking and kidding.  And as fate would have it, sometime later, she was introduced to my dad and, they eventually got married.
Story_ID: 625763
Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Robert William Stafford [Robert Stafford], R-O-B-E-R-T, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Dad was born on June 13, 1906.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: And he was born in Mount Holly, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Mount Holly, and now, now does he, do they have a family tradition of having been from some other place or were they--
Speaker 2: And his father [Robert Stafford] outside came from Delaware.  And we've done some research there and I can get back to about 1806.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Delaware still, in Delaware?
Speaker 2: In Delaware--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where they were enslaved and freed.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, all right.  Are there any stories from that period of time?
Speaker 2: No, none, none that I know of except one.  I, I've done some research and I found out, and this is more speculation than, than, anything empirical.  I saw a gap.  I was able to go back through the census and through the records, and see who lived in the household, and my father's father, and his father [John Stafford], and his father.  And then there was a gap, and then his father, as a younger man, showed up again.  And I didn't understand, and I questioned, I've spoken to some people at Delaware State University [Dover, Delaware], and some other genealogical persons.  And they believe what had happened, many of the so called Negroes were freed in the early 19th century and in the late 1790s because there was a change of crops and manumission.  And then the Quaker influence from Pennsylvania was there, so many of the slaves were freed.  And my great-great-grandfather, being one, was there but evidently, he became too, too uppity.  And he started approaching a white woman, I understand, and that wasn't tolerated, and they ran him out of town.  And he went across the river to New Jersey and settled, and then came back later in life, and reestablished with his family.  And then, eventually, they moved back to New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this would be your great-great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you know his name by chance?
Speaker 2: William Stafford [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, okay.  Slavery lasted in Delaware, I guess until what, the 1830s or '40s [1840s]?
Speaker 2: I think it was the '30s [1830s].  And what it was, I understand, they were primarily women and, and those who were around the house.  The, the, the crop had changed in Delaware, and more industrial, industrialization had taken place, and the slaves weren't needed as much.  That, coupled with the influence from the Quakers in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area and the Pennsylvania area to free the slaves, many of the slaves were freed.  The problem was they were freed, but they had no skillset.  What would they do?  They had no assets to, and no capital to buy anything.  And so, they returned to the masters and worked, and weren't exactly slaves, but they were on the plantation or in, in the fields for him for food and, and, and care.
Story_ID: 625764
Speaker 1: So your father [Robert Stafford], is there a story about how the family moved to Mount Holly [New Jersey] or--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know the story and it hasn't been told.  But in doing the research and looking at the census, we see that they, my father's father [Robert Stafford] and his brothers in the late 19th century migrated.  One went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a couple of years, but eventually all of them ended up in Mount Holly, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what did your father say about growing up?  I mean, what, what were things like for him growing up and you know?
Speaker 2: You know, unfortunately, and, and I was one of the younger of twelve children, and so genealogy and those things, when my father was living, that wasn't on my mind.  So, I didn't think to ask him and, and so, we don't have a lot, a lot of stories about him growing up.  But we do know that he grew up in Mount Holly, New Jersey, was educated, went to a training school at a high school in Bordentown, New Jersey [Manual Training and Industrial School for Colored Youth], and was a decent student.  He wasn't an A student, as I found out, because I saw some of his grades (laughter), some of his papers that he kept in a chest in the cellar.  But he, he was, he pushed education, but he grew up with his, his brothers there and his close cousin, Robert White [ph.], who he was very close to, even until death.  And, but it was a, a wonderful upbringing.  He worked in the farms in that area until he became, he, he got older and got married.  And then, his father-in-law [William H. Willis], as you recall, my grandfather on my mother's side, after he got married, my father-in-law helped him get employment with Campbell Soup Company where he worked for forty years until he retired.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  Now, Campbell Soup was in, in--
Speaker 2: Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Camden, okay.
Speaker 2: So it still is headquartered in Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right, so he had, now--now that brings us to the story where your mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] looks--sees him out the window, you know, going to the church.
Speaker 2: Well, that was before then, because then they--he got married, and then his father-in-law helped him get employment.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Grandpop helped him get employment in Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm trying to follow his life going from the farm to Camden.  So, he gets to Camden to, you know, do you know why he was in Camden?
Speaker 2: No, I said Camden was only fifteen miles away from Mount Holly and, again, he, he didn't live in Camden.  He lived in Mount Holly and commuted, but that's where he met my mother.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, she sees him out the window and--
Speaker 2: She had seen him out the window and, eventually, by happenstance, they were introduced, fell in love, got married, and he was still working in, on the farm outside of Mount Holly.  And then his father-in-law, after he got married, helped him get employment at Campbell Soup Company, you see, and that's where he stayed employed for forty years until he retired.
Speaker 1: Now, your father is in a generation that falls between the wars.  Actually, he was too young for World War I [WWI] and--
Speaker 2: Exactly--
Speaker 1: --probably too old for World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: --exactly, yeah.  And so, my father never served in the [U.S.] military and during that, and he often--I've heard him say that he regretted that.  He, he had great admiration for those in the military, and his first four sons did go into the military after that--went into the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In fact, during that period, I think they really tried to keep black people out of the military.  It seems strange now with so many blacks in the military.
Speaker 2: Well, they, they, even if they did go in and got into the military, they were relegated to very menial jobs.  And training really wasn't provided for the, for minorities in the military at that time.
Story_ID: 625765
Speaker 1: Considering your parents' talents and their dispositions, their hobbies, habits, even their looks--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, it's funny you say that because we, we joke in the family, we call it the Stafford side and then the Willis side.  And I was a spitting image of my father [Robert Stafford] growing up, and people, everyone knew that I was my father's son.  And then, as I get older and got into my forties and fifties, I now favor more of my mother's [Mabel Willis Stafford] side, the Willis side.  And now, when I look back at pictures, I see the transformation, if you will, that I do look like Uncle Donald [Donald Willis], you know, on my mother's side.  So, I, I think now I look more like a Willis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do.
Story_ID: 625766
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from Campbell Soup [Campbell Soup Company, Camden, New Jersey], I mean, in terms of the work there 'cause I've heard some from people.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I want you to--
Speaker 2: --I, I will tell you.  I, I recall, firsthand, my father [Robert Stafford], especially when, when they were going through what they call the tomato season.  That's from late July until the end of August where they pick tomatoes, and they had to get the tomatoes in.  The farms around Camden [New Jersey] and that area, southern Jersey [New Jersey], produced the vegetables for Campbell Soup primarily.  And during the tomato season, my father, I would hardly see my father.  He would work around the clock.  Sometimes he would sleep in the car for a couple of hours and go back to work.  And that was good for the family because we were, we, we, we didn't have much money at all.  And, but during that season, he was able to earn overtime and extra money, and the living was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so he did like, his work for Campbell Soup was, did he like one thing to do or did he just--
Speaker 2: He, he worked in the canning department where they were canning and packing and doing that.  He became a supervisor in that area and oversaw a shift where they, they canned the different soups.  They had them labeled and, and packed and sent to the warehouse.
Story_ID: 625767
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, you're the youngest of twelve, right?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest boy.
Speaker 1: The youngest boy, okay.
Speaker 2: The youngest boy of twelve, I had three sisters younger.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Then the, my sister, Carol [Carol Stafford], who's two years younger, is still living.  I had a sister, Katherine Marie [Katherine Stafford (ph.)] who died at a very young age.  And my sister, Gail [Jewell Stafford Bryant], who was the youngest, was four years younger than I am, and she passed about fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you go through the list of, you know, of your siblings, and insert yourself where you come, you know, where you come in?
Speaker 2: Oh, easily, easy, I might not be able to give you the birthdates but I, I do know the order of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my oldest brother who's still living and living in Virginia, Harold Stafford.  Then there is Wilbur Stafford who's now deceased.  A brother, Warren Stafford, who lives in California.  A brother, Robert Stafford, who lives in Camden, New Jersey.  I had a brother, Frankie [ph.], who passed as a child and I never knew.  I have an older brother, Eugene [Eugene Stafford], who lives in Mount Holly, New Jersey.  I have a brother, Ron- Ronald [Ronald Stafford], who deceased several years ago.  Then my sister, and the first girl, my sister, Joan [Joan Stafford Norman], who lives in Mount Holly, New Jersey.  And they, well, she's always been my second mother.  She, she, she watches over me.  And there's a seven year gap, and then there's myself, Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford].  And then, two years later, Carol.  And one year after her was Katherine Marie.  And one year after her was Jewell Gail Stafford.
Story_ID: 625768
Speaker 1: Now, was it unusual in those days for a family to be that large or was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, not at all.  I, I think it was a way of showing fertility, and it was just people had large families like that.  And without consideration of economics, as I believe, because you know, if you were considering economics, you wouldn't have twelve children.  You would have four children and, and do well, but we weren't that unusual at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when you grew up, did you, or was it just your mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] and father [Robert Stafford] and siblings in the household, or were you there with your grandparents, too, or--
Speaker 2: No, I had a, in 1958, I believe it was, I was ten years old.  And my grandmother, who was living independently and her husband, my grandfather, had deceased, she got hit by a car, and she was in her eighties, and she got hit by a car.  So, she came to live with us at home.  And she, she lived with us about four years, about four years there and they, they were good years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it was mostly just your immediate--
Speaker 2: Just the immediate family lived in the house [in Mount Holly, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  By, I guess by the time you came along, some of the older people had moved, had moved, the older (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even when I was born, my oldest brother, Harold [Harold Stafford], he had gone into, he had gone into the [U.S.] military.  And then, my second brother, Wilbur [Wilbur Stafford], followed him.  And, and then the Korean War was there, and my third brother, Warren [Warren Stafford], followed him.  And my young- their younger brother, Rip [ph.] at the time, followed him.  So, I really didn't get to know them when I was a, a child or infant until after the war was over.  And some came out and returned back into the Mount Holly [New Jersey] area, and some stayed in California.  And my brother, Harold, the oldest one, lived for many years in the Philippines and the Pacific until he retired in the 1980s.
Story_ID: 625769
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest memory I have is of my oldest brother [Harold Stafford] giving me a red locomotive bank, a little plastic bank, and I, for some reason, recall that.  I can tell you exactly what room of the house it was, and I was happy.  And I couldn't have been any more than two or three years old when he came back, and he brought for his youngest brother a little bank.  And I recall that, I recall being happy and, and that's the earliest memory I have in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's different, that's weird.  I, I don't know why, and he recalls giving me the bank.  He recalls bringing that home for me, so that had to be about 1951 timeframe.
Story_ID: 625770
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same neighborhood, I never moved, I never moved.
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that you even moved back to that neighborhood at some point later in life, right?
Speaker 2: I was reassigned to, when I was in the [U.S.] military and married, I was reassigned to McGuire Air Force Base [Joint Base McGuire Dix Lakehurst, New Jersey] and which is ten miles away, I think--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from there.  So, I did for three years, moved back into the area, and then left again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you describe the area that you grew up in and describe for us the sights, the sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My childhood in Mount Holly [New Jersey], Mount Holly is a suburb of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], twenty miles due east, twenty, yeah, about twenty miles due east of Philadelphia.  And it's a wonderful--[President] George Washington slept here--small, quiet town where there was a great sense of community.  Everyone knew each other, and we lived in a section of town called the hill that was, at the time, all black, and it was a black section of town.  And we were relegated there.  The house that I grew up in at 33 Willow Street, a very small street, it was unpaved until about 1960, I, I, think, was next to the railroad tracks that ran, that ran into Philadelphia from eastern New Jersey.  And I just recall my childhood as being happy, a lot of fun.  Now, it's almost aggrieving to live next to a railroad track, but we had a lot of fun as children when the train would go past.  And sometimes, one of the conductors, they'd throw a candy bar or something at the kids.  And when you're four or five years old, that's, that's a big deal doing that, knowing what time, my father [Robert Stafford] taught me the schedule when the trains were coming by when I was a young boy.  It, it was just a wonderful secure feeling growing up in Mount Holly.  There is a smell, the smells that I recall were when my mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] was baking.  She made the best apple pie.  I tell you, I, I recall when she baked, and many times, she baked on Fridays or Saturdays for Sunday dinner.  We always had a Sunday dinner.  And the smells that came out of the kitchen were just amazing, just amazing.  But the sounds, it was, it was a small town.  It was relatively quiet except for the trains coming by.  And the street I lived on was very small, so we didn't get much traffic at all.  And it was just a great, great childhood.
Story_ID: 625771
Speaker 1: What was the size of your house?  I mean, what was--
Speaker 2: We, we, we lived in an attached house that initially had three homes to it.  They had to tear one down.  And eventually, the one next to us was condemned and wasn't torn down.  And we had, our home was not large at all.  When I was a child, it seemed large.  But as I came into adulthood, I said, my god, we, we, we lived here?  But many of us, there were three or four or five of us in the same bedroom.  And three or four of us in the same bed until I became older, and, and my sister had gotten married.  And what, I had shared a bedroom with my older brother, and then he left.  And, hallelujah, I had my own bedroom, and I was the only boy left, so I had my own bedroom there and, but we were, it was very small.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was like a row house three--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was like a row house, yeah.
Speaker 1: But the only, but the other two units--
Speaker 2: And the one had gotten torn down in my childhood.  And then, there was a family, the Robertsons [ph.], who lived next door, they moved out.  The house was condemned.  And they, they put junk in there and newspapers.  And that was important when I was a child because I used to go in there to that condemned house.  My mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] was a domestic who lived for--who worked for Ms. Cooke [ph.] and Ms. Powell [ph.], some of the other more wealthy white people in town.  And they would give her old magazines to discard, and she would bring them home and put them in--National Geographic, Look, Life, Post, [The Saturday Evening Post], Ebony. Well, they wouldn't give her Ebony.  We would have Ebony and Jet, and I would go in there for some reason and just spend hours just going through magazines, going through National Geographic, and living vicariously around the world.  And I was just intrigued with, with that.  I, I would spend many hours in there.  I recall, I think it was 1958, '59 [1959] timeframe.  And I was in there reading, and I recall an article in Ebony, I believe it was, about Willie Mays who moved to San Francisco [California].  And he bought a home, and I believe it was for the forty thousand dollars.  And back then, we showcased things in the magazines and I saw this home.  He had a swimming pool.  It was just such a nice home, and I recall sitting there reading this magazine with my mouth wide open and said, "Oh man, I would love to be somewhere like that."  It was just, it, it was just amazing.
Story_ID: 625772
Speaker 1: We were discussing some of the magazines that you were reading in your youth--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --that inspired you, you know, many brought home by your mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] who worked for various white people.
Speaker 2: Who worked for--as a domestic.  And, and I, I lived part of my life through those magazines, as I said vicariously.  But they had an impact because I saw positive people, positive black people in Ebony and in, in Jet magazines, and some of the things that they were doing.  And then, in National Geographic, I saw parts of the world that I, I really wasn't familiar with in Africa, and Finland, the Laplanders, and, and things like that.  It opened up my, my mind and gave me a different perspective.
Speaker 1: I think during the break, we were like, kind of were reflecting, on the effect of the rich on the poor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of the working relationship.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They get this--and you said you had a chance to go to the homes of the wealthy?
Speaker 2: And, and help my mom sometimes, and help do some of the garden work, or do some of the things at, at their home.  And there was always--and sometimes they would come--bring my mother home.  And there was always an encouraging word from some of these much older white ladies, and it, it encouraged you.  And understand, this is during a--we weren't segregated, but there, there definitely was an hierarchy there in town [Mount Holly, New Jersey].  You knew who you were, and as I say, said, you know, what your place was and, but so, when they gave you an encouraging word, that was, that was a good thing, yeah.
Story_ID: 625773
Speaker 1: Was there a black side of town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was called the hill.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was the--
Speaker 2: And pretty much, it still is, although it's being--as I go home sometimes, I see more and more whites.  And it was on the higher side of town, so when flooding or if there was a lot of rain or whatever, we wouldn't be affected.  And that was appealing, that's more appealing now to developers, but we lived on the black section of town called the hill.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Railroad tracks there?
Speaker 2: Railroad tracks, of course, and those type things, and it was just a great community--sense of community.  Everyone knew each other.  You would get scolded--even a whipping from a neighbor just as soon as your parents would whip you.  And they cared about each other.  It was just a wonderful, wonderful upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Camden [New Jersey], right?
Speaker 2: No, this is Mount Holly--
Speaker 1: Mount Holly.
Speaker 2: --New Jersey.  I never lived in Camden, only in Mount Holly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I asked that question 'cause I was getting confused when I said, is this, is he talking about Mount Holly or Camden?
Speaker 2: No, I only lived in Mount Holly, New Jersey.  I only lived in one house, the house I was born in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --33 Willow Street.
Story_ID: 625774
Speaker 1: I know you can't be exact, but can you kind of give us an idea of the demographics of the town?  I mean, who was there and what percentage were the black people, do you think in those days?
Speaker 2: In a small town, I think the 1950 census was about eight thousand people in the town, in the, in the, in the town limits.  And there were suburbs, if you will, there were other municipalities right next to it that, you know, it was really put together.  And I guess there were about twenty-five thousand people in that area, if that, and it was a smaller town as you know.  And I would, I, I would even guess that maybe 25 percent were black in Mount Holly [New Jersey] itself.  There was definitely a demarcation demographically.  The blacks lived on the western side of town, and the whites lived elsewhere, and that's where the high school was.  And on the other side, there was another township, Hainesport [New Jersey] that was almost all white.  So, we were sandwiched in between the whites in the, in Mount Holly, and the whites in, in Hainesport.  Now, we all went to a regional high school, Rancocas Valley Regional High School [Mount Holly, New Jersey], which was on the other side of town.  And there was a rule that if you lived less than two miles from the school--no, I'm sorry, if you lived, lived less than a mile from the school, you had to walk.  Well, of course, the black section of town was about three quarters of a mile.  And the kids right there in Hainesport is exactly a mile, so they up the street, had a bus going to school (laughter).  And we, as blacks, had to walk to school, and walk through town, and walked all the way to the other side of town through the nice neighborhoods to get to the high school.  And I look back now--that was a good thing because we had a chance to talk.  And as, as kids would do, we laughed and joked on the way to school.  We tease each other, play the dozens, and things of that nature, and so it was a good experience.  It was, it was a, it was a positive experience having to walk back and forth to school that many of the white kids, who lived in Hainesport, never had that opportunity.
Speaker 1: I wonder, though, if the rule was made be- before--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the demographic was settled or afterwards, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: --well, well, they knew what they were doing (laughter).  We, we know that.  They knew what they were doing, and they were able to get away with that legally without sending buses up for the black kids to come to school.
Story_ID: 625775
Speaker 1: Far as you know, were there any, was there black representation in city government?
Speaker 2: Not until later years.  My father [Robert Stafford]--I come to find out, when they established a civil rights commission, was appointed to the civil rights commission.  And it was because of him, I understand, that we got street lights more, and we got some of the streets paved on that side of town.  And it doesn't seem like much now, but that was a big deal back then in, in the 1950s, in that, in that era.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your father, it seems, from what I read, and what you're telling me now about Campbell Soup [Campbell Soup Company, Camden, New Jersey], now he--you said he became like a supervisor at Campbell Soup or on or--
Speaker 2: On the line, on the production line, right.
Speaker 1: On the line, okay.
Speaker 2: On canning.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, he's also, so he's also involved in civil rights and he's an assistant pastor, too?
Speaker 2: He was assistant pastor at a church that my family founded in 1904.  And the Baptist church that I understand, cousins found the Second Baptist Church of Mount Holly.  You know, there's all--if there's a Second Baptist, you know it's a black church, because First Baptist primarily is always white.  And so, they founded the Second Baptist Church in Mount Holly, New Jersey in 1904.  And one of my uncles eventually certified or ordained the--another minister to come in and the church grew.  And my father got a calling and became an assistant pastor there at the church.
Speaker 1: Is there, what you say is true, it's a good point.  Second Baptist is usually always a--
Speaker 2: Second Baptist is always a black church.
Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan] and other cities, a Second Baptist church--
Speaker 2: It's always a black church.
Speaker 1: --it's always a black church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how your family founded the church, or were they one of another group, of a group of families, or did they do it themselves?
Speaker 2: No, they did it themselves, I understand, in Mount Holly.  And these were cousins, I understand, who started worshipping.  And I can't recall her name now in her home--and then grew to the point where they decided to organize formally.  And so, they were worshipping in her home on the other side of town and--
Speaker 1: Can the--
Speaker 2: --in the country.
Speaker 1: In the home of another black person or--
Speaker 2: My cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name is Stafford [Romelda Stafford] and I can't recall her name.  And it, it grew to the point where they organized formally and founded the Second Baptist Church in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Sometimes, the Second Baptist grows out of the First Baptist where at some juncture, there are black people attending the First Baptist Church, but are not treated with equality, and so they found their own church.
Speaker 2: I, I attend the church here in Alexandria, Virginia that had that experience, but no Second Baptist Church evolved.  And they got together and organized, and in 1906, they built a church that's still standing in Mount Holly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Well, the site is still there.  They've built another church since then.
Story_ID: 625776
Speaker 1: Now, so I suppose the church was--really made a big impression on you growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, it, it was, it was a significant part of my faith, my religion.  It was a significant part of my life growing up.  And my entire family--we, we have histories of being ministers or, or deacons involved in the church.  That was, that was part of our ancestry and it wasn't--if you go in the church, it's where you're going to sit in church.  No, your, your faith, and it continues to be an integral part of, of our family culture.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you, so how many times would you say you went to church during a week?  I mean, would you, would you have to go on Wednesday for prayer meeting?
Speaker 2: Oh, Sunday, when I was a child--Sunday, you went pretty much all day from Sunday school, and sometimes down to BTU, as they called the Baptist Training Union, and then after that, the evening service.  And so, as a child, sometimes you can get home at eight or nine o'clock at night after you could, you could have spent all day at church, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do recall after the main service at eleven o'clock, my mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] and father [Robert Stafford] were always giving.  I mean, they, they were, they were just great people.  And if there were new people visiting the church [Second Baptist Church, Mount Holly, New Jersey] or what happened--there were always people at our house after church.  There were always a lot of people and, and back then, the adults ate first.  And so, we as children had to play until the adults were done.  And I recall more than once just looking in the window to see if they're done.  They're sitting there talking and having a cup of coffee and we're, ugh, we want to eat (laughter).  But there were just happy times and, and just a lot of, a lot of, of fellowshipping together, you know.  They centered on the church and the (unclear) from the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have any leadership roles in the church when you were a youth?
Speaker 2: No, we--not that I recall as leadership per se.  We, we--and back then, you didn't see children really leaning, or that we weren't that advanced.  You did what you were told to do and you sing in the choir.  You usher, then you get those things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know they had like--they, they designate certain youth for the certain leadership positions in the church and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We, I don't, we, I don't (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --do things, I mean as a youth leader anyway.
Speaker 2: As a youth leader, I don't, I don't recall, I don't recall any.  I do recall participating in everything.  And there wasn't, that wasn't a question you were going to be in the choir, or you were going to be in the usher board, and the Cub Scouts.  You're going to do everything that they had, you're going to participate in Sunday school.  And one of the worse spankings I got, it was, it was a whipping I got--was skipping Sunday school and playing catch baseball with a girl.  And I broke Ms. Emma Mary's [ph.] window, her picture, picture window.  And she said, "Boy, you go home and tell your mama you broke my window."  And I went home, and mom was cooking for this big dinner that day.  And I, I won't go through the details, but my god, I, I never missed Sunday school after that.  I, I--it was, it was important, yeah, she thought it was very important.
Story_ID: 625777
Speaker 1: So, and now you grew up during the age of television.  You were one of the first generations to have a television around.  Did you all have one early on?
Speaker 2: I remember in 1953 that the Staffords got the first television in, in our area there and in our, on our street.  And 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] was the first show that came on that television.  And my brothers, older brothers, had worked and they bought a television there.  And we--I, I just thought--now we didn't have indoor toilets.  We still went out back to the toilet, but we had a television (laughter).  And it was, it, it was fun, but, you know, we, we had three channels there, channel three, channel six, channel ten, but we didn't spend a lot of time watching television as a kid.  We were always outside playing baseball and, and games and football, and things of that nature.  And during the evening sometimes, we'd watch some television, but we didn't spend a lot of time in front of the TV.
Story_ID: 625778
Speaker 1: Now, from what I understand, you started entrepreneurial activity early on, right, as a child?
Speaker 2: And I didn't have a choice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One Saturday morning, I was sitting on the porch, about eight o'clock in the morning, waiting because we were going to play ball, play baseball with Harold [ph.] and Ray Davis [ph.] and Darryl Simpson [ph.].  And all the guys were meeting at this field, the baseball field.  It wasn't really, it was just an open field to play baseball that morning.  And I was there waiting and waiting for my buddies to come around, and this car pulls up, and there was Ms. Ada Mason [ph.].  She was the usher, one of the ushers at the church [Second Baptist Church, Mount Holly, New Jersey].  And I remember her being a very tough lady, very rarely saw, saw her smile, and never at children.  And she came, walked right past me, never said good morning or hello.  And she stuck her head inside the door, and said, "Ms. Mabel [Mabel Willis Stafford], I'm taking your boy down to sell hot dogs and sodas with me on the corner."  And my mother said, "Well, okay, Ms. Ada."  And she just came--, "C'mon," and she didn't talk much to me.  We went and we got sodas from this wholesale place.  We bought hot dogs and we set up tables.  And we sold hot dogs and sodas that entire summer.  And I was upset because I wanted to play baseball with the fellas.  But she saw something in me and she, she, not encouraged me, she directed me that I was going to stay there with her.  And she taught me counting money, how to put money back in to buy more products, and those type things.  And it eventually became fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did that during, during the summer, and that, I think, it's still that entrepreneurial bug in me.  Now, after that, I went to work--
Speaker 1: Did, I'm sorry, though, did you get any of the proceeds?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she, she would pay me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got paid for that and incentivized.  And then, I started working in the only grocery store [Carter's Grocery Store, Mount Holly, New Jersey].  It was a little small store and I worked there for about five years on and off.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Probably about ten years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ten years old.  I actually started, he started paying me a quarter to take money down to the bank when I was eight off and on.  So, I started doing those things for Mr. Carter [George Carter], Mr. Georgie, as we called him back then.  But I started working with some regularity about ten, eleven years old.
Story_ID: 625779
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Mr. Carter, was that a white--
Speaker 2: No, he was black, black, like World War I [WWI] veteran, and very outspoken man and in our, in our area, he was considered wealthy.  He had a car, a decent home, and you know how you have that economic stratum, if you will, well, he, he was considered wealthy.  And I worked for him unloading boxes and we would sit there.  And he was a World War I veteran and some of the other guys would come around.  And I learned more from those old guys than you could imagine.  I never knew there was a Negro baseball league.  I never had heard of a Satchel Paige.  It was never in our history books, never knew about many of the other things that went on in World War I.  And these old guys would come around and they would just talk and tell me about those things.  Now, Mr. Georgie had a rule.  When I came to the store [Carter's Grocery Store, Mount Holly, New Jersey], now there were comic books I, I used to like to read, 'Archie' and some of the others, 'Jughead.'  I had to read the newspaper every day, the Philadelphia Daily News or the Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer] or The Bulletin.  I had to read a newspaper every day I came to work.  And he did those things, and I really didn't want to, but I kind of started finding it interesting, and he taught me to use the cash register and those other type things.  Again, I was disappointed because the other guys were running up and down the street and they're playing ball and having fun.  And I, I--he would pay me sometimes a quarter a day.  I would make a dollar a week and in the '50s [1950s], that was, that was money.  And I got paid on Saturday night, and I'd go home and give mom [Mabel Willis Stafford] the money, and put some in church and did all the right things.  But I didn't realize what an impact that would have on me later in my life.
Speaker 1: Now, it sounds to me, I mean, this isn't from here.  It sounds as if you were selected by people.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I look back.  I, I guess so.  I, I didn't understand it.  I thought I was being picked on and I look back.  And God has placed people in my life that has, that have had a positive influence in help shaping my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting way to look at it, but people it seems to me that people were selecting you for certain qualities that you had as you--
Speaker 2: Or I was drawn to them--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and they were placed in my life.  And they were encouraging, they were nurturing, and those type things.  And it's, it's helped me and I find myself now that I reflect back on my life and I see those things.  I, too, then have a responsibility to encourage younger people and, and to do those things, put your arms around them.
Speaker 1: There's a story with Ms. Ada Mason [ph.] and then George Carter.  They seem like they actually, you know, singled you out for someone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that could be--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --mentored or--
Speaker 2: --to do some- to do something positive.  And, again, they didn't care if I wanted to or not.  They, they pushed and they encouraged.  I'm grateful for that.
Story_ID: 625780
Speaker 1: What about school now?  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school but I, I didn't put my all into it.  I loved learning.  We had a one book encyclopedia at home, a black book.  I don't know where it came from.  It was in the house, and I spent a lot of time just going through just, just learning.  I, I picked up books.  We always had books in the house and I would pick up different types of books and do those things.  But in school, as far as doing the work, I was a mediocre student and I put in mediocre effort.  And my mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] didn't help much because she didn't understand as much at school, but she always, you had to do your homework, you had to apply yourself.  And dad [Robert Stafford] was working quite a bit, so you had to do it yourself.  We, we didn't have mentoring or tutoring programs and things of that nature.  But I did, I was a C, B student, coming up 'til high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey] and--
Speaker 1: Did you, let me want to go back to the early, did you have kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I was in kindergarten, yeah, we had kindergarten.
Speaker 1: And where did you start kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I started kindergarten in Mount Holly [New Jersey] on the other side of town.  And I walked across town because my sister went to junior high school, and the kindergarten school was--elementary school was across from the junior high school on the other side of town.  And so, my mother wanted me to go there, so my sister could walk to school with me and walk me home.  So, I went to kindergarten there, and then went to first grade through sixth grade at a closer school, Samuel Miller [Samuel Miller School, Mount Holly, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Now, what, I'm sorry, what was the name of the first one, kindergarten school?
Speaker 2: I can't recall the kindergarten school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was across town.
Speaker 2: Brainerd Street.
Speaker 1: Brainerd Street, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Brainerd Street elementary school, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, you went to school basically--and then to that school closer to you?
Speaker 2: A school closer, but it's called Samuel Miller--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --elementary school.
Speaker 1: Samuel Miller, okay.  And you say that black students were about 25 percent maybe in the students?
Speaker 2: I, I think blacks in total were about 25 percent, 20 to 25 percent, I would just guess.
Speaker 1: What were some of the other ethnic groups in school with you?  I mean--
Speaker 2: You saw few Hispanics and a few, and they were agricultural workers, seasonal workers primarily, that came to work on some of the farms during the summer.  But you really didn't see other ethnic groups.  There were whites and blacks pretty much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of the white population, were they mostly Italian or, or Jewish or German?
Speaker 2: Then, I couldn't, I couldn't tell you.  I think there was a mixture of, of, it was pretty ethnic in town.
Story_ID: 625781
Speaker 1: What was the racial attitude?  Was it a, was it a hard segregation then?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a hard segregation.  It, it was somewhat covert.  But you knew your position, and there were certain things that you didn't do and certain places that you really weren't expected to be at.  And that changed some in the '60s [1960s] civil rights.  And we saw a black family that lived on the other--bought a home in the newer section of town [Mount Holly, New Jersey] that they built, and it was like, oh, you know.  And then they built, what we call the projects, downtown and if you got into the projects, we thought you were upscale at the time.  And there were brick homes and much better than homes that I, I had lived in.
Speaker 1: Now, that is difficult now for people to, you know, envision them.  We're speaking in 2012 and we don't know how long this video will last in history.  But at the time that we're speaking here, the projects have a stigma.  Housing projects are seen as a pit basically for black people--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --but in those days, it was different, right?
Speaker 2: In those days, it was part of an urban revitalization effort, if you will.  And so, there were newer type homes where people of low income, people could live with some dignity.  And, unfortunately, they became overcrowded.  They weren't kept as well and they deteriorated into, not a good area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, they deteriorated into that.  And that's the stigma that's attached to the projects now.  And after that in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], it just, it just became, if you were in the projects, it was, it was a bad area.  It was a tough area.
Story_ID: 625782
Speaker 1: As you were saying earlier in your home, you had an outhouse?
Speaker 2: We had, we had an outhouse out back.  And if you had to go the bathroom, you went out back, you, you went out back.  And I don't want to be too graphic, but we had a bucket inside for certain things, and other things you went out back.  And some people know what I'm talking about, but we had a two holer.
Speaker 1: A what, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: A two holer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that's a (laughter), a two, two--that's what it was called.  We had a two holer out back that had two openings that you could sit on side by side and do these things.  So we, we had, we joked that we were pretty upscale (laughter).  And so, we, we--I think it was in 19--the late 1950s that we got indoor plumbing.  And I helped my father [Robert Stafford], as a matter of fact, we couldn't afford to have anyone build on, so my father and my brothers, we helped build the extension to our home.  And, and we put in indoor plumbing and indoor sewer and indoor heating and those things, and we, we were building on up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is a--well, I'm glad I asked.  I was just asking that question in relation to the projects 'cause the projects had toilets and--
Speaker 2: The projects were upscale.
Speaker 1: --so they were like a--
Speaker 2: Again, when, when I was a child, if you lived in the projects, you, you were okay.  Indoor plumbing, brick homes, it was, it was nice as far as we were concerned.
Speaker 1: But you raised another interesting point in talking about the plumbing that you all were doing.  How old were you when you all did your own plumbing then and helped your father establish a--
Speaker 2: I was about ten years old, yeah--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --ten years old, and doing that.  And we, we were one of the first on our street there [Mount Holly, New Jersey] to, to have the indoor plumbing.  And we put in, as a child, I had to go out, we had coal stoves, and you had to bring the coal in, and do that before you went to bed.  And as a child, I remember many days going out back through the ashes and picking up bits of coal that could be reused again and doing those type of things.  And it was out of necessity, I didn't know that.  I thought it was fun.  And so, we, we had that.  One thing that was interesting that we were never, we were never poor.  We were broke, but never poor.  And my parents, especially my father, instilled the sense of self-worth and dignity.  My father was a proud man in a good sense and that which you had, you took care of.  You shined your shoes, took care of your clothes.  We did those kind of things and you had pride in yourself.  And so, we, we never were called poor, weren't allowed to be called poor.  We were broke.  We didn't have much money, you know (laughter), but I had the most wonderful childhood you could ever imagine.
Story_ID: 625783
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school, again to, at Rancocas Valley Regional High School.
Speaker 1: You have to spell that for me.  Now what--
Speaker 2: Rancocas, R-A-N-C-O-C-A-S, Valley, V-A-L-L-E-Y, Regional, R-E-G-I-O-N-A-L, High School in Mount Holly [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this high school I guess by its very name attracts from the, that region you're telling me about.
Speaker 2: At that, at that time, right.  It was a central high school for the entire region and, and for about in the country about ten miles, fifteen miles out, kids came to RVR, as we called RVRHS.  And the school still exists although there are other high schools that have been built in these municipalities, the school is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you--now I didn't ask you before, but just thinking about your entire school life, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I used to always like history. I still do.  I, I very much like history and geography.  And not until my later years did I really like math because I really didn't understand it.  And I, I enjoy math now and numbers and doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of teachers, did you have a favorite teacher or--
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My favorite teacher was my homeroom teacher, Mr. Powell, Mr. David Powell [ph.], who was a very stern man.  But somehow, he, too, encouraged me.  I was---I had, I enjoyed Spanish, and was an A student in Spanish pretty much.  And I recall in my junior year, the township was having some visitors from South America, some chief of police from South America visit, visit our jail, and things of that nature.  And Mr. Powell came to me one day and he explained that to me.  And he said, "I'd like for you to be an interpreter," and I was, I was amazed.  And it was going, on a Sunday, so I stayed home from church.  And he came to the black section of town in his car to pick me up.  And we went through and went to the city hall and met.  And I and a couple of other people, and we tried to translate as best we could.  And afterwards, there was a dinner at his house up in Holly Hills [Mount Holly, New Jersey] on the other side, and I like, wow, and he invited me.  I came along and he treated me so well.  He was just encouraging and it, it just made an impression on me.  He took me home, and he told me how proud he was of me on the way home.
Story_ID: 625784
Speaker 1: In high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey] now, you were working in high school too, I guess.  Did you work at the grocery store [Carter's Grocery Store, Mount Holly, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: I worked at the grocery store the first year or two, part-time.  And then, we always worked during the summer.  I always had a job moving furniture at moving companies doing that.  And then, when I wasn't playing sports, we would work at Howard Johnson's, which was a chain of restaurants, and along the turnpike.  And so, we normally worked there after school until about eleven o'clock at night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, Howard Johnson's, were you bussing tables and--
Speaker 2: Bussing tables--
Speaker 1: --dishes?
Speaker 2: --cleaning, doing those kind of things, supporting the, the cook staff and things of that nature, janitorial work.  And so, we did whatever it took, and that was ingrained in us.  We always worked.  We cut grass, shoveled snow, whatever, took soda bottles back.  That was a big deal when I was a child.  So, you were conditioned to work, if you wanted money, you worked.
Story_ID: 625785
Speaker 1: Now, what about sports now?  You're a pretty good size 'fella and you liked to play?
Speaker 2: I was, believe it or not, I, I--well, no, believe it or not, I was a scrawny little skinny kid.  I, I didn't gain weight until I was forty something years old.  I was always thin and skinny, and, well back then, you were expected to play sports.  My brothers all played sports.  So, it wasn't--if you're going to play football, it's what position you're going to play.  And you're going to play basketball, and you're going to run track, play baseball.  You, you were expected to do that.  And I loved playing sports.  And I wasn't outstanding in anything, but I never quit.  I--we joked in my freshman year in football, I was a little scrawny, I was actually a little shorter and skinny.  And they joked that they didn't even have to clean my uniform at the end of the season.  They just hung it back up (laughter).  That's how they did it (laughter), I didn't get it dirty.  And I never saw much playing time, playing football, but never quit--I never quit.  You, you couldn't quit.  And I wanted to play more basketball, and I told my dad [Robert Stafford], I wanted to focus on that.  He said, fine, whatever you want to do.  And so, I started playing basketball and I was okay.  I was, I was mediocre.  I was also musical.  I played for years trombone and percussions and the band and the orchestra and was pretty good, and knew I was going to go to college for music.  And, but I had such high hopes of playing basketball that I stopped playing the trombone in my junior year, knowing I was going to get a basketball scholarship.  And my coach and others didn't see it that way, so I ended up with no scholarship at all.  I didn't go to college right after high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: I played forward--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --played forward and did that, and didn't, didn't score that much.  I, I--my highest game, I think, was nineteen points, but I made the honorable mention all Kelly [ph.], and those kind of things so, but it was fun.  You, you were expected to, to be involved.  It kept you out of trouble.  You, you did this type of thing.
Story_ID: 625786
Speaker 1: What other clubs and activities in high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey]?  Were you fairly popular?
Speaker 2: I wasn't real- among the blacks, I, I was popular, but overall in school, I wasn't a class officer, and you didn't see many blacks in, in that.  There was still that, you know, that was reserved for, you know, the quarterback of the high school football team was going to a white guy, you know, student.  And those type of things went on.  And, but I was involved in the chess club for, for a year and you had to, it was mandatory that you had a club, extracurricular activity.  And I recall my sophomore year, I went to sign up for a club at the last minute.  And one of the only ones that was open was the debate club.  I said, "Ugh, what is this?"  So, I went and signed up, and it actually turned out to be a good experience for me--teaching debate and so, I did that.  And then, other clubs, athletic clubs, the football club I joined and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Probably in the Spanish club, you think?
Speaker 2: I was, I was in the Spanish club.  That's exactly right, my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but this--I think we were talking about the Spanish, the big Spanish adventure you had when the, the law enforcement officials come to town.
Speaker 2: From South America, yeah.
Speaker 1: How, how did that really--I mean, the aftermath of that, you know, you still remember this and you still correspond with your teacher, right?
Speaker 2: I, I do.  I try to send my gratitudes, send a basket or something or note to say, hey, thank you, I still remember you, Mr. Powell [David Powell (ph.)], and I just did recently.  But it just showed, he showed an interest.  He was a stern, almost stoical man.  He, he didn't show much emotion at all.  He didn't speak much.  But that event and the fact that he selected me when there were other white guys that he could have selected, and he selected me.  He showed an interest in me.  He encouraged me and told me what a good job I had done on the way back.  That just stuck with me, that just stuck with me, and he came and picked me up.  And in his home, he just treated--I was nervous, I was one of the few young people there.  And he just treated me so well that it was, it was unexpected, and it stayed with me, and it encouraged me to do even more.
Story_ID: 625787
Speaker 1: Who were your heroes when you're growing up?
Speaker 2: In, in life growing up? Well, I'd say my older brother [Eugene Stafford] who's a--I love my older sister [Joan Stafford Norman], but as, as a guy, looking up, my role model was my older brother, who became the first black chief of police in our hometown [Mount Holly, New Jersey], which was a coup at that time in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Now, was he, was he the chief of police while you were in high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey] or--
Speaker 2: He wasn't the chief of police--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he became the first black chief, policeman, and he worked his way up through that bureaucracy.  He was, he just faced an imaginable opposition to the point where it was a civil service exam, and he scored the highest, the second highest in the state, I believe it was, became chief of police of the hometown.  It was a big deal because they hadn't had a black policeman.  And in ten years or so, ten or fifteen years, he became chief of police there.  After that, he became mayor, and then he became a county supervisor.  But growing up, he was a good student, he was a good athlete.  He was just a good role model that people loved and respected.  But he always showed an interest in me.  I recall, as a young boy, about five years old for, yeah, five years old or so, and he was still in high school, and he was an athlete.  He used to take me to the school with him.  And while he ran track and did those kind of things, he just let me tag along.  He was thirteen years older than I was.  And this, this seems simple, but I remember, as a young boy, he was getting dressed and going out.  And he had a bottle of Old Spice After Shave and it was there, and he gave me the bottle of Old Spice with that much left.  And that was just a big deal to me that--and so, I used to go to school with Old Spice on (laughter) as a child, and doing those things trying to emulate him.  And he still is my hero in life, he still is my hero, one of my heroes in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you have, you know, I mean I see a picture here.  You're able to work on projects with your father [Robert Stafford], you know, was your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you got an older sister that looks out for you--
Speaker 2: Still does.
Speaker 1: --this older brother is your role model?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had, I had a wonderful support system of, of primarily based around family that emanated from, from family, and we still do.  Typically, I'm, I'm separated from my family.  I live in Virginia.  They live in New Jersey, California, but we call each other.  We know what each other's children are doing, and their grandchildren and our children stay in touch.  We have a family reunion.  We, we do that and support each other still--wonderful family.
Story_ID: 625788
Speaker 1: When you're on a verge of graduating from high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey], then what are your prospects?  Are you considering college or did--had you talked about college with your counselors in high school or--
Speaker 2: Back then, blacks didn't get much counseling, encouraging to go to college.  It was starting to enfold more.  And if you did, you were encouraged to look at an HBCU, historically black college [historically black colleges and universities], to do that.  I was told that I wasn't college material, that I should pursue a general education in, in high school.  At that time, they had three curriculums, curricula, in high school, general, and you would become a worker, you know, to become a worker; a business curriculum, and perhaps you get a job as a general accountant, or something like that; and then college preparatory, and not many blacks went into college prep because they were dissuaded from doing so.  And my teacher in the eighth grade said, "Oh, you don't want to go to college.  In high school, I recommend you take general courses."  And my father [Robert Stafford] said, "No, you're going to take at least business."  And I took a business curriculum in high school towards my senior year.  Then I started taking a couple of college prep courses, especially in history and, and took algebra, and things of that nature, and was looking at going to a school, maybe in New Hampshire or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but didn't.  And I was still a little immature.  I, I always loved the girls and I, I chased the girls quite a bit, and decided that eventually, I was going to go into the [U.S.] military which I did.  Vietnam [Vietnam War] was going on, they were drafting, and I decided to be proactive to do that.  Now, let me go back just a second.  After high school, I took a civil service exam for the [U.S.] Post Office Department [U.S. Postal Service].  My brother-in-law had worked there, and he urged me to take the exam.  I did very well on it and was hired right after high school, a couple of months after high school into the Post Office Department.  And so, I went, worked at 30th [Street] and Market Street in Philadelphia for almost a year and did very well.
Speaker 1: Did you commute?
Speaker 2: I commuted back and forth to Mount Holly [New Jersey] and did very well there, but, again, the war was going on.  Recruiters were calling me, threatening me that I was going to get drafted.  I had to go up and take the draft physical, and I was on the list, so I decided that I was going to go in the [U.S.] Air Force.
Story_ID: 625789
Speaker 1: Now, this was the time, I think, a lot of young black men, or young men all over the country, I guess, were--had a lot of anxiety about the war [Vietnam War].
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: You saw, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --the newsreels about the people dying in Vietnam and--
Speaker 2: We saw all those things.  There's something, I was fascinated with Vietnam before it really grew to where it was.  For some reason, even in high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey], Vietnam wasn't a front page issue, but I was infatuated with, enthralled with, what was going on in this Southeast Asia.  And so, I did reading on Vietnam, and when the French occupied it when they were defeated in 1954.  And as the story grew, it became a, a real issue in the '65 [1965] timeframe.  I knew something about it and wasn't really a big advocate of us being involved in Vietnam.  And that happened, and right after that time, this Civil Rights Movement was going on.  But then, the more militant aspect of that, the Black Power movement was evolving, and, and I was, I was attracted to that and Huey Newtons [Huey P. Newton] and Fred Smith [sic. Fred Hampton], and some of others, Eldridge Cleavers, and eventually started reading some of that literature there (unclear) and some of the others, and 'The Wretched of the Earth' by Frantz Fanon, and started doing that type of reading.  And that, and I was confused, okay, I come up with a conservative background and do well and obey the laws and do that.  But I, I--all these things were happening at that time in '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968] timeframe.  And went in the [U.S.] military and I was doing well, but I still had this, you know, what was going on, especially with black people.  And the riots were happening and so there was a dichotomy, if you will, there's a pulling of both ways.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to speed through this too fast, but there's a process from what I read about how you chose the [U.S.] Air Force.  You really thought about what branch you were going to go to?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was encouraged by my brother-in-law who I still am close to.  He's a very, he's a very good friend, and I almost idolized him.  He was just a cool guy and a nice guy, took a liking to me, and gave me some direction, and he talked to me.  But he told me, he said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], go in the Air Force and you can get the best education.  You can go to college.  You can do all these good things.  And if you go in the [U.S.] Army, you're going to go to Vietnam, and that's where they send the blacks.  You're going to get, you know, go into combat."  And he said, "Enlist in the Air Force."  And so, we looked at it because my older four brothers had gone into, my four oldest brothers had gone into the [U.S.] Navy during the Korean War and served there.  And so, if I went in the military, they expected me to go into the Navy.  And I changed directions, and went into the Air Force, after giving the Army consideration and the Navy, enlisted in the Air Force, and I'm glad I did.
Story_ID: 625790
Speaker 1: You enlist in the [U.S.] Air Force, and what year is it when you enlist?
Speaker 2: I went in the Air Force in 1967, August of 1967.
Speaker 1: So, this is a year after high school graduation [from Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: About a year after.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you graduate from high school in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: In '66 [1966], May of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: All right.  And then, you worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] for a year?
Speaker 2: Almost a year, right.
Speaker 1: Almost a year and then--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --then decided to join the Air Force?
Speaker 2: Joined the Air Force to avoid the draft really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a--what, were they in those days encouraging--were they allowing you to choose an occupation path in the Air Force when you joined or did they--
Speaker 2: They actually did.  I was in basic training, and I didn't realize that I had leadership abilities.  I mean, you know, it just--I was never, never told that.  So, when I got to Lackland Air Force Base [Bexar County, Texas], and put together with a hundred other guys there, somehow I, I was selected to be a squad leader.  And doing those things, and I did well, I was put in a leadership position there.  And then, we took tests and when the tests came back, we were grouped up in a room.  And I had scored reasonably well on the test.  And they were showing a list of openings of schools you could apply for, and one of them was air traffic control.  I never thought about there were people who guided airplanes and cleared them to land, and towers, and I, I became very much interested in that.  I applied for the school and I recall (unclear) said, "No, that's tough to get into.  You probably won't get that."  And I choose the top three, air traffic being number one, and I was selected to go into air traffic control, and to the air traffic control school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, even though they discouraged you, you applied for it anyway and--
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't discourage, but they just told me that you probably won't get that, that's a tough one to get.  And I recall when the assignments came back and--, "Stafford [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford]."  "Huh?"  "Air traffic control school keeps their Air Force base in Mississippi."  And I, I was elated, didn't know what to expect, but I knew it was a good choice.
Speaker 1: Now, you're going to Mississippi though (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You're going to Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I went to Mississippi (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a state in those days that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said [sic.], with their lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification and all that so it--
Speaker 2: It was absolutely true.  Let me tell you a story.  Now, I'm a young, young guy, now nineteen, twenty years old, nineteen or so.  And in basic training, they had integrated blacks and whites together.  And so, you bonded with guys that you spent six weeks with, twenty-four hours a day, and whatever.  And so, as we broke up to get--go to our different schools and different parts of the country.  I was the only black that was going to this high technical center in Mississippi.  And the other guys I'd gone through basic training with were white, but we didn't even see that.  And at that time, you couldn't have a beer, drinking age was eighteen.  You couldn't have a beer in basic training at all.  So, we said when we get to Mississippi, we're going to go down, and we're going to have a beer together.  And we did and I remember we got to the base [Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi] and checked in and everything, and we were able to wear civilian clothes and we put them on, and we jumped in a cab and we went downtown to have a beer.  And we got there, and they wouldn't serve me.  And any other guy said, "Well, if Stafford can't stay, I'm not staying."  But eventually, when we got outside, there's excuses made, "Well, you know, I'm going to go back inside just for a little while."  And pretty much, they told me, people who lived there, "You need to do down to Division [Street] and Howard [Avenue].  That's where the blacks go."  And it was, it was a black section of town, but I had just forgotten the race thing.  I'd forgotten the, you know, all the issues with that.  And after that, the buddies that I'd gone through basic training with, we never did hang out again.  And I, of course, stayed in the black side of town.
Story_ID: 625791
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up, your father [Robert Stafford], I guess, and your older brother [Eugene Stafford], too, I guess were like kind of pioneers in terms of pushing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --integration in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Mount Holly [New Jersey].  So, were civil rights discussed a lot at home or did--it wasn't?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, I will tell you that during the civil rights era, there were many older conservative people that, that felt we shouldn't get too involved and especially in their hometown.  We spoke up and did those kind of things, but there were any type of marches or things of that nature.  And so, there were discussions at the dinner table, but there were no forums or outside of the home.  There wasn't a lot of talk about it.
Speaker 1: What was the general impression of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Very favorable, very favorable.  But again, older people were more timid and didn't want to rock the boat for fear of repercussions and jobs being lost and domestics, you've seen the help in the rest of those movies that they would be fired, and they needed the income.  So, they were pretty, pretty mindful of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You didn't really have any relatives in the Deep South anyway?
Speaker 2: No, not that I knew of at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, here you are in the Deep South (laughter).
Speaker 2: And here I, here I am now.  I, I look back at that period.  And, again, I'm, I came out of high school [Rancocas Valley Regional High School, Mount Holly, New Jersey] towards the end of the so called civil rights period, if you will, the '60s [1960s], the sit-ins and the bus- the things of that nature.  And it was evolving to a more militant period in the mid-late '60s [1960s] where Eldridge Cleavers and Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton], and those were becoming more appealing to young people than Martin Luther King, you see.
Speaker 1: Were you reading the works of Malcolm X?  Did you read the autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley]?
Speaker 2: I read some, that was after that a little bit, but I became aware of Malcolm X and those things.  I was reading the Black Panther newspapers [The Black Panther Community News Service; The Black Panther Intercommunal News Service].  As a matter of fact, even when I was in the [U.S.] military, and I got a letter of reprimand for doing so when I was overseas.  And I was trying to teach myself Swahili and, believe it or not, I got another letter of reprimand for having a Swahili book there.  Oh, well, you have to understand whites were intimidated, especially in the military.  Now, the military, being such a conservative organization that, that, you know, you toe the line, pledge allegiance, and anything outside the norm, this, this WASP [White Anglo Saxon Protestant] model was threatening.  And I was overseas, being in air traffic control, there weren't many blacks in air traffic control at all.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go overseas when you first left?
Speaker 2: I went into the military after I left Keesler, Mississippi [Keesler Air Force Base, Biloxi, Mississippi] and training.  I was assigned to Homestead Air Force Base in Homestead, Florida [Homestead Air Reserve Base] outside of Miami [Florida] where I earned my journeyman level, and I was progressing very well.  Career was going very well.  And then, again, Vietnam was going on, Southeast Asia, so I was assigned to Takhli Air Base in Thailand [Takhli Royal Thai Air Force Base].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Thailand or Takhli?
Speaker 1: Takhli.
Speaker 2: T-A-K- T-A-K-H-L-I, Takhli.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's about eighty miles north of Bangkok [Thailand] in the woods.  And so, where I worked at in the radar unit, we were on the other side of the runway.  And the woods, like on the edge of the woods, not on the main base, and a, and a radar trailer.  And then, they had a rest trailer where you could take a break.  And during my breaks, I would read a lot.  I'd read and a sergeant would come in and see me reading the Black Panther paper, and he thought that was a threat, and I got a letter of reprimand.  Oh, my goodness.  I had a book that I had, I, I bought.  It was on Swahili and I, I was trying to teach myself Swahili.  And I was in the break room one day and I was reading that, and he came in and saw that.  I got another letter of reprimand (laughter) for that.  So, and I was sent to the first sergeant who happened to be a--an African American, older gentleman.  And I recall him saying, "Stafford [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], you have such a great career, boy, you're in air traffic control.  Why don't you want to mess that up?  Why don't you just go along?  You can, you can do well."  And he--and, and it just bothered me.  I remember that to this day.  And it wasn't that the letters of reprimand were wrong.  It was that I should get in line and, and, and do what I'm told to do, and don't make waves.  And that, that didn't sit well with me at all.  But on the job, I was advancing.  I was well ahead of schedule.  I was, I was doing very well to the point that I recall over there after those incidents, they took me out of advanced training for several months although they needed controllers.  And I wrote a letter to the commander, and they eventually put me back in.  And I--my career was doing well.  I did well in air traffic control, I did very well.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But, those type of things were going on.
Story_ID: 625792
Speaker 1: I know when--in 1980 [sic. 1981], I guess, when Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] fired air traffic controllers, that a lot of people were horrified because we consider--I mean, the average person, you know, a plane is sort of, has some fear anyway.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And now, here the air traffic controllers are fired.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what is the difficulty level of that job, and what kind of diligence does that require?  Is it common--I mean, can you easily replace an air traffic controller, or is it easy to train one?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And I will tell you, it's a very demanding job.  The training, the skillsets, the scope of knowledge that you have to know from navigational systems to media--weather systems, radars, rules of separation, physics, there, there are many things that you have to know.  It's a difficult job.  But once you do know it, and it gets in your blood, you don't want to do anything else.  Now, just to reflect back on the firing of the air traffic controllers, many people don't understand.  The [U.S.] Department of Defense owns about 30 percent of this National Airspace System.  And there was a slowdown in 1970 where controllers were putting excessive distance between airplanes, and just clogging the system up for higher pay.  And the Department of Defense worked with the [U.S.] Department of Transportation to come up with a contingency plan that they employed using military controllers when the strike went on.  That's why President Reagan was able to fire the controllers without a real degradation, any degradation of safety, and rebuilt the system.  They anticipated that and outsmarted the union [Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, the system was very safe.
Story_ID: 625793
Speaker 1: So you're in Mississippi and this is, is this still in '67 [1967] when you go to Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the first part--
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: --of '68 [1968], I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, '68 [1968] you go to Florida, is that Florida?
Speaker 2: Right, in March, April of '68 [1968], I went to Homestead Air Force Base in Florida [Homestead Air Reserve Base, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's where you were when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: I was in the control tower when they--it was April 4th, I believe it was, 1968, I was sitting in the control tower, and we didn't have a television up there.  But someone came up and, and gave us the news that he had been shot.  And I recall being angry.  I recall--again, I'm the only black there, I recall being so upset at guys on my team.  I, I just didn't want to talk to them for that.  It, it was just, it was just terrible.  I was--it was just like a relative had passed.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard stories from police officers who were in a split team where the white officer celebrates with the death of Dr. King, while the black officer is seething.  Did you have--was that, was it like that in the [U.S.] military?  Did people celebrate?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think there's any celebration of that, at least outward.  I didn't see any celebration.  But I knew many of the whites were glad because Martin Luther King, at that time, was seen as a troublemaker and conspirator.  And, and whites were threatened because they weren't aware of what's going on.  You see, culturally, we had to learn, as blacks and African Americans, we had to learn white culture.  Whites were never forced to learn black culture.  We were the ones that had to adapt, they didn't.  And that threat still exists today.  That's why things are going on in this country when we have the first African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and so much opposition, whites are afraid.  They don't know.  They don't know black culture.  They don't know about other minority cultures, and they feel threatened because the status quo is being changed.
Story_ID: 625794
Speaker 1: We were talking about your career in the [U.S.] Air Force and the day that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  And, so that happened before you went to Thailand.  So, you, so now you're in Thailand in nineteen six--is it '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] to--I'm sorry.  I went to Thailand in July 1969 when the first man was landing on the moon.  I was in Bangkok [Thailand] until 1970 is when I came back from Thailand, so I spent about a year in Southeast Asia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did you get a chance to--I mean, what was the African American culture like in the Air Force in those days?  Was there a bond between the black airmen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, especially the younger airmen, the enlisted people.  I wasn't enlisted at the time before I, I commissioned.  And the younger airmen, there was a, a bond--this, this black and I'm proud movement.  I had infiltrated the [U.S.] military quite a bit, and so we had the handshakes the daps back then where you--all kind of moves.  It took you five minutes to greet a brother (laughter) and so, we had those things going on.  It was a black pride type thing and, and we were reading, and reading history, and those things.  [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America'] is coming out then.  I, I remember--recall reading that.  And my eyes were open to what a great legacy, what a great history, and great culture we had and those type things.  The more senior, older guys were more reticent to, to get involved in that.  And the younger guys, we wore our hair a little longer, mini Afros, if you will, and that were just bordering on the edge of, of the regulations.  And the more senior guys, then the officers weren't involved in that.  They, they didn't embrace that.  So, but for the enlisted guys, the younger guys, it was, yeah, it was cohesion, a lot of cohesion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting.  So, so the older--if you were an officer, you were less likely to be involved in that?
Speaker 2: You were less likely because those--the powers to be were less tolerant of that.  And, you know, you were concerned about your career and moving up and being promoted, more so than the enlisted guys were so much.  And so, the younger guys were just, just full of the black pride movement, and it was a wonderful time--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 625795
Speaker 1: Was there anything particular about Thai culture or politics that you can remember that--
Speaker 2: That was my first venture overseas.  And I found that they just embraced, for the most part, they embraced blacks as brothers, and they were treated very well.  And to the dismay of a lot of whites, who would put stories out about blacks, you recall some of the stories from World War I [WWI] where blacks were in Europe, and the blacks had tails and (laughter) and things of that nature.  Those things were still going on.  There was a segregation that if people went downtown, there were the black bars and the white bars.  There were the girls that the blacks socialized with, and girls that were whites only.  And if a girl had socialized with blacks, they weren't welcome on the white side.  So, those things were still going on, but I recall that we were just so bonded, we were so close, and we really didn't care, you know.  We, you know, whites didn't come to the establishments that blacks patronized and vice versa.  But the Thais, they embraced, they embraced blacks like it was no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, all right, so you--anything else about Thailand before we--
Speaker 2: No, not that I can think of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a good experience.
Story_ID: 625796
Speaker 1: You came back, and did you come back in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: I came back in 1970.
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], right, so that's right, you said '70 [1970].  Okay, so, where did you come back to?
Speaker 2: Well, I came back to--I had nine months left on my first enlistment.  And they wouldn't let me out early because my career field they, they needed, so they assigned me to a place in Rome, New York.  And I recall looking on the map near New York City [New York, New York] and looking all around for Rome, New York, and come to find out, it was up north near Syracuse [New York].  And so, I was engaged to a young lady [Amanda Boardley Stafford] at the time, and we had set a date of September 19, 1970 to get married after I got back from overseas.  And so, I went up to Rome, New York and stayed there and prepared, and I used to hitchhike.  I didn't have a car at the time, so I would hitchhike the six hours from Rome, New York down to New York City, catch a bus down to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to New Jersey, to see her on weekends.  And I did that, that was, that was a tough time courting my wife, my now wife, at that time.  So, we got married in September 1970 and moved to Rome, New York.  And it was, it was one of the worst assignments I ever had.  I had never seen snow like that.  We just got married.  We didn't have any money.  We lived in the attic over a hardware store and--or next to a hardware store rather, this house and--
Speaker 1: So, you didn't, you didn't want to live in [U.S.] Air Force housing?
Speaker 2: They didn't have any.  At my rank, there wasn't any housing available.  You had to apply for it and get in line for it.  And I was a junior sergeant.  I made rank pretty quickly, but I was still a junior.  And so, we, we can only afford this attic on, on Mary Street, Rome, New York and it was--so the snow, we got snowed in.  It was just a terrible nine months that I decided--and my wife wanted to stay in the [U.S.] military, she liked it--so I decided to reenlist although I had orders to get out.  And I reenlisted and they gave me a base of choice that I could be reassigned to for reenlisting in my career area in air traffic control.  So, she wanted to go back home, and so, we returned to McGuire Air Force Base [Joint Base McGuire Dix Lakehurst, New Jersey].  We returned to New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  McGuire Air Force Base, now is this where you decided you would, you know, pursue officers' training or?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't want to stay in the military, but I knew I wanted to pursue education.  And so, again, my career was going well.  I, I had made the rank fast.  In my job, air traffic, I was being noticed as, as one of the better controllers, and that was going well.  And I started going to college at night [at Trenton State College; The College of New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey], and taking advantage of the educational opportunities, and started pursuing that pretty, pretty heavily to the point where I volunteered to work the midnight shift at work, so that I could go to college during the day.  And I did that for a year or so.  And before I knew it, I had three years of college under my belt, and I was looking to get out after my second enlistment.
Story_ID: 625797
Speaker 1: Where were you going to school?
Speaker 2: I was going to Trenton State College at the time.
Speaker 1: Trenton State College, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And I think that's called College of New Jersey now [The College of New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so --
Speaker 2: I was going pretty diligently and working and--
Speaker 1: What were you focusing on, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: In business--
Speaker 1: Business, all right.
Speaker 2: --in business.  Again, I, I was always impressed by business.  So, doing that, I was married, I had a child [Earl Stafford, Jr.] at the time so we--I was staying pretty busy doing that.  And I was preparing to get out, and I was going to go, get out of the [U.S.] military, go to school, finish up, and then get a job as an air traffic controller, or at the same time, get a job as an air traffic controller to support my family.  And sergeant came to me, the first sergeant, he said, "Stafford [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford]," he said, "there's a program.  You take this test, you can get a scholarship, and become an officer."  And I said, "Sarge, I don't want to be an officer, I just want to get out."  He said, "Well, just take the test anyhow."  So, I took the test and I scored very highly, and I was selected for a scholarship.  And I got a scholarship to fourteen universities, major universities around the country.  And they would send me to school full time to finish my degree, but I would have to stay in and get my four years as an officer.  I talked it over with my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] and said, "Well, why not?"  And so, I eventually selected the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], and they sent me to school for a couple of years to finish the degree at the University of Massachusetts, and it worked out well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1976 when you finished, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, I got the scholarship in 1974.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you, now you were still majoring in business, right, and--
Speaker 2: Business administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what was--and you lived in, where did you live when you--
Speaker 2: Well, there happened to be an Air Force base that was closing nearby, Westover Air Force Base [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts].  And we call that to be--now, war was drawing down, and they were drawing down the military.  And so, there was housing available fifteen miles away at an Air Force base that I could live on cheaply and got a house there, and commuted to the university.
Story_ID: 625798
Speaker 1: What were you seeing ahead of you in terms of business?  I mean, what were you, what were you thinking now?  You're skilled.  You could be a civilian air traffic controller and make pretty good money, but like what were you seeing otherwise?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I wasn't making good money because I was still in [U.S.] military.  My skills were in traffic control.
Speaker 1: No, you--I mean I'm saying that you had--once you got out, you could do that.
Speaker 2: Well, with a business degree in government, outside of government, there are a lot of things you could do.  But I had intended to put in another four years and I was going to get out of the military, so get the degree, put four years in as an officer.  I'm still young enough to get out, go into air traffic control or business, too.  I had more opportunities in front of me now, not quite certain what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pardon me.  My career as an officer started going very well.  I was working hard, doing, doing well, and it was progressing.  And instead of getting out after my next hitch, I stayed in again, and got assignments.  And then, by then, it was about 1981 when this air traffic control strike was going on.  And I was selected to fill a position as the assistant liaison officer at, at the headquarters [U.S. Department of the Air Force] in Washington [D.C.].  Now, as a, as a, in my career field, that was just an outstanding assignment.  It was just one of a kind.  It was a national level assignment, and that's how I got to Washington and into the position as, as assistant Air Force liaison officer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, now what, was your role specifically focused around the strike--
Speaker 2: In that job, the strike?
Speaker 1: --with the air traffic controllers?
Speaker 2: Right.  Recall, I had mentioned previously that in the National Airspace System, all the aircraft, all the airways, all the airspace, all the navigational aids, about 30 percent of all that belongs to the [U.S.] Department of Defense.  And so, after the strike, they were going to rebuild the entire system, change rules, and air space structure, and navigational system.  The Department of Defense wanted to ensure that its interests were included in the rebuilding of the system.  And that was my job to ensure that DOD interests were, were looked after.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you kind of filled the spaces between where the civilians had--
Speaker 2: To ensure there was coordination between the Pentagon, and the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], and the [U.S.] Department of Transportation, and the rebuilding of the system, and establishing new rules and procedures.
Story_ID: 625799
Speaker 1: Now what was the difference that you perceived as, from being an enlisted man and being an officer?  Could you--I mean, did--I mean, what was the most dramatic difference for you, I guess?
Speaker 2: It was much more difficult as an officer, it was much more difficult as an officer, much more demanding, especially if you saw a career ahead of you, and you really wanted to, to excel, it was much more difficult.  As an enlisted person, there wasn't a political aspect to your career.  As an officer, there were certain things that you were expected to do that weren't written in the rule books, and certain social events and, and act a certain way, and be at cocktail parties.  It just wasn't my cup of tea.  It just--I did--I, I, and I still don't do well at that with small talk and, you know, buddying up with the colonel and the generals.  And I, I, that's--I, I--I don't, I can't do that well, I can't do that well, but I can do my job well.  I can lead well.  I can do those things well.  I'm just not a social person like that.  So, I found that a little difficult although my career was going well.  I, I, had some assignments that were unique, and ahead of my pay grade, and doing those things, and so, I, I liked the [U.S.] military.  I liked what it, what it did, but I knew that my full potential wasn't in the military.  It would never be realized there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any officers in the military who, you know, served as kind of, like a guide for you, you know, or try to help you in specific--
Speaker 2: He's, he's now deceased, but there's a Colonel Steve Butenschoen [ph.] who--I despised him--I worked for at the AFA [Air Force Association, Arlington, Virginia].  And I knew he did not like me.  He was a tough man and very, very disciplined, if you will, his way.  He didn't lead by example.  He would require many things that he didn't do.  He really--he was unfair.  He gave me assignments that were almost possible.  I recall spending more than one night at the AFA headquarters working, putting up systems, and doing things.  He was, he was difficult.  And when my tour was coming up there, they gave me the assignment.  I competed for an assignment as a commander of a full squadron.  And at my pay grade, that was, there was only two or three in the whole world and I was selected.  And he went and called personnel to have my assignment changed.  He didn't think I was ready for it.  Nonetheless, I prayed a lot.  And my assignment was stayed and I went to Greenland.  But I come to find out in looking back, I learned a lot from that man.  I learned a lot from the discipline, from the things that he had done, and I learned things not to do.  And I, I, did learn from Steve Butenschoen.  Later, after we both had retired, he--we tried to become friends, or at least civil with each other.  But I did learn, learned a lot from him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's an interesting story (laughter).
Speaker 2: It, it's a different story.  There have been other people in my career that, you know, that, that encouraged me, especially in the enlisted area.  But, Steve Butenschoen, Colonel Butenschoen, he, he was just a tough character, he was a tough character.  He was, he was unfair.  And it wasn't racial because there were other blacks that he interacted with, did well with.  It was just our chemistry didn't mix.  And he was the colonel, and I was the captain, and I was coming up for major, and I couldn't afford the blemish on my record.  And so, I, you know, I saluted and did what I was required to do and tried to exceed that which I did, and my career went on from there.
Story_ID: 625800
Speaker 1: You earned your M.B.A. when you were still in the [U.S.] military, right, did you?
Speaker 2: To, to really be, to be selected for major, you were expected to have an advanced degree, and to have completed certain military leadership training.  And I did both.  I, I got the M.B.A. from Southern Illinois University, and completed Air Command and Staff College [Montgomery, Alabama], which is a graduate level program, and I was doing both at the same time while working, so it was a challenge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you living near Chanute Air Force Base [Champaign County, Illinois] in, or was--is that the closest one, the one in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they had a campus here in the Washington, D.C. area.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Southern Illinois did.  And so, that's where I completed it at.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're in the Air Command school and--
Speaker 2: And I took Air Command and Staff College--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by correspondence which was much tougher than being in residence.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now, was that, now this does sound tough.  You're doing all this at the same time?
Speaker 2: And married, children, soccer (laughter).  It was, it was a very difficult time, it was a very difficult time.  And the job required some traveling and, and many, many sixteen hour days.  It was a, it was a challenge, it was a challenge.  But I look back on it now and see it as a blessing because it stretched me, I was doing things that I never thought I could do.  And so, it, it--the Lord was blessing me at the same time but I couldn't see it then.
Story_ID: 625801
Speaker 1: In terms of school and SIU [Southern Illinois University] for your M.B.A., I mean, what did, what was that like, and were there any particular courses or instructors that stand out?
Speaker 2: None that stood out positively.  I enjoyed the, the finance side.  I focused on that in my undergraduate.  And I recall this one instructor.  We had--the class arrangement was you went on weekends, Friday night, Saturday, and Sunday, and taking courses.  And you did that for several weekends together.  I recall one, one professor there.  We're on base and in class, and he used the N word.  I'm the only black in the class, and he used a phrase, "It's harder to find than a nigger in a woodpile."  And I remember, I was taking notes and I stopped and said, "I didn't hear that."  I, I thought maybe I, in my mind, but then, I happened to see people kind of glancing over at me.  I said, "Well, maybe he did say that."  And we're going along in class and later on, he repeated the same exact phrase.  This is an older professor, and--, "It's harder to find than a nigger in a woodpile."  And I, and I, I was, I was incensed.  And I raised my hand and I, I got up, and very respectfully, you know, in the [U.S.] military base, you know, and--, "I would appreciate it if you wouldn't use those type of analogies in front of me.  It's offensive to me and I think it's ignorant."  And he looked at me and says, "Okay, thank you."  I think he was doing it to test me.  But, nonetheless, I had a responsibility.  I went to the education office and filed a complaint, and he never taught on, on base again.  There are other analogies that he could have used and to make a point, but this is in 1980, '80 [1980] something.  It's well beyond that crazy stuff.  So, but it was a good experience, it was a tough program.  It was a--there are other master's programs I could have enrolled in that were less demanding.  But the M.B.A., it was the toughest of the programs and I'm glad I pursued it.
Speaker 1: Just reflecting on the N word for a second now, it does seem like it's a test in some ways doesn't it, but I mean when you--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --as your--when you were growing up, I mean, was that like the bottom line?
Speaker 2: Oh, those are fighting words.
Speaker 1: That's the bottom line?
Speaker 2: That's the bottom line then.  It's on then.  And, and so, that, that wasn't it.  We didn't use the word among ourselves and I'm so dismayed today that I, I see in some of the rap songs.  I see on television, the younger people throwing that word around like it's, it's nothing.  It's offensive to me.  I, I'm really dismayed that we use the word and like that because it has a certain stigma to it and I hope we get past that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really, I, I really do.  It doesn't do us any good as a people.
Story_ID: 625802
Speaker 1: So shortly after finishing your M.B.A., you were discharged, right, from the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: Or you--
Speaker 2: No.  Sure, I finished my M.B.A. in 1984.  And then in 1985, I got the assignment as commander of a squadron up in Greenland, and I stayed there for a year and--
Speaker 1: Now, was your family able to accompany--
Speaker 2: No, I, I was away from my family for a year.  And I had an assignment to come back to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], and I would reunite with my family.  And I thought then, with my enlisted time, I would have had about twenty years in.  I could have retired here in the area.  And, again, my career was going well.  And halfway through my tour in Greenland, I got a message from Headquarters Air Force [U.S. Department of the Air Force] that they were unable to send me back to the Pentagon.  The position had been abolished.  They were drawing down, you know, the [U.S.] military.  But congratulations, you've been hand selected for the Air Force IG team, inspection team, which was a career builder.  I knew men that would have, and women that would have jumped up and down with excitement to receive that assignment.  The problem is on that assignment, you travel 80 percent of the time, so I would have been separated from my family again.  And I took the assignment for about a year and a half and--
Speaker 1: This is the IGT team?
Speaker 2: The IG, inspection, inspector general's team.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And it's, it's a hand selected team that inspects various units to ensure that they're combat ready, and they're compliant with regulations.  And so, you're considered a shining star in your career if you, if you're selected for the IG team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was. I had a command slot as a captain, selected to the IG team, and but I was separated from my family again.  And so, after eighteen months of that, altogether about two and a half years, I was separated from my family.  My oldest son [Earl Stafford, Jr.] was in high school and going through his paces.  I couldn't get back to Washington [D.C.].  I retired, I retired.  When I put in my resignation, my retirement papers, then I was called by the general.  He said, "Stafford [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], look, your career's going well.  If I get you back to Washington, will you stay in?"  And I had prayed about it, and I rely on my faith quite a bit, and decided that no, that's not what the Lord is calling me to do.  And I, I retired.  I was promoted and you--that's during the time when, if you're promoted, you have to stay in that grade, in that rank, for three years in order to retire with it.  I wasn't willing to do that, so I gave them back the promotion and came home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you, you would have been promoted to major?
Speaker 2: To major, and I had already had a recommendation for lieutenant colonel before I put major on.  And so, things were going well, things were going well.  I didn't get out because they weren't.  They were going exceptionally well for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so what did you when you got out?  What did you--what was your plan?
Speaker 2: Well, when some people heard that I, I was retiring in that industry in air traffic, commercial companies, I got a couple of calls.  And one was from a colonel I had worked for before who was CEO of a small company, and he asked me to come to work when I got out.  It was right here in the Washington, D.C. area and so, I took him up on that.  Now, I was naive.  And I'm, I'm trusting.  And I didn't know what the salary was going to be at work, but I trusted the colonel.  I came to work for the company.  I came home on a Saturday from the [U.S.] Air Force.  I was away from my family and drove across country from St. Louis [Missouri] to Washington got home on Saturday evening.  Monday morning I was on the clock, I was on the job again, so I had no time in between.  And I reported for work on, on I Street down in Washington, D.C.  And come to find out, they were using me, I still did not know how to apply for a civilian job or ask the right questions.  And I come to find out they were going--they were paying me less than I was making in the military.  And this is for a colonel I was working for and I was putting in hours.  I was, I was really working to learn this new simulation, air traffic control simulation system that they had just invested in.  And I come to find out that I'm the only one that's working sixteen hours a day, and I eventually became the expert on this system.  After three months and working, and my wife's [Amanda Boardley Stafford] complaining she doesn't see me, and I'm trying to support the family, I knew I wanted to go into business for myself.  And so, one Monday morning, I went in and made an appointment to see the CEO, and handed him my letter of resignation.  He says, "Earl, you can't quit, we need you."  And I knew that.  I said, "Yes, sir, but I formed another company [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.], and this is how you can get to me."  And that was my first contract (laughter).
Story_ID: 625803
Speaker 1: Now, describe it, you know, what you were just saying off camera about your feelings then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I, I, at that time, being in the [U.S.] military, you, you're not taught about salaries and healthcare and benefits, and things like that, that's provided for you.  So, this was a new world for me, and getting out after twenty years in the military and entering into the commercial area, it was a different world and it was a challenge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I just want to make the point again, in case somebody missed it, that you had just learned, working for this fellow, a new area of technology, air traffic simulations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Simulation system, right.
Speaker 1: Systems--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, when you developed your company, you were still working for them, right, and you were thinking like, how am I going to--
Speaker 2: And so, I started the company, put in my resignation, and I had no work.  I had, had nothing, didn't, didn't know what I was going to do.  So I took a chance, gave them my resignation, knowing that I'm the only one that really knew the system.  I was working sixteen hours a day and I knew that they needed me.  And so, I put in my resignation, and then we drew up a contract, a consulting agreement, where through my company now known, that became known as UNITECH [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.].  Through my company, they could get to me, and I would provide services that way.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: See, and, of course, I raised the rate that I was charging them quite a bit (laughter), so that I could make a decent living and provide some help for my family.  And that's how I started out in business.
Speaker 1: And they were glad to pay it, weren't they?
Speaker 2: Well, they had no choice, they had no choice.  They had millions of dollars invested in this system, and they were using me almost like a slave.  I was working weekends, nights, and it was supposed to have been a team.  But while others were away with their families, and on weekends I was catching heck from my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford], I was spending no time at home.  I just needed to do well and it paid off.
Story_ID: 625804
Speaker 1: So, it starts paying off from the very beginning?
Speaker 2: Well, we started making some money.  And doing this, I had some business training academically, and that's a far cry from learning to run a company.  And then, I had to go out and look for other work and pursuing government contracts and things of that nature.  So, we started doing that.  And it's amazing, by me working on that air traffic system, there was another company that was involved with it that saw the diligence, and asked me if I wanted to do some, provide some menial support on a contract that they had with the Hubble Space Telescope launch.  And these were menial jobs, secretarial, janitorial, computer operator jobs.  And I said, sure, and I had fourteen employees there at--working on that Hubble contract.  I had the consulting contract there.  I had been on the contract with the [U.S.] Navy to provide air traffic monitoring service, I had won that.  And things were going along well for me.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an era, then also, I guess, that black people are getting contracts, as minority contracts, as we never received before, were never allowed, were always--
Speaker 2: That program started--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that program had started with Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] some years before and it was developing and you had to apply for that.  But this was, this work was outside of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hadn't received that certification yet.  So this was, this was outside of the so called 8(a) SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] 8(a) program.  This was work that we had pursued.  Others had seen the diligence that we had, that I had, and the good work.  And these menial jobs added up and we were able to make a little profit and do that.  And then in July 1990, I believe it was, I recall that Tuesday that I got a telephone call from the company I was providing consulting to, and they cancelled my contract [with Universal Systems and Technology Inc.].  You recall that the Hubble Space Telescope was launched, and they had problems with the mirror and folks saying, and it didn't go right, and immediately NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] cut the contracts.  So, I got a call that my other contract was terminated immediately.  It was just a dark and dreary Tuesday for me that day.  And my work was out, and I recall sitting there in a little office just wondering what the heck I was going to do.  I prayed through it.  I had no income coming in now, still had a wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] and children and a house.  And things were tough there for a while, but we stayed at it, pursuing other work.  And then, one of the companies called me.  They had, it's funny, contract with the new organization called the Resolution Trust Corporation that you'll recall that the savings and loan debacle that they had.  And they want to know, they had a little twenty-five thousand dollar contract, would I be interested in it?  And I did, and, again, we worked hard.  And they needed someone to clean up afterwards, and I volunteered to do that.  And during the day, I was with a suit and tie working on this contract and would go to my car.  And the other guy said, "Hey, c'mon, we're going to have--go out, and have a beer.  You want to have one, Staff [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford]?"  "No."  I went to the car, changed clothes, put on my overalls, and went back in as a janitor, and did those things.  But you do what it takes to get the job done.  I had to provide for my family.  And I would do that until midnight or so, run back to my office, see the mail and two o'clock in the morning go home, and get up at six o'clock; and start over again.  And we did that.  And the federal customer, the government customer saw what I was doing, and he was impressed by it.  And, eventually, he came to me, and he issued me a $2.5 million contract over two--over a year.  And, praise God, it was just--and that was the start of us moving on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he saw you as someone who would definitely deliver?
Speaker 2: And get the job done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I still see him, and that was twenty something years ago.  He's since retired.  And every once in a while, I see him around town, wave and say, "Hi, thank you."
Story_ID: 625805
Speaker 1: Now you've got an M.B.A., and you got, you know, you've been to school and all of that.  But the, the notice seems to come, I mean, you, the way you get contracts is by diligence, it seems?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's business, and you get additional work by doing good work with what you have.  You see, that's biblical, you know, you be a good steward over the little that you have, and then perhaps the increase.
Speaker 1: I mean, some would, you know, think that the first thing that they'd do is get a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] or something after--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --look, look successful.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So the (unclear) will think that they're already successful and give him a contract.
Speaker 2: I don't subscribe to that model.
Speaker 1: Have you ever heard of that before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Fake it until you make it, and I don't subscribe (laughter), I don't subscribe to that.  I think rewards follow value.  When you provide value in the marketplace to your customer, when you provide such value that they can't do without you, then rewards come behind that.  I still subscribe to that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was this contract for the $2.3 million contract [with Universal Systems and Technology Inc.]?  What was--
Speaker 2: $2.5 million.
Speaker 1: 2.5, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: To provide computer software development, other support to help oversee, and to assess the damage of this failed savings and loan issue debacle, where there was a lot of criminality and, and things going wrong in the savings and loan industry in 1990, '91 [1991], '92 [1992] timeframe.  And so, we started off again doing menial work.  And we were able to work our way up and 'til we were doing some more advanced work.  Now, that wasn't my background, but we hired people that knew that area and did a good job.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now, the previous job that you, the job where you worked as a consultant and as a janitor, that was, now was, what year is this and--
Speaker 2: Same, that was the same customer.
Speaker 1: Same customer.
Speaker 2: That was the same customer in the government.  And he needed janitorial work done and we volunteered to do it.  We got a little contract to do that and we did anything that he needed done and we did it well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, what office of government is this?  This is the--
Speaker 2: That was the, now defunct Resolution Trust Corporation--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Resolution Trust Corporation, all right.
Speaker 2: --that fell under the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this is 1991?
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991], 1992 timeframe.
Story_ID: 625806
Speaker 1: How do things progress through the '90s [1990s] then?  Were they--
Speaker 2: We used that same model to, whatever you do, do exceptionally well.  Always exceed customer expectation.  That was, that was part of our mission statement [of Universal Systems and Technology Inc.].  Whatever you do, do it so well that the customer will want you to do it again.  It's pretty simple.  And so, we did that.  We started pursing other work.  We went to different agencies.  You'll recall, even having that, during that time period, the USSR [Union of Soviet Socialist Republics] was falling apart glasnost.  And we were able to get a contract with the Defense Nuclear Agency [Defense Threat Reduction Agency] to provide some support, and the Soviet states, Belarus, and Ukraine, and those states, to provide some infrastructure support through the Defense Nuclear Agency.  And we did that very well to the point where they allowed us to bid on some nuclear engineering contracts.  Now, I knew nothing about nuclear engineering, but I do know how to find nuclear engineers and, and to hire them, and so we did.  And we were even doing some assessments, some bookwork in nuclear engineering for the Defense Nuclear Agency.  And we did that for several years, did so well that they allowed us to bid on other contracts to include running their Defense Nuclear Weapons School in Albuquerque, New Mexico, which we did for ten or twelve years, and did it very well.  So, it's that model that, you know, do well with what you have, and if you do that well, other things will follow.  And so, we grew pretty rapidly during that period.
Speaker 1: So, if you can demonstrate that you can manage a contract, you can almost get a contract for almost anything.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's true in life.  Again, if you do, if you exceed expectations with value, and you do it morally and ethically within those bounds, and you provide that value to a customer, he or she can't afford to let you go.  He or she will then tell their coworkers about you, and then you have an opportunity to even grow that way.  That's how we grew through, through value.
Speaker 1: So, even the subject matter that you may not be as understood in, or one that you don't even know anything about, if you can manage a contract, you can provide the--
Speaker 2: I wanted to solve that customer's issues, his problems, his challenges, beyond his expectations.  So, you do what it takes.  You hire Ph.D. nuclear engineers and, and you incentivize them and you come up with a solution.  You present it with--to your potential customer.  And they like the solution that you're able to provide at a reasonable cost, at a reasonable price.  It makes sense, it makes sense.
Story_ID: 625807
Speaker 1: Your company's called Universal Systems and Technology--
Speaker 2: Inc. [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.]
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And doing business as UNITECH, U-N-I-T-E-C-H.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, you start, you know, just walk us through the growth of this, you know, then--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my concept is when you start a business, and you don't have a specific skillset, you're a generalist, and you'll do whatever it takes.  There are times I would have washed your windows if that's what it took to generate revenue and a profit.  And then, as you take care of those lower level needs, you're able to pay the rent and pay payroll.  Then, you're able to strategize and start focusing on that area that makes sense where there are growth opportunities, and that you can do well in and becoming more specialized in that.  And that's what, that's what we did.  And eventually got into the training and interactive training courseware, and then eventually the simulation area for [U.S.] Department of Defense.  And that's where we focused on, and we excelled in, to the point where we were acquired by a major corporation, Lockheed Martin in 2009.
Speaker 1: Now, what exactly were you, you were creating simulators for air traffic control?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: We had changed and gotten away from the air traffic aviation area.  And one of the reasons was we didn't see growth potential there.  And so, I left my main customer which was a bold move.  I eventually didn't renew contracts, didn't bid on more contracts there at the AFA [Air Force Association, Arlington, Virginia], and focused our attention more on the Department of Defense.  And then, the training area. Now you'll recall during that time we, we were in Afghanistan, and then in, in Iran--Iraq, rather, and so, there was a need there.  And also, we were able to come up with engineering ideas that satisfied a lot of the challenges there for Department of Defense in training.  You'll recall the IEDs [improvised explosive device], the explosives that the terrorists were using there, well, DOD came to us and asked if we could develop a training simulator that a weapons effect type simulator, that we could train our troops on how to avoid, how to deal with. And we did that, and out of that came other training opportunities that we, we developed, engineered, manufactured, and deployed for the Department of Defense.  We did that so well, and I'm not boasting on myself, I'm boasting on the guys that really developed this.  These guys were working sixteen, eighteen hour days, days to get these things developed and did this for several years, that we captured in that and the--what's called the miles area, the laser.  You see the laser guns that are used for training?  We captured about 75 percent of the world market in that area.  And we were competing against some of the major corporations, the Lockheed Martins, the Northrop Grummans [Northrop Grumman Corporation], the General Dynamics [General Dynamics Corporation], the Raytheons [Raytheon Company] of the world of the Saabs [Saab Group] from overseas internationally, and we were winning--such that they came after and asked, asked to--they wanted to acquire us.  And we eventually sold to Lockheed Martin in 2009 after being in business for twenty-one years.
Story_ID: 625808
Speaker 1: Now, does it--are they really getting the same business without you, you know, in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  One of the important things in business, I found out, is that the entrepreneur should not be the center of the business.  Any organization that's, that is focused or reliant on one individual is a weak organization.  And so, we delegated out, and I still use that model today.  I want other entrepreneurs around me that can take responsibility and pride and a function in an area of responsibility, if you will, and the vision, and the subsidiary, and grow that and run that, as if it's his or her own.  And it incentivized them that way, you see, within bounds, allow them to run their so called company.  And they do it well.  They're very profitable and that all benefits you.  I don't need to be out front.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your goals are put together, a team, I guess, that will, that can--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --function.
Speaker 2: Put together an organization.
Speaker 1: An organization, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I still subscribe to, when you come to work for my--the company that I founded, as soon as you come to work for it, I go to work for you.  And my job is to ensure you have all the resources and wherewithal to, to excel.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My job is to be your biggest cheerleader.
Speaker 1: So, when you're looking for when, well even now, you're managing things now, but when you look for personnel then, who--I mean, how do you judge a person's--
Speaker 2: Well, it starts with the value system, it starts with the value system.  They don't--I don't necessarily mean religious.  I don't, I try to wear my faith, but I don't beat you over the head with it, but there has to be a trust relationship.  And then I look for those who have a vision, have a dream, to be entrepreneurial that want to, that want to grow something, to lead something, and have a passion, and then, they have to have the technical skills to do that.  And if it appears that it works out, then we go from there, and then I try to support them, to push them, and to give them all the responsibility that they can handle, plus 10 percent.  It's my job to stretch them, see, I think life is like a, your, your abilities are like a rubber band.  It's absolutely useless unless it's stretched.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I suppose that this work has--because of the, you said you had 75 percent of the world market at one time or another (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that one, in a miles area, that laser technology area, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  So, did that take you around the world?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're doing--with that and other training efforts, we're doing some other things that weren't involved with that.  We were, at one time, ended up forty different countries around the world.  We're doing some clandestine things for the government in various parts of the world in training and, and some things, I didn't even know about as CEO because I have a top secret security clearance.  There are some things that we were doing as a company [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.] that were above my security level.  And I still don't know though, you see, but we were, we were pretty much worldwide as a company.
Story_ID: 625809
Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide to sell the company?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it, life comes in phases, and then seasons.  And I had a season that I was in the [U.S.] military and I loved the company.  I loved UNITECH [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.], the people, but it comes to a time where you start itching to do something else.  And it's not as much fun as it started out to be.  And I think, and we prayed about it.  It was, it was about time to move on.  And so we, we did that, and we were able to get paid for our efforts.  And I moved on to something different and started another company.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard from others, those I know, someone I interviewed, who's defending the sale of BET [Black Entertainment Television] to Viacom [Viacom Inc.], was suggesting that really, they had no choice, but to let it go at the time they did because the big guys were going to, you know.
Speaker 2: You get to, you get to a point in business that your business grows that you can't continue along that without bulking up, and being competitive.  And, no, I think that's an individual choice that the founder or the owner of the business has to do decide what's best for that.  I treat the company that I run, even though I might be majority shareholder, I have a responsibility as CEO to the shareholders and to increase their net worth, net worth, their value, see.
Speaker 1: So, so when UNITECH was sold, this was in 2005?
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Nine [2009], okay, I'm sorry, 2009.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was 2009.
Speaker 1: Two thousand nine [2009], when sold to Lockheed, now did that basically set you up for life, I mean, in terms of--
Speaker 2: We were blessed (laughter).  Out of, out of that the Lord blessed us well, and such that I, I guess I don't have to work again.  Well, you know, you have a goal, you have an objective, you have a certain number that you want to reach.  And we've exceeded that and He's, He's blessed us in abundance.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you still maintain--now, you have a company that does investments or, or what was it, a--
Speaker 2: A holding company [The Wentworth Group, LLC] that we started to get involved in private equity.  Again, I didn't have to go to work and but I, I still want to be involved.  And I think that through that, we can do good.  We can help other smaller businesses, especially minority businesses that need, that need support, not only financial, but nurturing, encouragement, opportunities that we can get involved and do good, and make a living still.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was your biggest year with UNITECH?
Speaker 2: Our biggest year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When we sold, the year that we sold, it was still on the incline.  We were still growing rapidly.  We were, we were growing at about 40 percent a year.  And things, we--when we sold the company, we provided Lockheed Martin with about a half billion dollars' worth of opportunities right in front of it.  And it was a good sale.  It was at the right time at the right price.
Story_ID: 625810
Speaker 1: Now, in 2000, you founded The Stafford Foundation [Reston, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], okay.  And, and I would just assume, because of the conversation we've had so far, that you were involved in some kind of charitable giving before you established this foundation.
Speaker 2: Well, we've also done things, and as we could, and get involved and to help.  We were conditioned, my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] and I were conditioned like that from childhood, from the examples that our parents had taught us to give.  And so, that was a part of us, but we're both very much involved in the church and have been.  And my pastor at the time called and asked me to go to Haiti in 2002, to go to Haiti on a missions trip.  And I, I was just too busy to do it.  But, nonetheless, he insisted, and it was a life transforming experience for me.  When I went to Haiti, I saw the people.  I got a different perspective of what they wanted and what was needed, and I came back from there.  After spending a week or two there, I came back knowing that I wanted to commit my life to doing good, the rest of my life to doing good.  And didn't know what I was doing, but I founded a family foundation that grew and evolved to a public foundation.  Now, it's a public charity, The Stafford Foundation, and we are able to do some good things, and we continue to do some good things through that.
Speaker 1: Now, and now what is the--is there a particular focus, charitable focus of The Stafford Foundation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we want to, our mantra is this, is to help people help themselves, and live their lives in dignity, and then to inspire them to go out and help others.  And so, we do that.  We have a different model.  There's so many non-profit, well intentioned organizations out there, especially in the minority community now.  There's been a plethora of organizations that have popped up that are well intentioned, but they lack the wherewithal to have impact.  So, instead of us competing, and being another organization that does program work, our focus is to work with organizations, viable organizations, that are out there that are doing good, and to try to provide support through them.  And we do that in areas of education and training, training in health, and those type things.  We have a mission area--we're building a center.  And we've helped, working with another organization, we've built churches throughout Africa.  And we now currently have a large project where we're building a church--we've built a church, two orphanages, a school, an adult learning center, a conference center, and farming in Burkina Faso.  And we've named that in honor of my mother and father, Reverend Robert and Mabel Stafford Center [Reverend Robert W. and Mabel Stafford Center], in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.  And so, we help take care of children.  We focus on educating women there and doing that, and providing healthcare, and also religious Christian training and doctrine.  And so, we're doing those things there.  We work with other organizations, one that helps unwed young fathers to become fathers.  There are a lot of young men who go out, they have babies, but because of their background, they've never had a father in the home.  So, where do these young boys learn to become men and to become fathers?  We have to break that cycle, so we support and provide support to, and help to an organization that trains these fathers and help them get reunited with their children.
Story_ID: 625811
Speaker 1: Did The Stafford Foundation [Reston, Virginia] have any relationship at all to the President Bush's [President George Walker Bush] faith based initiatives?
Speaker 2: No, we did nothing with President Bush and his religious and faith-based initiatives.  I was aware of it.  I was associated with some other religious organizations that were trying to take advantage of the funding there.  But The Stafford Foundation, although it's a faith based organization, really didn't get started until President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was becoming president.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it existed, but it really didn't do a lot until then.  So, you got churches in Ouagadougou [Burkina Faso] and agencies in the--
Speaker 2: We have churches throughout Africa that we've helped build--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and doing that.  We work with about forty other organizations--I think it is, that we support throughout the country here of different races, different types, those with disabilities.  And we try to provide financial and other support.  Rather than competing with them, we want to join force with them to have an impact, and we don't need our names out front.  We don't need to get credit for it, but the Lord needs us to help others.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, if somebody is doing something with it, so, is your criteria that they have to be doing something--not just faithful, but doing something for the--
Speaker 2: Something that has good, and something where we think we can--that's important to us in healthcare and education, and those type things, so we try to collaborate with them.  We have partners.  Even with Habitat for Humanity, we're now negotiating and building a house, having homeless people volunteer to help build a house for others.  We have a program that we are, that is promoted out of The Stafford Foundation called Give Before You Get.  That started a couple of years ago at Christmastime where we were led to work with homeless agencies and shelters, and to have them involved in giving, especially at Christmastime.  And so, we developed a program where we provide gifts to the homeless people.  And they take them to hospitals and tell their story, and listen to the patients and work that way.  We ran it in five or six different cities across the country.  Last year, we just did it in the Washington [D.C.] metropolitan area and it's a huge success.  During the year, we get calls back from those in homeless shelters, "Hey, when, are we going to do this again this year?"  So, the idea is that anyone, regardless of your station in life, can give, can give, and giving feels good.  It's therapeutic and so we have, we work with different agencies, even Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America].  Those who are traditionally seen on the receiving end of charity, we get them involved in volunteering and in giving.  And it adds an air of dignity to their lives.  And so, what we're doing now, instead of just doing this at Christmastime, we're trying to have them engaged with different other agencies and organizations, volunteer organizations that they can volunteer a couple of hours a month, or they can get involved with.  And it gives a sense of self-worth to these individuals, and it makes a difference.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any relationship at all to, or do you work with the federal AmeriCorps project or VISTA [AmeriCorps VISTA]?  Do you have any association?
Speaker 2: No, we don't.  And we're still a smaller organization.  Although we are a public charity and we do give some donations, we're still growing, and there's only so much we can do.  We have limited resources, but that which we do, we try to ensure that we have impact, that someone's life is impacted because of what we do.
Story_ID: 625812
Speaker 1: I know we interviewed Reverend Rivers [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers] a few years ago in Boston [Massachusetts].  And he was discussing how he's tried to organize storefront pastors to do neighborhood work, good works in the neighborhood, instead of just teaching about heaven, you know.
Speaker 2: That's so critical, and you see that happening more.  I'm on the board of directors at Wesley Theological Seminary [Washington, D.C.] and they're doing the same thing.  They're coming up with programs where a church has to be outside the walls of the building, you know.  What you shout about on Sunday morning, you should be doing on Monday morning.  And the problem is a lot of pastors who are brought up religiously, and they have the religious training, aren't really trained on doing work outside the church in the community.  And that's where your congregation really is, outside.  And so, that's happening more and more, especially in the black church, you see that happening more and more, and I'm happy about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Stafford Foundation [The Stafford Foundation, Reston, Virginia] focuses on groups that are supposed to be doing good, or want to do good, or have been doing good, to do more.
Speaker 2: To do more.  They are viable, smaller, especially in the minority community, and we do that, not to be racial, but that's where much of the need is.  That's where much of the charities, focusing in minority community.  So, our focuses that we can help those there who are trying to do good, do good better, if you will, and help their own.  That's a good thing.  But we do, we do, probably half of the organizations that we support, and are associated with, are not minority organizations.  So, we're not color based or race based but, you know, you have to focus on where the need is.  And if we can get people to help themselves and come out of their situation, then we think that's effective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I hear what you're saying, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've been to many food banks.  I've done those things.  And I'm dismayed that I go there, and in preparation to distribute the foo- food, most of the people don't look like me.  But when it comes time to receive the food, then if you look in the lines of people coming through, almost all them do look like me.  And that's of concern to me.  We now have to get involved in helping our own and, to me, that's a foreign--this is far reaching but, to me, that's almost like a form of slavery, you see, and so, we have to help our own.  We are capable.  We've grown economically.  We have more disposable and discretionary income.  We have to focus that back into our own community, to help our people help themselves, and then go out and help others.
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds you're restoring in some ways a feeling that's been lost in the black community.
Speaker 2: It has, you're absolutely right, it has.  That pride thing, I remember coming up.  It was just a sense of pride in the community, and it seems like it's lost, you see.  And so, we have to do that.  No one's going to respect you until you respect yourself as an individual, as a group, as a people.  Until you respect yourself, you can't expect others to respect you.
Story_ID: 625813
Speaker 1: You're moving along here from, I guess, UNITECH [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.] was sold in 2009, right?
Speaker 2: In January 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, this coincides with another big event.  This is the inauguration of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, January 2009.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this is a big year for you (laughter) 'cause you, you're--
Speaker 2: It was a crazy time.
Speaker 1: --you know, if somebody--when we research you on Wikipedia, the first thing they mention is the People's Inaugural--
Speaker 2: Project.
Speaker 1: --Project [People's Inaugural Project].  And now, did you, were you excited about Barack Obama from the beginning?  Or was it, does it really have anything to do with him specifically, or how did it--
Speaker 2: And people don't like to hear this, and I've been interviewed probably seventy-five times on this.  And I tell the same story, and the media doesn't like to hear that.  My faith led me to do that.  I was led of the Lord to do that.  And this first came about in March 2008, and that is before Barack Obama even got the Democratic nomination.  Now, I'm a big Barack Obama fan, okay, and I still support.  I do some work and I think he's the greatest.  But I was led by the Spirit to do something for the underserved, as we term them, and to do that.  And I wasn't quite certain what to do, but I knew that in the inauguration coming up that, typically, you had to be well to do or of means to be part of the celebration.  And I was led to do something.  And taking it on my own to tell you, not many people know this, I worked diligently.  I had to negotiate.  I begged and pleaded to get the Presidential Suite at The Hay-Adams hotel, which is right next to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  And I purchased that during the summer of '08 [2008] because I had envisioned getting some homeless people coming up to the suite.  I'd have food and the things there.  We could watch the parade, and then send them home.  And so, I spent money to get that.  And then in October 2008, my brother-in-law, who I spoke of earlier, my sister [Jean Stafford Norman], were visiting.  And after church, he was in the kitchen reading the newspaper, and I was somewhere there behind him.  And I heard him say, "Can you believe this? That somebody would pay a million dollars to get a package at the Marriott hotel [JW Marriot, Washington, D.C.]?"  And I went over and looked over his shoulder and read the article that the Marriott had a package for a million dollars for three hundred rooms and a ballroom, and those type things.  And right then, I knew that Sunday afternoon, that's what the Lord had for me to do.  The next morning, I called the Marriott Hotel, didn't know what I was doing, but I knew I was supposed to do something.  And I spoke to a Mr. Eric Spate [ph.], who is a senior vice president of sales, and said I was interested in the package.  He said, "Well, sir," he said, "we've gotten two or three other calls, and whoever gets here first with a check will get the package."  And I went, and I was able to have a check, and I went down and I spoke with him, and I relayed to him what I was led to do.  Now, I had never met this man before, but I told him about the faith, and the Lord was leading me to do this.  And I expected someone to just, you know, just laugh, but he was a man of faith, and he understood.  We signed the contract, and it evolved from there.
Speaker 1: So, this is a check for, I'm sorry, but this a check for $1 million?
Speaker 2: For a million dollars.
Speaker 1: This a check that, on the TV show, people were waiting for John Beresford Tipton to show up with this $1 million check which (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Remember that show, 'The Millionaire'?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite in history, oh, no, no, I tell you, that leads my life.  I recall this.  That's another subject.  But I recall every episode of that.  And I still have reruns in my office here on DVD, someone gave me.  I always wanted to be the guy that delivered a million dollar check.  God's so good.
Story_ID: 625814
Speaker 1: So, this is, all right, this is really something.
Speaker 2: So, well, it's not of me.  So, we were able to go down and to do that.  But then, what do you do with that?  And I'm still confused.  I don't know what to do.  And the Lord led me to call certain people, like Lavern Chatman, who was head of the Northern Virginia Urban League [Alexandria, Virginia].  I know Lavern, but why?  And I was led to call her to explain what I thought we were doing.  And she started yelling on the phone.  I said, "What's wrong?"  She said, "Guess where I am?"  I said, "I don't know."  She said, "I'm walking right in front of the JW Marriott hotel [Washington, D.C.].  There has to be some--." She got excited.  And I called some other people and it just came together.  My name's upfront on this, but there was just so many people that came together that I recall us planning a coming together.  And it was unfolding, and it was just growing, and ideas of what we're going to do.  It just got, it became a religious experience.  And then, a public relations firm, DCI Group [DCI Group, LLC], came in and volunteered their time.  And they were a--they were not for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] they were actually for McCain [John McCain].  And they volunteered their time and helped us put this together.  We had a press conference on December 6th.  And I remember saying to my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford], I said, "Honey, I'm no longer in front of this.  This isn't about me at all."  And it just took off on its own, such that we brought in over four hundred people.  We went well beyond the three hundred rooms that were at the JW Marriott.  We had to purchase many other rooms.  We had people coming from twenty-two different states of different races, different situations, battered women, Asians, wounded veterans, and just a cross section of America.  But the focus wasn't on, we didn't want the focus to be on what we were doing.  We were trying to bring the focus to people in America that there's a need there, people who are hurting out there.  There are people who are unemployed that weren't getting bailed out like Wall Street was and GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] was.  There were people that were underserved, and we wanted to encourage people to be the brother's keeper, to go out and get involved.  And so, we did this.  It was a great event [People's Inaugural Project].  And then, it hit me.  I was talking with the leadership team.  I said, "You know, it'd be almost hypocritical to bring people in to Washington, D.C. to this great event, and send them home the same way."  And so, we tried to provide some training, and then if you're really sincere about what you're doing, then was it that you do when the media is no longer interested in your story, and the cameras are turned off?  And so, we made a five year commitment with every organization, people from every organization that we brought in, that we would support them.  And so, we continued to provide scholarships and support to those organizations and those people.
Speaker 1: How were the people selected and the organizations?  So, I mean, so were the people selected from the organizations you tapped?  Is that how--
Speaker 2: What we did, we set up a criteria that we wanted a cross section of America.  We wanted people of different races, different ethnicities.  I'm devoutly Christian, but I wanted people of different faiths.  I wanted people from different sections there, and not only those people, we brought in other people who were of means, and they integrated.  We had a prayer breakfast.  We watched the parade.  We had the ball, but we also had two children's balls, see, children should be involved in this.  We had seniors, Mom Tucker [Rachel Tucker], who I brought in for the breakfast, she was 106 years old.  And we had children as young as two years old involved.  We wanted everyone involved in this.  We set a criteria for that.  And then, we asked, we delegated responsibility to different organizations.  And they went out, and they worked with other organizations to select these people to fulfill that, yeah.  It was just a wonderful miscegenation of different people coming together, putting this on.  I will tell you, I got over nine thousand emails and telephone calls from people around the world, from Australia, New Zealand, from France, from Germany, people, and in the United--people who wanted--not tickets to the event, but how can they get involved?  How can they help?  They were inspired to do good, you know.  I've had older ladies call me months after the event was over, and somehow got my home telephone number, and chewed me up because they called, and I didn't return their call (laughter), and they wanted to help.  That's what we were excited about, that people now wanted to go out, and to do good, and to help the underserved, and then help the underserved help themselves.  That's what we were excited about.
Story_ID: 625815
Speaker 1: Did you have to hire staff, extra staff to help the volunteers?
Speaker 2: Volunteers.
Speaker 1: All volunteers?
Speaker 2: We had volunteers.  I had people in my house in the living room at three or four o'clock in the morning.  I'm in bed.  And remember, at this time, I was going through a merger and acquisition process with my company [Universal Systems and Technology Inc.] which was really horrendous.  So all this was going on.  And we had volunteers.  We had people across the nation sending in--one of the late--my daughter [Jessica Stafford Davis] and my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] said, "Well, you know, it's good to bring them in, and we're going to have a ball, but they should look good.  And so, we should have gowns," and they--it was a program set up, they set up a store, Lavern Chatman from the Urban League [Northern Virginia Urban League, Alexandria, Virginia], and we got CEOs, female CEOs, and businesspeople, and others of means to donate gowns that were never used.  And then, we said, "Well, the guys should look good."  And we had people donating tuxedos, and we had people volunteering to make tuxedos.  It was just an amazing influx of people across the nation.  Amtrak [National Railroad Passenger Corporation] gave tickets and helped with the transportation.  JetBlue [JetBlue Airways Corporation], I mean it was just a coming together of America to volunteers.  We had people we couldn't use.  There were people providing haircut.  We had a line of barbers, hairdressers.  Ladies were getting, what do you call it, manicures and all--people, and then the night we had the ball, I got filled up.  I mean, I couldn't, I was worse than a little baby.  I just couldn't stop crying.  There were people there that didn't have a penny in their pocket to those, with those who had millions, and you couldn't tell them apart.  There were multimillionaires there at the ball and people of means, businesspeople.  And there were people who were homeless, and you couldn't tell them apart. It was just a wonderful experience [with the People's Inaugural Project].  It was, the Lord put that together.  And it was a great affair, and people came together, but the real work was after the party was over.  It was after that.  And that's what we're most proud of that people were inspired to go out and help other people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of interaction did you have with the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] at that point?  Did he come over and talk to this group at all?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  No, and we couldn't expect him to do that.  That was independent of his campaign.  There were other balls going on.  We talked with his team, his campaign team.  And they thought that we--they would be able to get him in there to come by, and say hello.  He was well intentioned, sent his regards.  The other balls were going on, on the other side of town.  But you'll recall, now there was a financial debacle.  And he was in the office, I think, at seven o'clock the next morning.  So, we understood that he couldn't come by.  He sent his regards and thanks and those type of things, but we were very happy with that.
Story_ID: 625816
Speaker 1: When people have revelations about, or religious inspiration to do something, I mean, what does that feel like?  I mean, how do you, I mean, how do you--
Speaker 2: You know, and that's the hardest thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of feeling did you have and what made you like a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not like a voice comes from heaven and says, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], do this," you know (laughter) it's not.  But, you know, in your faith, your spirit is dealt with in such a way that you're compelled to move to do this.  And it's not always very clear, as with me going down on my own, and getting the Presidential Suite at The Hay-Adams hotel [Washington, D.C.].  That's not where I was led to do, but I wanted to be obedient to what I was supposed to do.  And so, instead of that little party I was going to have at The Hay-Adams, the Lord revealed, because I tried, and I believe because I tried to show myself obedient, He revealed something much greater.  And it wasn't about me, see.  And that was the focus and we prayed about that.  One of the things that we did when we had meetings and we met, the team, I didn't meet with the team, the leadership team every day.  But once a week we had a meeting that I chaired, and we always prayed.  Faith was at the bottom of that.  And it was always said, we always prayed, and things just happened.  It was, if you had seen behind the scenes, it was an emotional experience with people.  And I won't call names out that you would know that had come, and it was just a white, black, Asian, Latino, young, old, young people.  It was just such an experience of coming together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was amazing.
Speaker 1: So, there's an ongoing--are there still, I guess, alliances, and things, and programs that have come out of this inaugural?
Speaker 2: There are.  And as I mentioned earlier, we still stay in contact with, and support many of the organizations that were brought in for the People's Inaugural Project to be of assistance.  And it was more than just a party, it was a commitment to have impact.  N Street Village where homeless women in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], we provide support to people of Massachusetts who have worked with the disability.  One of the things that we've done there, and that's one of my favorites, they are mentally challenged people there.  And we coordinated with them, and we were able to buy equipment, so that some of these people now could work in the bakery right nearby.  And it's not high tech work, but they're now able to be employed full time, and help sustain themselves.  That's exact- they're making pies and we bought pies from them, and they're just now so happy that they are working.  That's one of my favorite.  I have their picture up in my office and I have a girlfriend up there.  She's pretty severely challenged, but she's working, making pies.  It's good stuff.
Story_ID: 625817
Speaker 1: You're on the Board of Governors for the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: And I have a board meeting and the gala tomorrow night (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and doing that.  So, we've gotten involved in volunteering, and trying to do a little good.  And my situation, I've over extended, so I'm retrenching a little bit, and focusing more on the foundation [The Stafford Foundation, Reston, Virginia].  And I'm going to resign from some of the boards, and try to replace myself with others.  I've been able to get in situations where there are not many minorities, and now my responsibility is to bring other minorities in, too, and then I'll leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2010, in January, there's another, there's a big milestone here where you were a personal hero on an airplane.  Can you tell us the story?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), I forgot about that, I wasn't a hero.  We had done something that Bill Cosby for the campaign, for the foundation, the Doing Good campaign, we established.  And Bill called and said, "Hey, listen, I'll do something for you to help you with that."  And so we had the launching of a Doing Good campaign to inspire other people to come, and to get involved and to volunteer.  It just so happened at that time, the following weekend, that TV executives were meeting in Las Vegas [Nevada].  And so, we had put together a public service announcement that we wanted to pitch in Las Vegas.  So, myself and the consultant were on an airplane going to Las Vegas.  And I was sitting there in the first class cabin and we dozed off.  And I had just woken up, and I see this large gentleman with a black hoodie, Caucasian guy, with two bags in his hand going through.  And I thought he was going to the men's room.  And he goes, and he goes to the cockpit door and tries to open it.  And I remember thinking, hey, that's the cockpit.  The bathroom's to your left, silly.  But, he turned to the bathroom, and then went past that, and he went to the door to pull down the handle.  And he put the other bag in and he--I said, "Whoa," and I remembered jumping out of my seat.  And he's a pretty big guy, and I grabbed him and pulled him away.  And I'm thinking in my mind, he has two satchel bombs in these satchel, these cases, and this plane is going to blow up!  And I remember saying to myself, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], you're about ready to go to heaven."  And I'm wrestling with this guy, and not really wrestling, 'cause he wasn't really resisting that much, and I spin him around.  And I'm yelling to the other cus- passengers who were, some were asleep, "Get the bags from him, grab the bags from him!"  And people started coming, and they're waking up, and they see this black guy wrestling with this white guy.  And they're wondering, well, what's going on (laughter) here?  And so, we're able to restrain the guy.  We put him in the seat, and held him back.  My concern was that there might be a conspiracy.  And so, I'm barking orders, yelling at people, "What seat did he come from?"  He was in row twenty-seven, "Go back and search the area, make sure there's nothing in his bags," and those kind of things.  And the crew came, and I don't know where the crew, the flight attendants--they finally came.  And they came, and the pilot made a rapid mercy descent into Denver [Colorado].  And that's all there was to it.  And I think the press tried to blow that up, but it was not that big of a deal.
Speaker 1: What was the upshot of it?  I mean, what was--did he actually have any explosives (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he had some mental problems, and had been drinking and took a couple of pills.  And when he was there, we had him restrain his hands behind his back.  And he looked at me and says, "When we land, do you think they'll take me to another gate?"  I said, "Oh, they're going to take you somewhere, but it probably won't be to another gate to catch another airplane."  And he was just, he had some mental problems, and he wanted to get off the airplane to go home.  And we found out later the--actually, the door would not have opened at that altitude and done that, but when you're waking up and you see that happening, you respond.
Story_ID: 625818
Speaker 1: Tell us more about the Doing Good campaign with Bill Cosby.  How did that come about and--
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Cosby, Dr. Cosby, if you will, called after the inaugural event [People's Inaugural Project] and he said, "Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Stafford], good job on that."  He says, "I want to do something to help The Stafford Foundation [Reston, Virginia]."  And he says, "I'll volunteer one day of my time to do whatever you ask me to do."  And I said, "Well, thank you for that, and we'll put something together and we'll let you know."  And we decided that we wanted to come up with a campaign that would inspire others more so to volunteer, to get involved in philanthropy and charity, and to do good.  So, we came up with the Doing Good campaign that give a dollar, give an hour, get involved, okay.  And we put together a campaign and some literature and some advertising on that, and asked Bill if he would come in and help do a PSA [public service announcement].  And we would have an affair, a breakfast, and if he would speak and do that.  Dr. Cosby, not only one day, he gave us three days of his time.  He was very beneficial in helping us put together the filming of that, and offered a valuable assistance, and continues to be a good friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he gave three days?  He--
Speaker 2: He gave three days and he's just a funny man (laughter).  He--I couldn't stop laughing when I was with him, but I knew him.  I was on the board at the University of Massachusetts foundation [UMass Amherst Foundation].  And, of course, he got his master's and doctorates there, and we had been together there.  And so, I felt very, very comfortable around him, he makes you feel comfortable.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he's a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] man.
Speaker 2: Either that or--
Speaker 1: I believe he worked in Campbell Soup [Campbell Soup Company, Camden, New Jersey] at one point, didn't he?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he worked at Campbell Soup.  He's out of Philadelphia, went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], ran track--
Speaker 1: I think I heard a story where he worked at Campbell Soup.
Speaker 2: He worked at Campbell? A lot of college guys do during the summer, work at Campbell Soup, so very well could be.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, he's a wonderful human being.
Story_ID: 625819
Speaker 1: I know you speak on occasion.  I know you spoke for the commencement address at Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in 2010.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There are probably other speaking engagements, and, and I mean so, what are your future plans?  Do you have another big idea that's--
Speaker 2: No, we want to do well what we're doing.  And the concept is to help people help themselves.  Let's get out and take control of our future and of our communities and get involved.  Let's be more prescriptive than we are descriptive.  Anyone can describe how bad things are, but let's be part of the solution.  And you don't have to give a million dollar ball, but give a dollar.  Go out there and help, give an hour of your time to do something.
Speaker 1: You sort of addressed this in the interview, but like we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Unification.  I just have this thought that as we have had more economic opportunities, some of us, that we've become so successful, and we've become so sophisticated that we don't tie in to our past.  We have a responsibility.  We have a great responsibility to help those, not to give away anything, not to lower any standards, but to nurture and to encourage others, not only our young people, but also our peers.  We, we, we, we, need that.  I--a question that I ask sometimes and it's a difficult question is have we over integrated?  No, I don't say in a negative tone.  I use vegetable soup as an analogy that I like, my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] knows I like vegetable soup.  And when you look at it, you can identify the carrots, the peas, the potatoes, the onions, the things that go into making this a wonderful broth.  They work together to do that.  But you can identify the elements that make up this broth.  And that's how I see us as a society, that we are a great part of this American story in this great country, the greatest country that ever existed.  But we have a legacy, we have a history, we have a culture that's different.  And we can identify that, we can retain that, and still be contributors to this great broth we call America.  And I'm afraid that we're losing that.  We're losing, our children don't know our history and our culture, and what keeps us together.  Our religious and faith background that has brought us thus far, I'm afraid that's, that's, that's being diluted.
Story_ID: 625820
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you still--you've accomplished a lot in a few years.  What, today, would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Oh, I hope if there is one, I hope it's one of love, of giving, and promoting my faith in Jesus Christ.  I don't, I don't hide that.  It's unpopular sometimes which, if you believe in something, you stand up for it.  But I just, I just hope if someone thinks about [HistoryMaker] Earl Stafford, maybe one day after they put my bones in the ground, they'll say, "Well, you know, he, he wasn't perfect," which I'm by no means, "but he tried to do a little good."
Story_ID: 625821
Speaker 1: When--just reading the environment here that we're in at your home here in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area, you have a--when you walk in the front door, well, I didn't walk in the front door, but in the front, in the foyer, there are two African sculptures--
Speaker 2: By Charlie Palmer [ph.], yeah.
Speaker 1: And then when you look up, you see scenes of the teachings of Jesus that appears--
Speaker 2: The life of Jesus Christ.
Speaker 1: Yeah, on the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had it painted in the rotunda--
Speaker 1: In a rotunda.
Speaker 2: --and in the foyer.
Speaker 1: So, what are you--I guess, you know, it delivers a message of its own, but what are you, what do you have to say about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I am a strong believer that there should be no difference between who you are and what you believe.  There--I said it before, there should be no difference between who I am on Sunday morning, and who I am on Monday morning, you see.  And my faith has to be an integral part of all that I do, and that includes my home and my family, my job, my inspira- my aspirations--all that should be integrated, and that's who I am.  That's how I was raised and that's--and I shouldn't be ashamed of that.  I shouldn't, I should not be ashamed of that.  And we convey that.  I just believe that all, whatever I've been able to achieve, God has willed that, and allowed that to happen.  He's blessed with that.
Speaker 1: Does it--we live in a time today when a lot of them, when you hear that someone is a Christian, you expect them to be a super conservative.  I mean, is that--do--
Speaker 2: Well, in what subject, you see?  You have to ask, was Christ a conservative or was he a liberal?  He, he, he went beyond the conservative view and he, and he was inclusive of all.  The harlot, the adulteress, the publican, the tax, but he was inclusive of them all.  But there are certain standards that he was pretty strong on, loving your neighbor, giving, forgiving, see.  I just don't buy into these labels of being conservative and liberal, and left and right, and I don't buy into all that.  You just treat others as my dad [Robert Stafford] taught me one time, the way that you would want to be treated.
Story_ID: 625822
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back again at your career, like is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Not that I, I could think of.  I--some of the things that I've done, I wish I had done them better.  But I look back now, see some of the things that I thought were false or mistakes were really there to help refine me more, and provide other opportunities.  So, no, I'm pretty much satisfied with my life, and God's blessed me in a tremendous way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know we usually focus on a lot of career things and chronology in terms of career, but tell us something about your family.
Speaker 2: I'm blessed to have a wonderful family.  I have a wonderful wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford].  We've been married for forty-two years this year, and a devout Christian woman from near my hometown [Mount Holly, New Jersey].  We have three wonderful children.  My oldest son, Earl, Jr. [Earl Stafford, Jr.], and he's a deacon in the church.  My daughter, Jessica [Jessica Stafford Davis], and my youngest son, Mark [Mark Stafford], who are all very, very close.  And I have four wonderful grandchildren, Madelyn [Madelyn Stafford], who will be a teenager tomorrow; and Thurston [Thurston Stafford (ph.)], Mark, Jr. [Mark Stafford, Jr.], and Tristan [Tristan Stafford (ph.)].  And we're just a very close family that enjoys, we enjoy each other.  And yet, we, we, we're not so closely aligned that we don't have our separation, and being able to be individuals, yeah.  And they are all just wonderful people who give.  They're involved in, every one of them, in the community and the church, and in giving and volunteering.  I'm just proud of that.
Story_ID: 625823
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.  I feel I've got an easy answer to this.  I want to say something about our president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  And one of the things that's important to me is that he get reelected.  Now, understand, especially as a businessman, I don't agree with every decision that he makes.  I don't agree with every decision that my wife [Amanda Boardley Stafford] makes, but that does not re- prohibit me from, or stop me from loving and respecting her.  The president is in a very tough situation.  And if he's not reelected, his presidency will go down as a failed administration.  And it would be much more difficult for those who look like him, and look like me, in the future to rise to that position.  He is being confronted with an inordinate amount of opposition for no reason.  Well, there is a reason.  And we have to get beyond, we have to get beyond that.  He's done wonderful things, made some mistakes as every other president, but there's just such an opposition to him being successful.  There are people in America who would rather see this country fail than him succeed.  And we have to come together, not only as a black people, because he's not the black president, but as a people to support this country, and focus on what's best for the people, not this political bickering that's going on, at our demise.
Story_ID: 625824
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: One day, when I guess they, they read my obituary and they form my obituary, I think it's important to me that I be remembered that my faith, I believe in Jesus Christ, and as a disciple, that's important.  That's my family history.  But as someone who loved people, wanted to give, loved his family, and love people.
Story_ID: 625825
Speaker 1: This is just a snapshot of my younger sister, Carol [Carol Stafford], and myself.  It should have been taken when I was probably about seven years old and she was about five.
Speaker 2: Seven years old in 1956, right?
Speaker 1: No, it would have been 1955.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955], okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: When I was a young boy, I had my two front teeth were missing.  Here's a picture of me sitting on Santa Claus, across his lap, in a department store, probably in 1952.
Speaker 1: And that was published in the--
Speaker 2: And that was published in the Mount Holly Herald on the front page, all I want for Christmas is my two front teeth.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken the day I graduated from the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] in 1976 with my older brother, Wilbur [Wilbur Stafford], who's now deceased; my wife, Amanda [Amanda Boardley Stafford].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's, again, that's the age of the worst photography in America.
Speaker 2: That, the mid-'70s [1970s], for some reason, the cameras were horrible (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not only still, but also video.  You can tell on television the colors weren't saturated.  This is just a school picture that I had taken.  I was probably about ten years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I have a sister, Keane [ph.] who used to live in Mount Holly [New Jersey]--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --and she graduated from UMass Amherst.
Speaker 1: Wow, two connections?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother [Mabel Willis Stafford] and my father [Robert Stafford] in 1970s.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my daughter, Jessica [Jessica Stafford Davis], was being christened in 1977.  My family, brothers and sisters, and my mother on the end.
Speaker 1: Again, another school picture, I was probably about eleven years old there.
Speaker 2: This is a younger picture of when I was probably about six years old and in front of our house in Mount Holly.  That was my father kneeling, my sister, Carol, he's holding, and my older brother, Ronnie [Ronald Stafford], who's always a joker behind.
Speaker 1: This is a picture in the 1970s of myself, and my oldest son, Earl, Jr. [Earl Stafford, Jr.] in my parents' house.
Speaker 2: This is a picture when I first got into the [U.S.] Air Force.  You had your picture taken, and that was the first one in uniform.
Speaker 1: This is a picture several years later.  I was in Thailand, and I had a picture taken by a photographer in Takhli, Thailand.
Speaker 2: It's a picture after I returned in front of my parents' home with my nephew, Ted, Jr. [ph.].
Speaker 1: Another school picture, I'm probably about fourteen years old, fifteen.
Speaker 2: I don't recall this picture, but I know it's of my--in front of our house.  My sister, Joan [Joan Stafford Norman] on the left; me in diapers; and my brother, Ronnie.
Speaker 1: Another family picture at my parents' house in the 1980s when my younger son was a baby.
Speaker 2: That's me and my wife, Amanda, holding my younger son, Mark [Mark Stafford]; my oldest son, Earl, is next to her; and my daughter, Jessica, is sitting.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I was in the, when I got back from Thailand, at my father's house.
Speaker 2: Again, some of my brothers and sisters in front of my parents' home when we were older. And from left is my older brother, Eugene [Eugene Stafford]; my sister, Joan; my sister, Carol; my sister-in-law, Ann [Anna Stafford]; her husband my brother, Robert [Robert Stafford]; and me on the end.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of when I was in Thailand.  I guess I thought I was cool, but I was outside the radar unit that I worked in up in Takhli in Thailand.
Speaker 2: Thought you were cool--
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures.  It's when we were able to take a picture with my grandchildren and [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama, my wife, and I.  You want me to tell who they are?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And me on the left; my granddaughter, Madelyn [Madelyn Stafford], in the rear; my wife; President Barack Obama.  In the first row is my grandson, Mark, Jr. [Mark Stafford, Jr.]; my grandson, Tristan [Tristan Stafford (ph.)]; and my grandson, Thurston [Thurston Stafford (ph.)].
Speaker 2: This is a happy picture of my wife and me at the People's Inaugural Project, the presidential inaugural ball.
Speaker 1: And this is me dancing with one of the guests, an underserved guest that we brought in for the people's inaugural ball from Kansas City.
Speaker 2: And this was several years ago, this is a family portrait that we had taken at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have to name them again, no?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And from the left in the rear is my granddaughter, Madelyn; my daughter, Jessica; standing tall is my youngest son, Mark; and to his left is my oldest son, Earl, Jr.  In the front, in front of Madelyn is my grandson, Thurston; sitting on my wife's lap is my grandson, Mark, Jr.; my wife, Amanda; my grandson, Tristan, is on my lap; and that is me.
