Story_ID: 597824
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Dolores Margaret Richard Spikes.  D-O-L-O-R-E-S, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, S-P-I-K-E-S [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 24, 1936 in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now, but pre-retirement days found me being president of the Southern University System, and then president of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland].  Before those administrative days, I held other administrative positions, but--that was teacher and researcher of mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 27th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 1315 Balsam Avenue, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 70807, which is my home.
Story_ID: 597825
Speaker 1: Well before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer as a warm up sort of.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, crawfish bisque.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Sky blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Late spring and early summer, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere where there are lots of large libraries where I can just roam through and among the books.  I--sometimes I used to go up to, to Cambridge [Massachusetts], where you know there are bookstores galore.  And, and just roam through the bookstores.  I do the same thing in Washington, D.C. where there seems to be a bookstore on every corner.  (Laughter) And, and I just love, I love bookstores, and I love those bookstores now that have coffee shops in them so you can stop and sip some coffee while you're browsing through a book.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That the only--the one that I always cite to my grandkids I guess is: keep your eyes on the prize, which is somebody else's phrase, not my own by any means and not an original, but I like it because what it means is that you've got to be focused, and you can't let little things deter you from your goals or your dreams.  At least that's the way I explain it to my grandkids.
Story_ID: 597826
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lawrence Granville Richard] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Margaret Mae Patterson Richard, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, Mae, M-A-E, Patterson, P-A-T-T-E-R-S-O-N, Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D [Margaret Patterson Richard].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 13th, 1918.  She was the last in her family to be born, she was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  The others were born in Pointe Coupee Parish [Louisiana] somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace them?  Can you take 'em back to the 19th century?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  You were telling us about your grandmother.  Your mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother's mother [sic. grandmother] was Lucille Ricard [Lucille Ricard Bell] who married Horace Bell.  I understand that they came from across the Mississippi River from Pointe Coupee Parish.  I'm not sure if the--I, I've heard one of my mother's older sisters talk about a couple of towns that they may have lived in, but I'm not sure about the particular place that, that they're from in Pointe Coupee.
Speaker 2: Now how do you spell Coupee?
Speaker 1: It's P-O-I-N-T-E, and then the other word is C-O-U-P-E-E.  Yeah, hear--I've heard one announcer say (pronunciation) Pointe Coupee, but here--around here we say Pointe Coupee (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Were there any stories about the people from Pointe Coupee, what they did for a living or--
Speaker 1: Mostly farming.  That part of the country is mostly agricultural in nature.  My mother's side of the family, maybe the men were generally in the building trades, carpenters, bricklayers and the like.  What we can trace is the particular African American ancestry, part of the--.  I had a cousin who was done some research and she said as far back as she could get was to a lady in South Carolina, but she couldn't get any particulars.  So I don't really know.  So we--that's a difficult one on my mother's side especially to be able to find (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they can trace 'em, I'm sorry, back to South Carolina to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: About what, what year are we talking about?  Eighteen hundreds [1800s] I imagine.
Speaker 1: Oh, we're talking about 1800s, yeah, we're really talking about way back in the 1800s.  And it seems that this was a, a privileged mulatto woman, though.  She was a free woman.  But we aren't--we can't get any data in terms of where she came from and where she went after that.  The cousin that was looking for that is, is from Lafayette, Louisiana.  She lives here now.  And when I came back from Maryland, we promised ourselves we'd get--as a matter of fact, one of the things that I promised was that my project in retirement is to look at the genealogy of my families, I just haven't been able to get to it.
Story_ID: 597827
Speaker 1: So the name Richard, now is that your father's last name, or is that your mother's?
Speaker 2: My father's last name.  Now, when my father and his family came to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], their name was often confused with the name Ricard.  Now I have a Ricard on my mother's side, her mother--grandmother was a Ricard before marriage.  So they would say Richard and folks would say, "No, you mean Ricard."  (Laughter) I say, "No, you mean Richard."
Speaker 1: Now how did your mother spell her, her last name?
Speaker 2: Patterson [Margaret Patterson Richard] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it spelled the same way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, R-I-C-H-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Lucille Ricard [Lucille Ricard Bell]?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Richard.
Speaker 1: Richard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her grandmother was a Ricard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So your grandmother--
Speaker 2: And Ricard and Richard are two different names now.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how did your grandmother Lucille spell her last name?
Speaker 2: R-I-C-A-R-D, no H there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Ricard like that.
Speaker 2: So my father and his brother decided, "Okay, we'll fix this.  We're gonna call ourselves Richard," and that's what they did.  I have a baptismal certificate from my father.  My father's name on that baptismal certificate is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I may as well get it now formally.  What's his--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well what's his--
Speaker 2: Grant Laurent, R-A-U-R-E-N-T [sic.], which is French for Lawrence, Richard.  I also have a document from the clerk of court here in Baton Rouge saying that his, his changing his name officially to Lawrence Granville Richard.  (Laughter) So that would fix all of those who would try to make him Ricard rather than a Richard.  But if he spoke to anyone outside of Baton Rouge, remember I told you Baton Rouge was about as far north as they got.  If they spoke to anyone outside and said Richard, they wouldn't know who they're talking about.  So when my aunt died about two years ago and I had the, the task of calling relatives in Dallas [Texas], (Unclear) and, and other places, I had to identify myself as Dolores Richard Spikes [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], Granville's daughter, Granville Richard's daughter because they would not have known who Granville Richard was.  (Laughter) So it was an interesting story about, you know, their, their name change.
Story_ID: 597828
Speaker 1: I don't know much about them.  My daddy [Lawrence Granville Richard] tells some interesting stories about his father [Simon Lawrence Richard, Sr.].  His father was a rice farmer, had some land along the Mississippi River.  And you know you got to have a lot of water for rice farming.  And I suspect that--that that's why they settle along the Mississippi River, and that's where they probably got their water from before the Mississippi River was polluted as it is today.  But he was also the schoolteacher in a little town in St. James Parish [Louisiana] that doesn't exist anymore.  And I asked my father, I said, "Well how, how, how did your daddy teach school when he was not in school himself?"  He said, "Well, my father was a self-taught reader."  He taught himself to write, he taught himself arithmetic.  So he gathered all of the children in that little town and he started a school.  My daddy went to the fourth grade, so I figure that's as far as my grandfather could go, fourth grade work.  But the, but the Richards were noted for two things: music and mathematics.  Most of my relatives on my father's side who went to college, and some who didn't go to college, were either in music or mathematics or mathematics related area, or both.  And of course you know there's historically a connection between music and math.  So I guess it's a kind of inherited gene, which I appreciate because for whatever--I don't know why, but I've always known that I would be a mathematician.  Nobody pushed me that way.  When my father would come in from work, he would ask me to sit at the kitchen table.  You're too young to know this, but there were these kitchen tables that had the porcelain like tops you could write on with a pencil, drive my mother [Margaret Patterson Richard] crazy.  He say, "Show me how to do this in mathematics."  And I showed him how to do algebra, I taught him trig [trigonometry], I taught him calculus.  Here was a man who had formally now a fourth grade education, learning mathematics at the calculus level.  Wasn't until I got to college though, that I understood that he knew as much industrial chemistry as any industrial chemistry baccalaureate degree person.  Because he worked as a laborer in what's now Exxon [Standard Oil Company; Exxon Mobil Corporation] for over forty years.  When he died, he had worked there forty years.  When he was seventeen, eighteen years old he started out.  And he learned just by observing and picking up on what these people had.  And we would talk about it over the kitchen table, writing down formulas to explain, and he would want me to explain the mathematics behind something that somebody had said.  And when he had put all three of his daughters through school, he went back and got his GED [General Educational Development] degree.  He was--that was the proudest moment in his life, and of course in ours because it was a dream for him.  And I do believe if he had not died in '57 [1957], my father would have been in college and would have had a college degree.
Speaker 2: Well from what you say, he--his knowledge base exceeded you know a GED.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I mean it really did.  I mean if he--I mean let's face it.  Had he been a white man in that time, and had the opportunities of whites of that time, he would have been a college graduate.  But of course, you know lot of good, black minds were wasted that way because of first slavery, then segregation.  My father didn't dwell on those things too much.  He just believed in, in going on and doing what you can.  Now my husband [Hermon Spikes] will tell you that he was jack of all trades.  You know the--metal roofs are a big things today, and I laugh, I say, well we grew up with metal roofs.  I used to hear the rain falling on those tin roofs, it was like music that would put us to sleep.  And my father put them up.  He painted, he taught all of his girls to paint.  Tell you what else he did.  He was a hunter.  He taught his girls how to shoot rifles, hunting rifles, shotguns.  Took us to the levee at a time when it was legal to do so, put tin cans up, taught us how to shoot.  And on the inside mother was teaching us things that girls was supposed to do.  So we had a pretty, pretty nice balanced life I would say (laughter).  And, and learned how to do a lot of things because, simply because of what my father was able to do.
Story_ID: 597829
Speaker 1: Now I've heard this now about four, five times since I've been here this week, that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now your father [Lawrence Granville Richard] was Creole, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  All the Creole men seem to know all the contracting arts, and you know how to build and put together things and put, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, many of them were in the building trades (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot of the arts and--yeah, the building trades--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --brick masons and other kind of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, pipefitters and all kind of trades.
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother's brothers were in the building trades, or one was a painter, the other did wallpaper and stucco work, sheetrock, stuff like that.  And he--she had a brother whose day job was working at Standard Oil [Standard Oil Company], or Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], but on evenings and weekends, he did work in the building trades.  My father's brother--I mean he--plant job was steady work money that came--you know if you had a family, you had to have money coming in.  So if you didn't own a construction job, you know a construction company, and you depended on somebody else for work, well that wasn't steady.  But they managed to, to do the steady job and on evenings and on weekends, they'd do the construction stuff to earn extra money to provide for their families.  No means, by no means wealthy, rich, middle class, anything else, but it was sufficient.
Speaker 1: Now, can you--now did your mother [Margaret Patterson Richard] get a chance to finish school, or--?
Speaker 2: Tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Tenth grade.
Speaker 2: She went to tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 597830
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Actually they met becau- (laughter) my, my mother's--an older brother of my mother's, he was about five years older than my mother [Margaret Patterson Richard], met and married my father's sister.  And so my mother and father [Lawrence Granville Richard] met through them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that brother-sister married sister-brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's how they met.  Now I don't know how my uncle and my aunt met each other, but that's how my mother and father met.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So and that was in, was that in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] here?
Speaker 2: That was in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By this time my father, my father and my mother were both the youngest in their families.  And by that time, they had moved to--the family had moved to Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 597831
Speaker 1: All right now when you think about your parents' personalities and what they were like and their personalities and dispositions and talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well people say that I take after my father [Lawrence Granville Richard].  They say you walk like your father, (laughter) you look like your father.  We were close.  I guess I was the eldest of the three girls [Spikes, Ann Richard Fenelon and Elizabeth Richard Bellaire], so perhaps my father.  On the other hand after I picked up some weight, they said I looked like my mother [Margaret Patterson Richard], so I don't know (laughter).  But I, I think it was my father primarily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 597832
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: You know it's, it's strange.  But my earliest childhood memory is of the old fashioned ways of holding wakes when people died.  They didn't go to funeral homes.  The church is for wakes, they would wake people in the, in their homes.  And so when my grandmother [Florence Bell Patterson]--old family house was down on Oleander Street [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my mother's [Margaret Patterson Richard].  When my grandmother died, I was about six years old.  She was waked right there in the living room of that house.  I just remember peaking over in her casket.  When my aunt's husband died, and they lived in that house too.  He was waked right there.  And I--and for some reason, that, that just struck me and just stayed with me.  And for a long time I, you know I was shy of funeral homes.  I didn't like to pass in front of them or anything (laughter), I just stayed away from them.
Story_ID: 597833
Speaker 1: But I, I guess you know one of the most interesting things was when I came to recognize the, I guess the diversity of people in South Louisiana, almost every person in South Louisiana can tell you I guess--of at least two or three I think origins behind them.  And my father [Lawrence Granville Richard]--some of those old pictures that I showed you were German ancestors of--on my father's mother's [Lizzie Shepp Richard] side.  And then there were the French.  One of the questions on your questionnaire say, you know, what's the origin of your name?  And the origin of the name Richard, it, it--I found this out really some time ago, but it's actually a German, came from the German.  And Ricard was just what people wanted to call Richard (laughter)--Ricard is also just a derivative of, of that same German name.  You know the history of the Germans invaded France and, and whenever you have these invasions, people take on all kinds of names.  So one of my great- my great-grandfather on my mo- father's side actually came from France, a Richard came from France and settled here.  I don't know how the Germans got in or when they came in, but the pictures I have that belonged to my aunt and were passed down to me, and my aunt was just a wealth of knowledge.  You know, I kind of wish I had had time to go back and listen to the tapes.  I taped a lot of what she said in her later years.  I don't remember much of it offhand.  But whenever--sometimes people say I can be a little volatile, you know (laughter).  But I said, well I've got all these bloods boiling up in me: the German, the French, the American Indian [Native American], and by the way it's the Blackfoot Indian, and the African.  So you know some of them don't like each other.  (Laughter) So they get to fighting inside of me and something might spill over a little bit.
Story_ID: 597834
Speaker 1: That was an interesting case of the Blackfoot Indian [Native American].  So I said, "Daddy [Lawrence Granville Richard], there are no Blackfoot Indians in, in Louisiana, how did you get to be a Black--to get Blackfoot in your blood?"  They came down with some of the Cajuns from Canada, and that threw me for a loop now because I knew about the French that came over, but remember--I mean you know all these people were intermingling during that time and nobody knows who's what here in the South, especially the, the southern part of Louisiana.  There are Caucasian people here who have almost as much black blood in them that I have in me and vice versa.  I do know, and all of us know, that many African Americans who, whose outward appearances were more Caucasian than Africa, pass for white.  Not here, they'd go away somewhere.  They're in Denver [Colorado], they're in Los Angeles [California], they're in New York [New York].  They're all over this country and they married into white families or into other families.  I say, you know what's gonna happen one day is a little black baby is gonna pop out there and somebody's gonna wonder, what's going on here?  (Laughter) But somehow it's managed to--I suppose they have managed to either not have any children or explain it away, 'cause it's bound to happen somewhere.  I mean just the genetic law says it will happen somewhere down the line.  But all of those different ethnicities were living together in South Louisiana.  In New Orleans [Louisiana], and that's a--New Orleans is all something different than (unclear).  They're more Creole than they are fr- the Acadiana Indians.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The ones that came down from--they're more mixed with the actual French people.  And so that part of my family that came from St. James Parish [Louisiana], New Orleans and what have you, those were the ones--that was the one that came from France here.  But I had some also who--there's some Richards and we're trying to figure out how we're related, but I know we would have to be in Opelousas [Louisiana], so we haven't out that branch is and Lake Charles [Louisiana].  But they're more--they're from Acadiana.  About five summers ago I met a fellow from Canada who was a Blackfoot Indian.  And I say, "I've been wanting to meet a Blackfoot Indian for ages.  Please tell me about it."  And so he taught me a few words that I don't remember, but we had a great time.  And he cited the same story that my father cited about how the Indians traveled with these French speaking people to--down to Louisiana, and some of them intermarried or lived together and produced offspring.
Speaker 2: Now let me just interject this from what I know is that Blackfeet were out of Northwest.
Speaker 1: Blackfeet.  Now that's not the same as Blackfoot.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Blackfeet, yeah, that's one of the things he explained to me very hurriedly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now he say you got the Blackfeet Indians that are below the Canadian border.  But the Blackfoot Indian was in Canada.
Speaker 2: Up in the eastern--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --part of Canada where Acadia is.
Speaker 1: There you go, there--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So that's a, that's an explanation that I have not heard before and people (unclear) take into consideration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had not either.  I was so glad to meet this guy, but we had a collaboration with the--what are called the tribal colleges, Indian, American Indian colleges and universities.  The Hispanic serving colleges and universities, and of course the historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  And those--we, the three of us formed a triad and, and worked together to do various things and get various things done.  And, and in doing that, we just learned a lot about each other and I sure learned a lot about that Blackfoot Indian that my father talked about.
Speaker 2: It's an interesting concept 'cause a lot of the black genealogists you know wonder, you know what people--.  'Cause a lot of people say that and okay we say they couldn't mean Blackfeet are on the Northwest, maybe it's a joke, you know, people telling them that because they don't--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know but it's, but you're saying it's not.  It's really--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's exactly--I, I was absolutely astounded by his story.  We had a long talk.  And we were emailing back and forth until my illness just kind of put me out of touch with folk and, and so I haven't heard from him in a while.  But that was quite interesting and great deal of information for me.
Speaker 2: Okay, and all of us now--
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause we have to think about this.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 597843
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm gonna ask you to recapitulate what you were saying off camera about your father's [Lawrence Granville Richard] ancestry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Caribbean African ancestry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You ready?
Speaker 1: Yes, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, one little piece that I did learn about my father's African ancestry is that they came to this country by way of the Caribbean.  Never knew which island that they came from, but I suspected Haiti because you know, a lot of voodoo, Catholicism there, strong Catholic tradition in my family.  And there were folk on my father's side of the family who practiced voodoo.  We had a cousin Grace [Grace Valentine Johnson] in particular from New Orleans [Louisiana] and New Orleans--oh, Grace was a, (laughter) she was a magnificent woman who sang, loved to sing.  She sang in clubs all over New Orleans.  Remember I told you that people in my father's side of the family also were musically inclined.  Many of them were, I'm the exception.  The--Grace moved later on in her life to California where a couple of her kids had moved.  She had a daughter named Geraldine [ph.], and Geraldine also sang and played the piano, so they had a little band out there in San Francisco [California].  I believe it--yeah, San Francisco area.  And so she went out there with them to sing and to play the piano.  Her husband, Plas Johnson [Plas Johnson, Sr.] who she married in, in New Orleans, was a musician as well.  Plas went as well with, you know with the rest of them.  And there was a Plas, Jr. [Plas Johnson, Jr.] who was there too.  When my father died on February 6th in 1971, I was in the hospital, I had to have--I was actually in graduate school studying for the Ph.D. at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And I had to go in for some emergency surgery.  I told her, I say, "Look, I'm--last semester, I'm finishing up my dissertation, can't this wait?"  "No, you got to go now."  So I, I had to, I had to stop my work for a while to go in the hospital.  But on my third day, I called--I was in the hospital alone.  My husband had been by.  He said, "I'm going, I'm going over to your mom's [Margaret Patterson Richard] house and take a bath and change clothes; I'll be back."  I said, "Okay."  I was just lying in the bed there.  And I called.  And a friend of ours who lived around the corner, answered the phone.  And I said, "(Unclear), is my father dead?"  And she said, "Wait a minute, let me get somebody," she was taken aback.  And she went to get somebody, my h- Hermon [Hermon Spikes], my husband.  She got Hermon.  Hermon came to the phone and said, "I'll be right there."  I don't know what it was, but something just told me my father was dead.  I guess it was that connection that we had.
Story_ID: 597844
Speaker 1: So when he came to the hospital, he confirmed that my father had suddenly dropped dead of a heart attack.  And my last vision of him was sitting across from me on a windowsill telling me--he had just gone to the doctor and got a perfect workup there.  Surprised that he, he was dead.  Just all of a sudden dropped dead.  And when Grace [Grace Valentine Johnson], Grace was called and told 'em that--they said--some of them call him Grant, "Grant [Lawrence Granville Richard] is dead."  Grace couldn't come right then.  She said, "But I will be there as soon as I can," and she did come.  And when Grace came, she said, "There's some trouble in this family somewhere."  She said, "Somebody wants to take some of Granville's things out of his house."  Sure enough, we had another cousin, that cousin was on my mother's [Margaret Patterson Richard] side, who wanted to take one of my father's hunting rifles.  Or maybe he just wanted to steal them.  I think he just wanted it because he had a lot of affection for my dad and he just wanted to, you know, to take it, but he didn't want to ask anybody.  He just wanted to take it.  And so apparently there was some commotion about that.  And then she said, she asked for me and they told her that I was at home now.  And so she came up and she said, "I want to read your palm and read the cards for you."  I said, "No, Grace, you are not reading my palm, and you're not reading any, any cards for me."  But I mean, but she was always seemingly so reliable in that kind of stuff.  You know, always make you want to believe that there might be something to this voodoo stuff.  My granddaughter I think sometimes has a kind of psychic mind.  We can be driving the car seventy-five miles an hour and there's a car going by us at ninety miles an hour.  And Bianca [Bianca Pete] will say, "That was So and So sitting in the backseat of that car."  Say, "Bianca how could you make out who that was, three or four people in the backseat?"  But she would.  She'd know who it was.  And sometimes she doesn't say very much to you, but she's the kind that, she give me a kind of mystical feeling about her that maybe that gene has passed down to her.
Story_ID: 597845
Speaker 1: All that sounds crazy I know, but it, it all goes back to that heritage I think from the Caribbean that was handed, you know, handed down from one generation to the other (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did your people speak Creole?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the older ones did.  By the time my sisters and I got to school, if you were going to Catholic school especially, you were teased an awful lot.  I was the oldest and it was a tradition in our family said the oldest one would take care of the others.  Now I'm on a year and four, year and four months older than my middle sister [Ann Richard Fenelon] and she's only two years older than the one that was here, the youngest one [Elizabeth Richard Bellaire].  But I had to take care of the other two.  Make sure nobody bothered them or anything.  So sometimes I had to fight people off of them.  So we were teased if, if we spoke French or anything of that sort.  So the language almost died out with the younger generation.  Some were--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Who would tease you?  The other African Americans?
Speaker 1: Other African Americans.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So much so that, that the state itself, especially with the tourist indus- tourist bureau, started saying, you know we, we'll about to lose a rich heritage here.  And so they started teaching French in schools and, and you know, French in school, and encouraging parents to hand the language, the Creole language or whatever it was, down to their kids.  Because now there were Creole dialects really that differed maybe from this part of, of South Louisiana from another part of South Louisiana.  There's a difference in Lake Charles [Louisiana] where my husband [Hermon Spikes] is--folks come from, nearby there anyway, and Opelousas [Louisiana] or Lafayette [Louisiana].  And god knows there's a difference from, from New Orleans [Louisiana].  Baton Rouge [Louisiana] was I don't think very highly regarded as a Creole city.  It was a, a sort of mixture.  It was where people immigrated to to get jobs.  They came from Mississippi, they came from all over, they came from across the river [Mississippi River] and also there was a huge population that largely, most of them were Catholic.  So they largely centered around St. Francis Xavier Church downtown [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And they mostly lived around that area until the high- interstate [Interstate 110] came along and took a new high school they'd just built [St. Francis Xavier High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and, and many of the homes that the people had nearby.  And so the community as a whole sort of broke up and dispersed.
Story_ID: 597846
Speaker 1: Now that story once again, I say this on every tape almost, is told all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Happened on the west side of Dayton [Ohio].  Happened--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --in Deep Greenwood in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  Almost every city north side of Omaha, Nebraska, Kansas City where the interstate is brought through--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --the old part of the business district in the black community.  And you, you know from traveling, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and black community is the one that, you know, suffers.  This community, Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: So back in the '50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], what they call urban renewal--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was the key culprit.
Speaker 2: Urban renewal all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It really broke up stable communities and families.  They, they broke up villages of people that helped, all of whom helped each other to raise each other kids.  All of whom pitched in when somebody needed some help.  And there was no such thing if a kid had a, I mean, I mean it didn't happen that often in our day (laughter), but young lady had a baby out of wedlock, that baby wasn't going anywhere.  Family was gone take care of that baby.  And you never thought, never thought about abortion or giving your own up to anybody.  Just wasn't done.  But that village disintegrated.  And it was disintegrated by the interstate [Interstate 110] and the so called as you said urban renewal projects that went on.  And I think a great deal was lost in the transition from our ancestors to later generations through that.  The stories weren't being told anymore.
Speaker 1: Now did you, I'm sorry, well go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know the stories that were handed down because you know on Sundays my mother's house was the beacon for the members of the family who came by.  And would sit around a dinner table and--or they just came by to get some dessert.  Mother [Margaret Patterson Richard] would make a cake or something.  But they were all nearby so if they didn't have a car, they could walk.  But that went, that went by the wayside too.
Speaker 1: Now, now what kind of stories--now some of the stories that I've known as New Orleans [Louisiana] stories like story of Dr. John and Marie Laveau and that sort of thing.  Are they--were they told in your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Oh, you always heard about the horror stories, (unclear) you were, yes.  They were all--and they were all, just about all, always the same stories.  And as I say, we had relatives in New Orleans and we visited them frequently and they visited us frequently.  We saw more relatives on my mother's side really, than on my father's [Lawrence Granville Richard] side.  But there were some on my father's side that we visited regularly to in New Orleans.  I really never got to understand New Orleans in the right way until I worked there for a while.  I served as president of the Southern University at New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana] for a while.  And, and got to know and really like the city.  I'd just get in my car on the weekends and just drive around just to get to know the city.  I said, you know this is a, this is a nice place to know.  Of course today's ridden, ridden with crime, shootings and things.  But so many other places are too.  But then it was a pretty good place to be, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 597847
Speaker 1: Well tell me about growing up.  Now you grew up here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], right?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Baton Rouge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and in the central part of the city you said near Xavier school [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  Did--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was asking you ma'am, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 1: From early on a sound that I would always hear when I was around six, seven years old, remember I was born in 1936, were the sirens.  These were the alerts, you know, the practice drills.  The war was going on.  Turn off the lights.  We lived across from a train, railroad track.  And cars full of soldiers would be boarding and going off somewhere and we'd stand on the porch and wave at them, they'd wave back.  But it was an eerie feeling hearing that sound so often.  My mother had an oil lamp, and she knew that we were so afraid.  So she'd just turn the oil lamp on and she'd lit it for a while until we sort of settled down.  You had close the shades or the blinds or what have you.  And then just sit there very quietly.  My mother--both my parents [Margaret Patterson Richard and Lawrence Granville Richard] were deeply religious, would always have us to say the rosary or to say prayers, that this is a good time to pray.  I have first cousins, all, just about all of whom older than I am, who, who served in World War II [WWII].  And they would come home with their soldier uniforms on, and we were, we would really just think the world of them.  That uniform meant something special.  But there was also, in addition to that sound, there was the sight of soldiers who had come back, we would see them at church, who were shell shocked.  That was not a nice thing to see.  They, they sometimes would walk dazed not seeming where to go.  But people treated them kindly because they knew what had happened to them.  So they weren't discarded.  They weren't put to the side as if something were terribly wrong with them.  They were treated very nicely.  Those were the earlier sounds and sights that really would scare us.  But then the circus would come to town now and then.  And just the joy of, of seeing and hearing the sounds of the animals and the, and the circus of people was a whole lot better.  But we couldn't afford to get under the big tent.  But we found a way to get in, but we just couldn't pay to get in, but we found a way to get in the big tent.
Speaker 2: How, how did you do it?
Speaker 1: Well you know you can't tell those kinds of secrets.  But there was always some kind folk who knew that they could look at you and tell you didn't have much, and that you, you know, really wanted to see the circus.  "Come on this way."  And it was always a big group of us.  "Come on this way," you can go and, you know, just so far and see.  Didn't have seats or anything, but you could get in, you could see.  So it's usually through generosity of one of the gatekeepers who would let us in to see the elephants and the trapeze artists and what have you.  Those were, those were good times.
Story_ID: 597848
Speaker 1: Every two weeks my father [Lawrence Granville Richard] got paid.  He gave each, each one of us a nickel for our allowance.  And that nickel was the biggest amount of money we had ever seen.  We'd go to--you know we could get can- lots of candy and cookies for a nickel back in those days, and that's what we did.  But he'd also do something else.  He would go down to Delpit's Chicken Shack [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and get us a chicken loaf or a fish loaf or something.  That was a real treat for us.  I mean you didn't have all these fast food places then.  And--or sometimes he'd go up on North Boulevard to Bernard's [Bernard's Chicken Loaf House, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was another black owned restaurant.  And so we'd have those real treats that came every, every now and then.  The, the po' boys came once a month, though, they didn't come every two weeks with Daddy's paycheck.  Christmastime were good times, except that we each got to pick one gift every year that we really wanted.  And we got that one gift, whatever it was.  Now I wanted a bicycle.  So I said, "Daddy if you buy me a bicycle I can go to the store for Mom [Margaret Patterson Richard] and I can bring all of this stuff home," and what have you.  Well he didn't have the money to buy a brand new bicycle.  But he had to wherewithal to go to the junkyard where after to get a frame, an old frame and wheels and to painted it up and it looked just like new, and it was a blessing to have that bicycle.  By the way, my father rode a bicycle himself to work for many years, to Exxon [Standard Oil Company; Exxon Mobil Corporation].  If he didn't ca- if the weather was good, he didn't catch a bus, he didn't catch a ride with somebody 'cause he surely didn't have a car as I told you.  (Laughter) He, he, he didn't learn to drive 'til after he had put us all through school.  But those, those were good sounds.  The bad sounds were when we were ridiculed just for being African Americans, for being black, for being Negroes at that time.  If somebody saw you standing near a water fountain that said, "For whites only," they didn't hesitate to say, "Get away from that water fountain, nigger, get away from it."  And you know they were so afraid that you were gonna drink from their water fountain.  And of course when we traveled, we traveled in--if we drove somewhere, the only one that owned a car in my family was one of my daddy's brothers--my, I'm sorry, my mother's brother.  And sometimes he'd take us on a trip (background noise).  He'd take us on a trip and we would, we, we would stop with our homemade baskets of food and eat somewhere where we thought we might be safe.  And the restroom was somewhere back in the woods somewhere, you know, where you could go out where nobody could see you because you couldn't stop and use a restroom at a service station or any place like that.  You know and of course anybody my age, and some older or younger, can tell you the same kind of story.  That, that's nothing new, we all experienced that during those days.  When I went to University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland] to work, someone pointed out to me that the last officially recorded lynching was right there on the Eastern Shore of Maryland.  And they showed me the spot where it was, where the tree was.  The tree had just been cut down.  Nobody disputed it.  I hadn't seen it in writing, but nobody disputed that.  And as I understood, I came to understand later that Eastern Shore of Maryland was as racist and segregationist as any place in the Deep South.  A place of--Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass.  The one good thing about it, though, it was the entryway to New York [New York] and to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], to the Underground Railroad.  So it was easier to get out of it, out of the racism from places like that, than it was to get out from out of it from Louisiana or Mississippi 'cause you had to go through other southern states (laughter).  It wasn't just a state over.
Story_ID: 597849
Speaker 1: But those were all--when I was growing up, there were the sounds of course of just everyday things.  I--sports were big in my life.  I--believe or not, I actually played basketball.  My grandkids laugh at me now.  Say well, "Mom, you played basketball?  Did you move any faster than you move now?"  I said, "Yeah, I could get a little bit better."  But things of that kind were big.  That was our entertainment.  We, we played basketball on a concrete court or on, on, on dirt.  We didn't have any gyms to play in, except when we got to high school.  But other than that, we were outside playing.  Same was true for bas- softball and the other things.  We made do with what we had.  We didn't have money for dolls, so my mother [Margaret Patterson Richard] showed us how to take a Coca-Cola bottle, the old little ones, and you know they kind of shaped like a person would be shaped.  And I would then take corn silk to put at the top of that bottle to make hair for the doll.  And so we made dolls out of corn silk and Coca-Cola bottles and anything else we wanted to add.  So it was I guess the joy of, of being inventive, imaginative, and--because we had to.  It's a shame now that they--people don't have, the kids don't have to be imaginative because--and because they, they don't have to be, they aren't.  But they can be if they're taught.  You can, you can teach kids to be imaginative.
Story_ID: 597850
Speaker 1: It just isn't, just isn't the same anymore.  I, I sometimes say that I, I went to a segregated school system.  And we had hand me down books and we all knew it.  And may have leaked in the building.  But we had the best teachers because all of our teachers were black and so nobody could pick off the best black teachers to send them to the white schools.  We had them ourselves in our community.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm sorry, what was the first school that you attended?
Speaker 1: St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Went to the eighth grade, that's as far as it went.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I couldn't go to other Catholic schools because they didn't accept black students either.
Speaker 2: So, so it was all-black Catholic school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now what were you saying about the teachers?  You were telling us--
Speaker 1: I said our teachers were--nobody could siphon off the best of the black teachers to go to white schools 'cause the white school didn't want them.  We had them all to ourselves.  So we got in some sense the best possible education.  We got better educations than many blacks getting today because we had people who cared for us, who told us we could succeed, and we took Algebra I and Algebra II regardless what anybody said and didn't care how dumb you were, you had to take it.  So we were better prepared to go to college than anybody else too.  Although a good percentage did not go to college.  Many of them whose fathers were in the building trades went along with their father.  Some went into the [U.S.] Army, or in different places, but a lot of us ended up in college.  They just--I mean those, those were times when I mean you know when you talk about the, the, the good sounds and the bad sounds.  The good sounds were always those of, of family and of community, always.  And the bad sounds were those where you were denied something because you were different.  You weren't like those who were taunting you.
Speaker 2: Now who were some of your teachers and mentors in school?
Speaker 1: There's a lady who is ninety-nine years old.  She'll be a hundred in January.  Her name is Mrs. Mildred Clark.  She's the founder of an organization whose acronym is CAWSC [Community Association for the Welfare of School Children, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but it's a, it's an organization that initially was designed to help schoolchildren.  And at first Mrs. Clark took money from her pocket and anywhere else, but she said, "This has to be bigger than me."  So she organized a group of people and formally started this organization called CAWSC and I suppose some thirty-five, forty years, CAWSC is thriving, it's good as ever.  She was a founder of that.  That's an example that I--one of my examples I had to live with.
Speaker 2: Now, now what did CAWSC stand for?  Was that a--was it an acronym for something else?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah it's an acronym.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Community for the advancement and welfare of school children, something of that sort, I may not have it exactly right.  But that's what it essentially stands for.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it got--in the beginning, it was just getting students things they needed.  Now it's broadened so that it involves parents too.  See that parents have the things that they need to ensure that the kids are successful in school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was, was math your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 1: Always.
Speaker 2: Yeah?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Always.  I had a teacher named Mrs. Leslie Banks [ph.], and these all people all lived to be ripe old ages.  The folks who aren't living, they haven't been dead for too long.  And she taught geometry, and she would always go around with a stick or a ruler in her hand, pointing to something.  But she taught, they taught us well.
Speaker 2: Now they taught at the Catholic school, at St. Francis Xavier (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, St. Francis only went to eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 597851
Speaker 1: My two sisters [Ann Richard Fenelon and Elizabeth Richard Bellaire] went to St. Francis Xavier High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] because by that time they had built, the men of the church [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--remember a lot of them are in the building trades, so they built this school with their own hands.  Money we raised by having bazaars and things of that kind, festivals.  And I imagine was some money borrowed from the diocese of Baton Rouge [Roman Catholic Diocese of Baton Rouge], but at any rate, by the time my youngest sister had graduated from school, a year or two, they were coming through with the interstate [Interstate 110].  And I remember the men of the church going to Washington, D.C. to plead, "Please let our school stay.  We've just built this school.  It's a center for this community, community."  And it was because you know, there's a, it's basketball court there and it didn't matter whether you belonged to the church or the school.  On weekends, everybody was out there playing in the yard and, and they used the facilities, the recreational facilities there.
Story_ID: 597861
Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about the fate of St. Francis Xavier School [St. Francis Xavier High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], it had just been built.  Now what year is this?  This is in what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.  Had to be around fifty--'59 [1959], '59 [1959], '60 [1960], somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because both of my s- I finished high school in 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so both of my sisters [Ann Richard Fenelon and Elizabeth Richard Bellaire] went through that high school.  One right behind the other.
Speaker 1: So this happened after you had graduated.
Speaker 2: After I had graduated, yeah.
Speaker 1: But in 1959 the new St. Francis Xavier School, and how old was it when you--when it was--
Speaker 2: The school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when it was knocked down.
Speaker 2: Just enough for two classes to have gone through.  I believe about eight years old or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Eight years old, and you said the men went to Washington, D.C. to plead with the--
Speaker 2: Went to, some of the leaders went to--
Speaker 1: --interstate, highway commission--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They went to the senators and [U.S.] Congress--everybody they could possibly see.  They were told there was just no way they could get around it, no way.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The--so did they offer, I guess there was some compensation, but (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: They didn't compensate the--?
Speaker 1: No, you know that they can take--(laughter) the state and the feds can take property that they need for the good of all.  They don't have to compensate you for anything.  They didn't--that time they didn't compensate them for anything.
Speaker 2: Well that's really terrible.
Speaker 1: Yeah it is.  It's no way in the world they could have compensated them because I mean, how were you gonna pay these men who gave of their own free time and will to build this church [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?  There's no way in the world they could have put a price on that.
Story_ID: 597862
Speaker 1: I went to McKinley High School [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was at that time the, well it was the first and only school for black people in the State of Louisiana.
Speaker 2: In the whole state?
Speaker 1: In the whole state.  Kids from Blundon orphanage [Blundon Home, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  People sent their kids here from Mississippi, from all over so that they could go to high school.  Have a chance to get out of this field, get out of the sharecropping business.  They were really trying to get an education for their children.  And so they all came to McKinley.  Was after that that they built others too, but McKinley was the first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was the first one.
Speaker 1: It was the first one.  And so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  This was established in the, in the 19th century, or--
Speaker 1: Yes, early.  And now we, we--a group of us got together.  I don't remember the year, we formed the McKinley High School Alumni Association.  And the--there were the old--the building that represented the old site for the school was just standing there.  And it was already on the register of historic places [National Register of Historic Places], but we wanted to preserve it; wanted to make it a kind of community center.  And we worked very hard at doing that.  So I was you know one of the, the founding and charter members of that association.  And we found some very helpful people in the state legislature--legislature who helped us to get some money to fund the restoration of the building.  I'll be dog gone if by the time we have it all straight, some kids who were playing with fire set the building afire and so much of it burned.  (Laughter) So we had to start over and restore it, but it's there now.  Beautiful, beautiful place.  And it is a, a really a center for the community in that area, in South Baton Rouge [Old South Baton Rouge, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So it lives on, it's legacy lives on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  South Baton Rou- now who were some of the teachers or mentors at McKinley High School, when you were in high school?
Speaker 1: I just mentioned a couple of them to you, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The name of Frazier come up.  Frazier was one of the earliest edu- black educators.  And he was really one of the leading persons to, to see the need for a school for blacks in, in Louisiana, and in particularly in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Frazier.  You're not talking about E. Franklin Frazier?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: This is a local Frazier.
Speaker 1: Local Frazier.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Joe--J.M. Frazier.  Can't think of his--I know the initials, J., J., I wanna say J.M. Frazier, but, yeah.  And well he was one of those along with some of the others.  The--
Speaker 2: So the people you mentioned before, like Mildred Clark and Leslie Banks [ph.], they were, they were at McKinley?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were at McKinley, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now was Mildred Clark any relationship to--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --President Clark [Felton Grandison Clark]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: No, those were, no.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now did you run for student office in high school or anything like that, or were you recognized?  Now you were a math talent, apparently, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Good math student.
Speaker 1: I participated in, in--as I told you I played basketball and softball.  And I belonged to some clubs in high school and I would, I, I guess some people thought that I could do orations pretty good.  So I, I was often encouraged to, to do that and to enter contests for orations of various kinds.  And that continued on through and beyond college years, as a matter of fact.  When, when I graduated from McKinley, I guess Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was the obvious place for me to go.  It was right in my backyard.  I had been offered a scholarship to take care of my tuition and my books and, and things of that kind.  So it didn't take much for me to get my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At McKinley?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I graduated as salutatorian at McKinley.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is 1953, right?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Story_ID: 597863
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming up, before we get you to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], now was--you said the church, was church very--real important when you were growing up in terms of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Church [St. Francis Xavier Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], all of our social activities was centered around the family, the church and the school.  That was it.  I mean you know the, you didn't have any of this club or that club or gangs or anything of that kind.  It was set, those three: church, school and family.  Everything was centered around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a presence of--was there a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] in town?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, there was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  Wasn't YWCA for--that blacks could go to.  But we were encouraged and the girls were encouraged to go to the YW--YMCA.  Now we played ping pong and do other kinds of activities that they had at the YMCA.  So yeah we did that too.
Story_ID: 597864
Speaker 1: Now was--you said there were musicians in your family too.  Who were some of the musicians, and what did they do?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't mean--the, the one big name musicians, you know, they always formed local bands.  And for whatever reason, the musicians didn't, I mean they just had a natural talent for it and they didn't go to school in order to perfect it so that they could get into you know the bigger world of music, if you will.  So they, they--all I can tell you is that they were Richards and, and, or married into Richard families.  But I don't know their particular names, except for the cousin Grace [Grace Valentine Johnson] that I mentioned (laughter).  Plas Johnson [Plas Johnson, Sr.] and, and she married Plas Johnson who was a musician, and their kids were musicians.  I can remember one daughter's name, Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Johnson].  And Plas, Jr. [Plas Johnson, Jr.].  But there was at least another one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you'll find if you go to (Unclear) today you're gonna find old bands around there where there are Richards there.  There always are.
Story_ID: 597865
Speaker 1: So when you started Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] it's 1953, right, fall of '53 [1953].  Was Southern--were you very familiar with Southern I guess having grown up here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean did you get a chance to go over there much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, we used to have a competition every year that was a comp- for all schools in Louisiana.  There was one for the white folks at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and one for the black folk at Southern.  And so you'd have subject matter competitions.  And I went and one year in geometry and another year in chemistry.  I had a chemistry teacher (laughter), her name was Ms. V.T. Jones [ph.], Ms. V.T. Jones said, "Well the man who wrote the textbook would get an A out of this class.  The teacher will get, would get a B."  She was the teacher.  "So that means that the rest of you can make no more than a C."  And we didn't make more than a C until one time when I went off to the state to take this test in (unclear)--all over the state, I was number one in the state.  That semester I got a B (laughter).  But after that little sing song was over, I went back to getting Cs.  So I think it was an early lesson that was important for me because it made me not really hold grades up as something that was tantamount to, to knowledge and wisdom.  I mean that's what that taught me.  And so when, you know, if I didn't make a, an A and I did the best I could, then that was fine with me.  It even transformed to college.  When I got to college, I had a physical ed [physical education] teacher.  And somehow she had gotten the word that I was a straight A student.  And so under the, under her breath she would little murmur things that, "Well you know, you think that PE is a pushover."  And (laughter), and, "Come here and think that you're gonna just be given a grade.  But all you people who are straight A students," (unclear) she was talking to all of us who were students, students otherwise, "you're gonna find out it's not as easy."  Well what the course consisted of really was just people doing some team sports.  What she didn't know, though, that I had a very strong background in team sports.  So she was absolutely taken aback when she put us on a basketball court and I could play basketball.  She had us doing volleyball, I could do all of that (laughter).  But she meant to keep her word, and so that semester she was sure that I would get a B.  I'd earned an A, but I got a B because she just had to make her point.  And I didn't argue with her or anything of that kind because Ms. V.T. had already taught me that as long as you're secure in who you are and what you are, you don't have to worry about what others, what others say about you.  So I didn't worry about that single B that I got.  I went on to finish summa cum laude, so I think that, she sort of at that point must have said maybe I'd better change my attitude about this in spite of her B.  I still went on to finish, you know, as one of two students in the class graduating summa cum laude.
Story_ID: 597866
Speaker 1: Now are there any teachers that--now the president was President Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what did you think of him and, and what--and who were some of the other teachers that were there?
Speaker 2: I thought that Felton Clark was a president's president.  Any--and I know that Huel Perkins [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins] and anybody else would have told you that this man stood out.  He spoke well.  I--we had to go to convocation at least once or twice a month.  I mean it wasn't optional; you had to go.  A lot of kids were trying to find out ways to beat the system and not go to convocation, but I wanted to go.  I wanted to go for two reasons.  One, I wanted to hear Felton Clark speak.  Number two, I wanted to hear that great Southern University choir [at Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So I was delighted to go to convocation.  Felton always exuded confidence.  He always took the light and academic achievement, and he went through an awful lot in terms of humiliation at the hands of the Louisiana legislature and the governor [Earl K. Long] just to keep the doors of Southern open and to keep opportunities for black kids alive.  And so there was some who came on later and decided that well, Felton Clark must have been an old Uncle Tom.  Well those of us who knew, had to take issue with them and say he did what he had to do to keep this place open so you could come along and call him whatever you wanted to call him, but you will get an education.
Speaker 1: Now I know one particular incident that people gripe about, and he caught a lot of flak about was the expulsion of the sixteen students--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I know I talked to Huel Perkins about that yesterday and got his perspective on it.  How did you feel about that and what--?
Speaker 2: Well it was a rather daunting moment I think in Southern's history.  Nobody really thought that those students should have been expelled.  But I suspect that anybody who knew anything about Louisiana politics knew that he had been given an order to expel those students, or else.  And the or else was not too pleasant.  Didn't have anything to do with Felton personally, I don't believe.  It had to do with the funding of the school.  They would not hesitate to close that school.  So my perspective is that in his day and time, Felton took those actions which he felt were necessary to keep the doors of Southern open.  Perhaps he could have been a bit braver and say, "I'll step down before I allow that to happen."  But you know what would have happened?  They would have put somebody else there, one who would have done the same--what they wanted him to do.  But who would not have been the presidential, would not have had the presidential presence that Felton G. Clark had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I think, you know, he, he did as he was told, and he knew he had to do it.  He knew he had an option; he could step down and not do it.  But he also knew that somebody would be put there who would do it and maybe even worse, would not care about it.  At least he cared and he knew that it shouldn't be--it's not something that he would have done on his own.
Story_ID: 597867
Speaker 1: Now it may sound you know, self-evident, but the, the relationship between the State of Louisiana and the black schools [HBCUs] in Louisiana was an adversarial one.  Would you, would you say?  I mean.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.  I mean the only reasons the black schools existed was to keep blacks from bothering them about their white schools.  I mean there was no love for Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  I mean you know Ralph Jones [Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones] from Grambling was often mocked because you know the--Grambling was in a rural community and farming community and when it went, you know, they say, "Oh, where are my chickens or my turkey--where--," you know, this or that.  He had to do all sorts of things.  Everything's some dance himself when he went down to the legislature.  And so it was the same thing there at Grambling.  Every black school I think, almost every black public school can almost recite to you verbatim with just the circumstances changing a little, the same kind of story.  Had that kind of relationship with the state, various states.
Story_ID: 597868
Speaker 1: Now when the students were expelled, now you were, you had graduated by then, right?  By--'cause I--that happened in '61 [1961] I believe, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That happened in '61 [1961], and I graduated in '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I was--I'd gone off for a master's [degree] at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] back in '58 [1958] and married and in '61 [1961] was working in Mossville [Louisiana], just across the river from the--across from the Calcasieu River from Lake Charles [Louisiana].  We lived in Lake Charles.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's go over some of the details of that.  But were there any other--was it--so, so do you think--I was asking Huel Perkins [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins] yesterday if he felt, he felt that this incident haunted President Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] for the rest of his life, basically, kind of, you know.
Speaker 2: I think it was one of the things that made him die a death much earlier than I think he would have otherwise.  That and the fact that he was forced out of office.  Remember Felton Clark's father [Joseph S. Clark] was the first president of Southern on--at its Baton Rouge location [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  Southern was all that Felton knew, only thing he knew.  So when that happened and then eventually when he was literally forced out of office, I think that Felton the man, devoted from Southern, no longer existed.  And so there was no desire for Felton the man to live on.  So he died a death much too soon than would have occurred otherwise.
Speaker 1: Now what, what were the circumstances that forced him out of office?
Speaker 2: Well they said--
Speaker 1: That's later than '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Had, had to do with finances.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's not a black public school though that didn't have financial troubles, and I'll tell you why.  The students who wanted to come, didn't have money to come.  People like Felton said, "Come.  You can work."  That time, you know, when it came to maintaining the yards and the buildings, kids did all of that to earn their keep so they could go to school.  So the campuses were running a deficit.  Black campuses [HBCUs] everywhere were running deficits.  There were some political undercutting there, and I frankly can't tell you what the particulars were, but the former business manager of Southern, George Netterville [G. Leon Netterville], became president after Clark supposedly to help clean up the financial mess.  That didn't happen, it couldn't happen.  State finally passed a law that says that okay it's against the law for any public entity to run a deficit.  Now when they did that, now it became a legal issue.  And so schools had to be more accountable, but what it did essentially was limit to a great extent the opportunity for many kids to go to school because before then if you had--there was ever a kid who desired to go to school and had the wherewithal to do it, willing to work for his money for his schooling, that student got into a Southern University or a Grambling State University [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], or a Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] or any of those schools in the South.  He got into it.  Because the presidents were by and large people who themselves idolized an educated being and knew that education was really the key to freedom and to liberty for black people.  And that was imbued in every parent, I mean you know they all thought that education would deliver their children from the fates that they themselves had had to undergo.  So there was, there was that entity that--which he was asked to leave because of that.  But, yeah, I think much soul searching had to be--have been done.  He was an honest man.  I mean he was not a--this man was--he wasn't arrogant or anything of that kind.  But I do think that, that the incident in which he was forced to let students go really just preyed upon his mindset to the point where I think finally he himself was as I said, divorced of Southern.  He just couldn't--he could no longer deal with it.
Speaker 1: Now--thank you for that, 'cause that's a story that's popped up several times in the collection, you know, from different points of view.
Story_ID: 597869
Speaker 1: Now when you were a student at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], did you ever think about administration?  I mean did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My goal was to teach and to do mathematical research, and those were the happiest times of my life when I could do that (laughter).  I could set up all night working on a math problem.  But I did have a problem in saying no to people who asked me to help them to do something.  And I got into administration quite accidentally when the chancellor asked if I could work part time for him.  Said--he said, "I'm, I'm really behind and I need some help."  Said, "Can you give me a hand?"  Well I ended up really working two full-time jobs.  So I--
Speaker 1: Now this is way down the line, though from, from when you're in undergraduate school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's way, that's when I went back to--
Speaker 1: Well let's kind of catch up a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You went to University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] for a master's degree.
Speaker 2: For a master's degree.  At Southern when I was an undergraduate there, I worked during the summers and had scholarships.  I pledged a sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and you know the hazing then wasn't anything like the hazing that goes on now.  You know, they like you keep you up, awake, and what have you.  So one day the big sister sent someone to look for me because I was supposed to be doing--in somewhere else.  And I said, "But I can't do that, I have a test tomorrow."  My being in school depends on my keeping my scholarship.  And my keeping my scholarship depends on my making grades.  So I can't stay up all night.  And so I said, well there goes the end of the sorority.  Well luckily, I have a couple of friends who were already in (laughter), and so I think through their (unclear) and good graces I did get in.  But my first priority was keeping that scholarship so that I could stay in, in school.  And the summer allowed me the opportunity to work and you know, get some money to buy clothes and stuff for, for school.  There was a fast track three year program that some of my classmates, people entered the class with me got on and finished a year earlier.  I couldn't afford that because I had to work in the summer.  I did go to school one summer.  And actually I finished in three and a half years, but that last half year I decided that I would take some courses in education and get a teaching certificate just in case I didn't get a assistantship or fellowship to grad school.  But I was active in student government, with the off campus women's association, things of that kind.  The usual things that, that one, you know, participates in in college life.
Story_ID: 597879
Speaker 1: Okay well tell us about the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] in '57 [1957], '58 [1958].  And this--it's never been a school that had a lot of black students, and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --even today, so--
Speaker 2: Interestingly, you know, I--(background noise) I had--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I was given, I was offered a fellowship to University of Illinois, all of $1,200 that took care of--had to take care of everything.  But they did waive my tuition, and that was a big help.  But I, I lacked nine hours of required courses to meet their entry requirements for the master's in mathematics.  So I went there that first summer so that I could take those nine hours.  So I did that the first, first semester, first summer.  Got through that okay.  Interesting thing happened in a topology class that I took.  There was one other African American in that class and I think we were about the same color, you know.  So when I got my grades, I had a C.  I said this can't be right.  I know I should have had at least a B, probably an A in this course.  So I went to the professor, I said, "Would you mind checking your roll again to see if you've got the right grade for me?"  And he kind of nervously took out his paper and he looked through 'em and he said, "Yeah, see your grade's right here."  I said, "No, those are not mine, those are somebody else's."  Here I am up here where these A's are.  And he could have gone through the floor.  I said, "Well would you mind submitting a change of grade form to give me my correct grade?"  So he said, "Well I, I'm not allowed to do that, I can't do that."  I said, "You mean you're gonna let your mistake stand?"  "I don't have any choice."  Anyway, I let it slide.
Speaker 1: Really, you let it--?  Well--
Speaker 2: I let it slide and enrolled in his class for the second semester.  I got a B in an algebra course, modern algebra course.  Now this was a course in which I had tutored one of my housemates (laughter).  She was from Chicago [Illinois] and had done her undergraduate degree at the University of Illinois.  She got an A, I got a B.  So when she found out about it, she said, "I don't understand what happened."  I said, "I don't either, Lois [ph.]," I said (laughter), "because I know I knew more algebra than you did."  So she said, "Did you write everything, cover everything?  Your blue book?"  We had these little books, you know, the covers were blue that we had to write answers to questions in.  I said, "I answered the questions."  She said, "But did you fill out--?"  I said, "I didn't write any more than I had to."  I've always been taught to write my answers as succinctly and correctly as possible.  "Oh, I should have told you: this man wants you to write everything, fill out that blue book completely."  And I looked at her, I said, "Yeah, I guess you should have told me."  So the next semester I registered in his second course.  And at the end, I wrote stuff all across that blue book, the margins and everything else.  And he couldn't have read it because it was some foolishness in there.  I had already answered the questions, but I got an A out of the course.  And as far as the man in topology, I sat on the very first row.  And when I sat there the first day, I said, "Professor, I'm the student you gave the wrong grade to last year, or last semester.  I don't intend to get a wrong grade this semester.  I'm going to earn the right grade."  I made an A in that class.  (Laughter) So you know after that when I found out that--yet we're in graduate school, you really have to know professors and how to deal with professors and I guess it was a good experience because when I finally did decide to go back for the doctorate degree, I remembered those experiences.  And so my first order of the day was to get to know my professors.  And that was another story, but I don't want to jump the gun 'cause I, you know I--it was some years before I--my daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown] was about eight or nine years old when I decided to go back to, to graduate school for the doctorate (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 597880
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your, your marriage.  'Cause you met your husband [Hermon Spikes] when you were in graduate school, right?  Or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met him--no--
Speaker 1: In undergraduate school?  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --actually I met in undergraduate school [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--in a world lit [world literature] class.  He was a math education major.  He sent me an engagement ring through the mail when I was at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  I, I barely had money--I had--I ate two meals a day.  I ate a donut and a cup of coffee for breakfast, and I joined a co-op at the Wesley group.  And we put our money together and the lady over there at the Wesley Center [Wesley Foundation Student Center, Urbana, Illinois] agreed to cook for us if we would clean up and all that kind of stuff.  So that's how we got our dinners, in that way.  And there was no money left over for anything else.  So those were our meals for, you know.  But he sent, sent it through, through the mail.  And I was married two weeks after I returned from graduate school.  My sisters [Ann Richard Fenelon and Elizabeth Richard Bellaire] planned the wedding, did everything; I didn't have to do much of anything except walk down the aisle.  So I didn't have money to come back home to see anybody when I was up there.  As a matter of fact, the first semester I was up there, there was an epidemic of the Asian flu.  And if you didn't have a fever of 104 degrees or something, you didn't see a doctor.  Best thing they do is go home and try to get your fever down 'cause we have no more hospital--place--no more doctors.  And I know I missed about three weeks of school, but most kids did.  And if I had the money, I probably would have come home.  So I'm glad I didn't have the money.  I would have quit by then.  But I, you know I went on and we got through that, through that big setback right there.  But you know after that we--first semester, we, we met--that summer I finished in the summer of '58 [1958].  In that summer, another of my housemates, we lived in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] house there, which is right, right on the campus.  We decided we wanted to try apartment living on our own.  Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], remember.  So her name was Betty [ph.] and Betty said, "Well, Dolores [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], these people don't like to rent to black people," or to Negroes as we were called then.  "So I, I'll go and make the arrangements for us to, to move in."  And she did.  So they didn't know that a black person was coming to move into their apartment.  So I moved in and they never did say anything.  So Betty said, "You know, I think that they think that you are probably from one of those, from a foreign country somewhere; that you're not a Negro."  I said, "Well I can't help with what they think I am, but that's what I am."  But I had no trouble then.  Moved in and out at will.  So we had our experience of living in an apartment for, for a semester.
Story_ID: 597881
Speaker 1: But as I said, went home and got married.  After that, I--Hermon [Hermon Spikes] had--we both had jobs.  Hermon had a job in Lake Charles [Louisiana], and I had one in Mossville [Louisiana], which was not too far, just across--just like I'm going from here to Port Allen [Louisiana], right across the bridge [Horace Wilkinson Bridge].
Speaker 2: So you taught elementary school?
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: High school, okay.
Speaker 1: Taught for four years and our daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown] had asthma.  We couldn't keep her there all the time, so sometimes when it got bad, I had to bring her back down here to stay with my mother [Margaret Patterson Richard].  So we decided that given her asthma condition, we would try to move somewhere where the air was dry.  So we got a chance to be interviewed for jobs in White Sands, New Mexico with the, with the feds as mathematicians.  My husband meanwhile got a s- a fellowship, and it's a National Science Foundation fellowship for a master's in math ed [math education].  So we stopped by Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to, for him to get his master's.  And meanwhile the chair of the department asked if I wanted to teach some freshman classes there and I said, "Sure."  Well the short end of all of that is that we ended up being offered permanent jobs at Southern.  Never did get to New Mexico.  My--our daughter outgrew her asthma within a couple of years, so it worked out okay.  But then I said if I'm going to stay in higher education--he was teaching at, at Southern laboratory school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I'm going to stay in higher ed and move on through the ranks, I've got to have the credentials.  And the credentials of course were you know, doctoral degrees.  So I decided that I wanted to go back for a doctorate.  I really wanted to go to University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to study in an area where there was the foremost expert.  But I knew I couldn't uproot my family and say, "You all come with me to Berkeley [California]."  So I decided I would go to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and just change my field of emphasis to something where there was an expert in that area at LSU.  And I did that.
Story_ID: 597882
Speaker 1: First day I walked into one of my classes at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I sat sort of in the middle where I could see the board well and I could hear well.  There was nobody--I was the only African American in that room.  Nobody sitting in front of me, nobody sitting right behind me, and nobody sitting directly on either side of me.  I remember it was quite obvious that they weren't (laughter)--I mean it was so obvious.  But it didn't bother me.  I had made it known that look, I've got a Ford Foundation fellow [Ford Foundation fellowship] for three years.  I'm gonna get a Ph.D. in three years.  I don't have time to linger around.  I'm, you know, my business is to study math.
Speaker 2: Now, now what year is this, and--
Speaker 1: This is 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how long had there been black students at LSU at this point do you think?  What--about maybe three years?
Speaker 1: Oh, there had been--no, there had black students since, oh, earlier than that.  I imagine in the late '50s [1950s] 'cause my neighbor across the street who's deceased now was there for her master's [degree] in one of the vocational programs.  But he was shot at and everything else.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it wasn't easy.
Speaker 1: No.  No, no, no.
Speaker 2: But he, he was--but they were there before--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you.  'Cause you know like we hear, we, you know, many have seen this story, you know, pictures of George Wallace in the door, State of Alabama.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Oh--
Speaker 2: Other people trying to integrate the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], you know, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Other, other--you know, real big struggles trying to--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So there was a struggle here at LSU?
Speaker 1: Absolutely a struggle at LSU.
Speaker 2: Here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], same city that Southern's [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in.
Speaker 1: Same city.
Speaker 2: And people were shot at and--
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed.  They were shot at and discouraged and everything else.  It took a strong, strong willed person to go through that.  But I was the first one to--first African American to get a Ph.D. in mathematics from there.  They didn't have anybody to get a degree in that area before.  So I was an oddity in that respect I guess.  So--but, but there were good people there too.  I mean there were enough faculty members who were really nice, good people who weren't racist or anything, who helped me.  Who told me, "Don't go to this instructor.  You know, stay away from this person."  And because you know, they knew that they would not treat me fairly.  And, and that was good.  And my major professors were, were excellent and they helped me out a lot.  But when we had our first test in this class, a teacher'd given us back our papers and as I found out later, he was really one of the good guys.  And everybody was trying to lean over to see what I had made on the test.  (Laughter) Well it turned out that I had the highest score I believe than anybody in the class.  And so the next time I went to class, I had people right--sitting right in front, right on each side and in the back.  All of a sudden the stereotype had been broken down by one test score.  And so black women can learn mathematics, you know.  It's something that just occurred to them.  So anyway they--from then on it was a matter of, you know they wanted me to come to functions they had.  But the truth was I was limited in interacting with them because I was a homemaker too and I was a mother [to Rhonda Spikes Brown].  And I, and I really didn't have time to socialize.  By the time I got through with my, my studies and all, there just wasn't any time left.  And even then, I was hardly sleeping at night.  Wasn't enough hours in the day.  So when I, when it got around to--this was during the period in which I had told you that in '71 [1971] I was winding down on my dissertation and my father [Lawrence Granville Richard] passed away.  And that really set me back a semester or so.  But come the end of the summer, I had finished the dissertation completely.  And all I had to do was to type it.  So it was being typed during the fall semester.  And I marched across that stage in December of 1971, and was awarded the doctor of philosophy in mathematics.  But by that time it didn't mean as much to me anymore.  I realized then that maybe I was doing this for my father who had missed out on something that was within his reach had he been given the opportunity.  And so it was just another credential for me to go to work.
Story_ID: 597883
Speaker 1: Didn't you feel--you must have felt special in some way that very few black women have, or very few women have Ph.D.'s. in mathematics.
Speaker 2: I learned later that at that time I was the seventh black person to have received a Ph.D. in mathematics.  There were two other black women, whether they were in pure math or not, I don't know, but they were in mathematics.  One may have been in math education.
Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by pure math?  I saw it on the material.
Speaker 2: As opposed to, as opposed to math education where you're studying math, but focusing on the teaching of mathematics.  If you're doing the Ph.D. in mathematics you've got to come up with an original piece of work, your dissertation, which got to come out of here.  It's--you can't do any survey work or, or stuff like that.  I mean of course you depend upon the work, you build upon the works of others, but it's got to be in an original thesis or proposition.  Comes out of your head.  And everything you prove about it has to come out of your head.  I found that to be such a joyous experience, being able to do that kind of stuff, you know.  I could set up all night and all by doing it, it didn't bother me.  So those were happy times for me.  Hard, but happy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your dissertation [at Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?  Would we understand any of it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  It was called 'Semi-valuations and Groups of Divisibility.'  And, and, and Jack Ohm would probably want to disown me if I--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Jack Ohm would, would disown me if I, if I didn't say to you that yeah you can understand it because he figures I ought to be able to explain it to you.  Here I've got an object that I want to understand.  It doesn't matter what it is.  I just--I need to know some--I don't know everything about it.  I need to know something else about it.  But how do I go about learning about this?  Well you know the old saying, think outside the box.  Well I wanna get outside of this box.  I'm gonna go over here and see if I can study something else and somehow bring it back over here and apply it so I can understand the thing that I wanted to in the first place.  Well that was the nature of the kind of thing that I was doing.  It doesn't say what the things were or what have you.  But that was the nature of it.  The moving back and forth is called, was called a mapping.  I was taking features of this thing here and mapping it onto features of this thing over here, which I knew a little something about already.  And then I was going to see whether I could take that knowledge that I know already and then map it back to this other one to understand it a little better.  That essentially is, was the concept behind these things called semi-valuations.  I was studying something called a community ring.  The semi-valuations were the mappings and the groups of divisibility were these other objects that I was studying that I knew all about.  And that I knew, and then brought back over here to the rings to learn something more about that.  That's about the best I can do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well it's not--I almost understand--yeah I think it's pretty, it's not, it's not--
Speaker 2: You (unclear) understand the basic stuff.
Speaker 1: I do understand the basic concept.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's really a completely abstract idea in mathematics.  And many ma- abstract math, ideas in mathematics often become practical experiences though in physics, chemistry, astronomy.  So we have a saying that no mathematics is really truly abstract.  Eventually somebody finds where--its place where it belongs.
Story_ID: 597884
Speaker 1: Now did you know some of the ma- black mathematicians who worked on the--some of the other projects like Dr. Samuel Massie [HistoryMaker Samuel Massie] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who is from Arkansas here, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We value those names, and Banneker [Benjamin Banneker].  Yeah, we knew those names.  We didn't know them personally, but we surely knew those names because I mean they were the trailblazers.  They were the first to get out there and really study, they got--paid Ph.D.s and they were the first to really make significant inroads into the study of mathematics.  Everybody had great respect for them.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any heroes like say Einstein [Albert Einstein] or his wife [Mileva Maric] or Norbert Wiener or anybody like that?  People that really were trying to figure out how the--what the nature of the universe was with mathematics, basically.
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't have any heroes.  I had a great deal of respect for so many people who use mathematics to, you know, mathematical biology and mathematical physics, mathematical in anything you wanna know.  And so they took what people like myself and Jack Ohm and others did, in the abstract sense.  And they took that and applied it to their particular disciplines, which made us feel pretty good.  But which also illuminated their brilliance in being able to figure out how to apply that.  Because that's really a big challenge in and of itself.  So you know a lot of--and there's lots of folks in that category.  But I don't know of any that stand out, stand out to me in terms of having had any particular influence on me.  Yeah, I might say that there's a group of mathematicians in France whose work I relied heavily on.  I don't know who they are, they called themselves Bourbaki [Nicolas Bourbaki].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-O-U-R-B-A-K-I.  They, they were real mathematicians and had names, but that's what they called themselves and they wrote volumes of books on ring theory, field theory, ideas in mathematics.  In French, of course.  And I've got those same books right back in my library there.  They're treasures to me.  I would never think about getting rid of those books.  Did I ever think about burning my--I couldn't find my dissertation when I came back from Maryland and I was almost, almost went bananas.  I said, talking about, how can you misplace something like that as hard as I worked for it?  I just like to sometimes go back and read a little of that stuff and say you know, these guys, and they were mostly guys then, these guys really were good thinkers back then.  They, they really set the stage for all of this.
Story_ID: 597885
Speaker 1: I learned how to read French on my own pretty much.  I'd taken two years of German in college.  So we took the language--I was about to take a course in reading French.  And my major professor said, "You don't need to do that."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He say, "Here's a book in French.  Get you a French dictionary and go read it."  I said, "And you expect me to pass a test like that?"  He said, "Yeah."  (Laughter) So I had to do what he said.  And I passed the French test and the German test too.  I hadn't thought about the German test because you know I had two years of reading and writing German.  So I, I knew I could read and write the German, but the French--.  You know all I knew was that little Creole stuff that I'd heard my Aunt Corrine [ph.], you know say around.  But I didn't know about reading it.  But sure enough, his method worked.  Just take the book and a dictionary, French-English dictionary, and get through it.  And surprisingly, I not only learned some mathematics, but I really did learn how to read French books in mathematics.  Got through the test.  I couldn't believe it, but it worked.  (Laughter) So I, I wouldn't--when I sometimes--some of the youngsters because one of my goals my, my father [Lawrence Granville Richard] never understood as I was working toward the Ph.D. I let him know that I was going back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to work.  He couldn't understand that, because even then before I even got through my first year, I was getting offers from everybody.  I understood that I was a two-for; I was a woman and I was black.  So you know they get two for one.  And so they started recruiting me pretty early in business, industry--other schools.  But I said, "Dad, you know I never saw a black person myself with a Ph.D. in mathematics until after I had gotten my master's degree."  Never once during my whole study at Southern had I seen a black mathematician with a Ph.D. in math.  "And I think there ought to be some more like me and I want to go back to ensure that."  And he didn't understand that because they--he knew that Southern wasn't paying me much.  But, but I just felt that that's what I needed to do.  So after my husband [Hermon Spikes] and I came back and we started working there and I got the Ph.D.  And one other thing, there was one other little incident at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  They had a chair of a department who didn't think women could be mathematicians.  At that time there were two of us (unclear).  He certainly didn't think that black folk could be mathematicians.  So I would tell some of my LSU comrades, I'd say, you know I'm not gonna tell him I'm Catholic 'cause he might think Catholics can't learn mathematics or three strikes you're out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So I didn't say anything about that.
Story_ID: 597887
Speaker 1: Okay so 1982, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration.  They're saying that black colleges [HBCUs] are obsolete and need to be changed and you're at--you're the chanc- assistant to the chancellor at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] at Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yes.  And full time teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got to be a bit much for me the first semester, so I went to the chair and I said, "I just can't do this full time."  I said, "I, I just can't.  I'm--my body is absolutely begging for rest."  "What I need, I really need you here."  I said, "But you said work part time, but I'm working full time," (laughter).  So unbeknown to me, he calls my chairman and asked if I can, he can borrow me for the rest of the year full time.  My chairman says yes.  I go back and ask my chairman, "Why did you tell him yes?  I don't wanna go back."  "Well how do you say no to the chancellor?"  So I didn't have any choice (laughter).  Anyway, I stayed with him and then he was gone within another year or so.  The new chancellor came aboard and I was packing my bags, going back to my classroom.  Happy as can be.  He said, "Where you going?"  I said, "I'm going back to my class."  He said, "No, I want you to stay here."  Again, you know, this reluctance to say no when people say I need you for something.  So anyway, I stayed there.
Speaker 1: So this is 1985?
Speaker 2: This was 1985 by now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--no, no, no.  That was about--wait, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it says here you served as assistant to the chancellor from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this was when the new chancellor came in.  It had to be about ninety--.  I worked for the first one first year and then he moved on, and somebody else came in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: About '83 [1983] to '85 [1985] I worked for the other one.  And then there was a general shakeup from the president on down.
Speaker 1: Wait, I think I'm still confused.  Okay you were assistant to the chancellor first time from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985].  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then the new one came in.
Speaker 2: No, no.  When I say assistant to the chancellor, I'm talking about the position there.  But there were two different people--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --during that span.
Speaker 1: Oh, during, oh from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985] there's two different ones (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 597888
Speaker 1: Then in '86 [1986] did you go back to teaching or what happened?
Speaker 2: Well in actually about the middle of ninety--of '85 [1985], 'cause we're talking fisc- our fiscal years run from July 1st to June 30th.  So the middle of, of fis- fiscal year '85 [1985], there was a general shakeup.  Board decided we'd get a new president [of the Southern University System], and the new president would get a new chancellor and all around the board.  So the new chancellor who came in asked me if I would be the vice chancellor for academic affairs and the executive vice chancellor [of Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I said, "Okay, I'll do that."  And I was in that position, and then when--
Speaker 1: So what year is this when you're in that position?
Speaker 2: This is in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985], okay.
Speaker 2: Until '87 [1987] I believe.  Yeah, '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about the--now was it, I mean--now here's something you in- initially didn't want to do, but what were you able to do as, as vice chancellor?
Speaker 2: Of academic affairs?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well I, I concentrated on programmatic developments, particularly on lift--standard lifting.  We created this notion of the honors program and an honors college during that time when I was vice chancellor for academic affairs.  And I--that's why when they chose to name the honors college building after me, it had some special meaning for me because the idea had been--had fermented in--during my term of office in, as vice chancellor for academic affairs.  And we started growing more academic--higher level academic programs, master's and doctorates.  And after I guess I was getting settled in that office pretty good, I was asked to, to enter the race for chancellor of the Southern University at New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I did so hesitatingly, didn't think I'd get it, but was satisfied where I was.  But I did get that position.
Story_ID: 597889
Speaker 1: And the summer before that though, I had planned to go to the Institute for Educational Management at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], so I did that, went to that institute.  And that was a good networking piece and learned a lot there.  And we--I didn't stay at the university of New Orleans--Southern University of New Orleans [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] too long, but long enough to get a new telephone system.  The telephone system was a nightmare for us.  It was the same system that had been there since the system--since the campus was founded in 1959.  So it was a PR [public relations] nightmare.  People would call, they couldn't get through.  Lines were busy all the time.  And so I said, no, we have got to get a new phone system.  We did.  We also had to build a new computer infrastructure.  We did that too.  We didn't have any money to do that, but I figured we would get it some kind of way.  (Laughter) So I went--after I had done it, I went to the legislature and said I need the money to pay for this telephone system, and I need the money to pay for this computer.  But, but you're supposed to ask permission.  "I know, I know, sir.  I should have, and I'm sorry, but things were so bad I just had to get it done."  So I took my little slap on the wrist and then got my money and went back to New Orleans [Louisiana].  But we had those two things in place.  And so that was--I mean those were two big things for us because we had been dragging on with stuff that had been there for--I mean since the place was founded.  The school had a reading and writing lab that was very good, and not given much attention.  So we put more attention on that.  They produced a scholarly journal for students and faculty.  So we put more resources in that so they could be better known, and about half, 40 percent or so of the students at SUNO, Southern University New Orleans, are in our weekend and evening and weekend division.  People who are going part time, working people who can't afford to take off, generally older students, many with families.  Problem was that all of the services of the university shut down at five o'clock.  Everybody went home.  So we had to change the thinking of the people and say, no, we've got to have the registrar's office open, we've got to have the library office open, we've got to have whole bunch of services so these people can take care of their business in the evening when they're here.  Then we also opened up a daycare center with emphasis on providing learning and for the older kids, homework and studying opportunities.  And that worked fine.  We also arranged for the cafeteria folk to come back in the evening in case folk needed to have some food to eat.  So that, that--all of those were big moves we did in just a little time.  And we were pretty much on our way after that.
Story_ID: 597890
Speaker 1: And, but then I came to a board meeting in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] in 1989, and little did I know that I would walk away from that meeting with an offer of presidency of Southern University [Southern University System].  Seemed like they fired the then-president [Joffre T. Whisenton] like on the spot.  Asked him to leave right on the spot.  He was a nice fellow, I liked him, he was good.  I think what happened was that some of his close associates really undermined his work, which was unfortunate.  And he, so he said, "Well Dolores [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], if anybody's going to take my place, I'd feel better if you took it."  And so I, I felt better about entertaining the notion, but I told them I needed to go home and talk to my husband [Hermon Spikes] first.  So I did.  But as is the case usually with Southern University, there's some politics involved.  Fellow named Buddy Roemer was the governor.  Seems that Buddy holds the idea that he wanted to have Huel Perkins [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins] for president and that I could be chancellor of the Baton Rouge campus [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I said well, "Joe," that's the chairman of the board was Joe Charra [ph.].  I said, "Joe," when he called with that notion that night, I said, "now I'm, I'm not--I'm happy at New Orleans [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I'm not asking for either one of these positions.  But the problems are all here on the Baton Rouge campus, and the only way I'm gonna solve them--."  You got money problems, the campus was in financial exigency, the faculty was on the verge of an explosion because the board had allowed at that time salary increases for the system officers.  And you just don't do that if you've got financial exigency on any one of your campuses.  And the third thing was that there was an inspector general who was finding all sorts of wrongdoing on the campus, with some people even being arrested.  And two years from then there was a Southern Association [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] for accreditation visit coming up within in two years.  I said, "Now with all of that going on, I'll take the Baton Rouge campus if you're gonna give me the same salary or more that you're gonna give Huel Perkins."  "Well we can't do that Dolores.  He's the president."  I said, "Yeah, but I'm the work horse that you want and so I'm just telling you that, you know, I don't mind.  Get anybody you want for the job.  But that's it.  So--and it's fine with me, you know, I really--if, if that's the way the governor and you all want," I said, "I'm, I'm fine at New Orleans.  We're doing fine there."  Getting fat with these people bringing me big cinnamon rolls and po' boys every day (laughter), but, but we're getting along fine.  So the next--I kind of figured, you know, that they were gonna go along with the governor.  So the next morning they called me, the board called me back for an executive session.  So they said, "We want to offer you the presidency of Southern University."  I said, "Will you also delay appointment of a chancellor to the Baton Rouge campus because what you really want me to do is to clean up this mess on the Baton Rouge campus.  And you can't put somebody in between my doing this and, you know, and getting the job done right."  So they said, "You will be chancellor for a couple of years if you want to be as well."  So I held both positions.
Speaker 2: Now this is 19--
Speaker 1: This is 1989--
Speaker 2: --eighty-nine [1989] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to 1991 in which I held both positions.
Story_ID: 597891
Speaker 1: First thing I did, I had worked so long with SACS [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools], the accrediting agency, that I called and asked for an extension.  They don't usually give extensions, they've got to be very, very good reasons.  But I think that they had watched me work with them in a competent and honest way that they knew I wouldn't have asked if it absolutely were not necessary.  So they did give me permission to do that.  I said, "All I need is a year.  And I don't care how many recommendations we have, I don't want a probation and I don't want a warning."  And my faculty and staff and got together and they were working like mad.  Meanwhile we still had the money problem.  I don't like to fire people, you know, they need their jobs.  Unless they just, you know, aren't working.  But I take seriously the taking of someone's job away from them for reasons that are not of their own making.  And so I said I'm gonna try something else.  I could have--since the board had formally declared financial exigency, I, I could have, you know, done almost any legal move I wanted to make.  But I said I'm going to ask the faculty and staff, those who are making about twenty-two, twenty-five thousand, I don't remember which one, to donate 5 percent of their salary back to the university.  And if we do that, we will meet the shortfall, and we will not have to worry about a shortage at the end of this fiscal year.  I didn't want to--I could have mandated it.  But mandating it mean, meant that--I checked with civil--office of civil service [Louisiana State Civil Service], they told me that if it were mandated, that anybody who wanted to retire in that time, that their retirement would be affected because the salary retirement would be based on that lower salary, 5 percent lower.  Everybody responded positively but one person, who was a good friend of mine.  And they came and said, "Dolores [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], you know this isn't personal."  I said, "Yeah, Barbara [ph.], I know.  You just have a problem with the administration (laughter), I don't care who it is."  She said, "Yeah you know how I feel."  I said, "Well that's fine.  We're gonna--that's why it's voluntary, so don't worry about it."  And we did, we got that done and I made a commitment to them they'd have their money back in two years, and they did.  Had their money back.  And now I was president of the system [Southern University System], remember.  So I really was not involved in the Baton Rouge campus' [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] finances and so forth--my salary.  So I didn't have to do this, but I and all of my system people took the same cut that the Baton Rouge campus did.  'Cause you got to lead by example.  But when it came time to restoring the money back, giving the raise so we could cover their loss, I didn't take mine because I didn't want anybody to perceive in the least way that this was something by which I might benefit.  So I asked the board if they would donate the amount of my raise to that reading and writing center on the Southern University New Orleans campus [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] because they needed new equipment and they needed the money to get their program further along, and they did do that.
Story_ID: 597892
Speaker 1: Meanwhile, knowing Southern's [Southern University System] history (laughter), I had for the first time in the history of anybody in higher ed, president in higher education in this state, negotiated a separation agreement with them.  Board can fire you at will.  They don't have to have any cause.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you did what you needed to do, and then negotiated your own exit?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but now I negotiated my own exit before I finished doing what I was supposed to do.  (Laughter) I mean I wasn't--(unclear) do that first.  So they could have fired me.  I said you have to give me ninety days' notice.  And if you fire me for cause, I wanna have a hearing.  And I have the choice of whether that hearing is public or private, and I can tell you more than likely it's gonna be public.  'Cause I'm not going to do anything that's gonna make you fire me.  If you don't give me notice, ninety day notice, my contract automatically rolls over to the next year.  And that happened for as long as I could take it.  In 1996, I told my husband [Hermon Spikes], my daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown] and my two top people there that I had decided to leave at the end of the next fiscal year.  No one else knew, and they said nothing to anybody.  But meanwhile--
Story_ID: 597893
Speaker 1: Oh, be- before I get to that, I got to tell you about this judge [John Minor Wisdom] and the consent decree.  In addition to all that stuff, I had this consent decree thrust upon me.  And this judge with the Fifth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit] in New Orleans [Louisiana] was something else.
Speaker 2: Now this is--what year is this?  Is this--
Speaker 1: That was from the moment I stepped into the presidency.
Speaker 2: Okay, consent degree [sic.].  Now what, what was the nature?
Speaker 1: The consent decree was an agreement between the State of Louisiana and the federal government, specifically the attorney general, for the desegregation of higher education in the State of Louisiana.  I met with our lawyers and went to every meeting they had in New Orleans.  They wouldn't back away.  And one day we were meeting in the judge's chambers.  [HistoryMaker] William Jefferson, believe it or not, was our attorney.  William is a brilliant lawyer.
Speaker 2: Who is--now who became congressman.
Speaker 1: William Jefferson, now the congressman who's in all sorts of trouble.
Speaker 2: For the money in the freezer thing--alleged (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, money in the freezer.  Which is much to my dismay.  This man was too brilliant for that.  I think you know sometimes greed can get the best of, of, of--I mean I just don't understand it.  But at any rate, yes, that's the same one.  Even our opposition talked about how brilliant his briefs were that he filed with the court.  But we were in the judge's chamber and the judge asked, "Mr. Jefferson, if you had the choice of hiring someone from the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana] or Southern University, which one would you hire?"  So William Jefferson said, "Well, judge, I don't know.  I would have to interview the young people and talk to them to get their records and find out who would be best suited for the job."  So the judge said, "No you wouldn't.  You know you would hire the one from the University of New Orleans 'cause that would be the better one."  And at that moment, I was boiling, I stood up and I said, "I beg your difference."  I said, "That's a racist remark, judge.  That student at the Southern University of New Orleans is more than likely as good or better as the student at the University of New Orleans."  And he said, "Who is that lady?"  Meanwhile Bill's pulling on my jacket to sit down: "Sit down, sit down before he gets you fired--or gives you a citation."
Speaker 2: Contempt of court.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I said, "No, I can't sit up here and this man talking us like that."  I said, "Let him cite me for tempta- for contempt or something, but I can't do that."  So he said, "She is the former chancellor at Southern University at New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], and now she's president of the Southern University System."  So the judge kind of looked, he didn't say anything else about that issue, but moved on to something else.  But I didn't let that judge out of my sight or out of my hearing distance from that point on.  Stood right there with him.
Story_ID: 597894
Speaker 1: And we--the thing that broke I think the camel's back in terms of finally settling this aspect of the consent decree was when we were meeting and nobody would give or take anything.  So LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] wanted some- something and I said, "I tell you what, I will agree to take a million dollars from the money that Southern [Southern University System] gets to help you in your integration efforts for graduate school, if you take that money and use it for scholarships for African Americans for scholarships, preferably in areas in which African Americans are underrepresented."  When I said that, the president of LSU's mouth fell open, all of (unclear).  "You would do that?"  I said, "Yes.  If we agree here and now that we are done negotiating this consent decree.  And if what I want on the table stands, and if what Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] wants on the table--."  Grambling had had--Joe Johnson [HistoryMaker Joseph Johnson] had left and they had been--they had had three or four presidents.  Essentially, frankly I was fighting for Grambling too.  And so at that point, we started signing papers, and that was the end right there.  I wasn't completely satisfied, didn't have everything I wanted, but I said we can work on the other part.  But we're gonna get this part done.  That's the scholarship that they named the Huel Perkins scholarship [Huel D. Perkins Doctoral Fellowship].  The money that came from Southern.  So that's, that's, that's how that money got to LSU.  It came through Dolores Spikes [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], but they call it the Huel Perkins scholarship.  We gave it to--and, and they've been at, and ever since, they've been awarding the students, you know, to help the graduate students get--.  Because that's what we needed and that's what I wanted, an opportunity for more of our folk.  I mean I had two more faculty members after I got my Ph.D. within the next five years, they were in school, or finishing up Ph.D.'s. in mathematics.  And during that time of my presidency, if a student majored in math or electrical engineering, or anything that required a lot of math, that student also had a math major.
Story_ID: 597895
Speaker 1: And at one time I recall--we had a good dean then.  You know faculty sometimes (laughter) they look at their own personalities.  If you're gonna be a leader of faculty, you've got to understand that, that you have all these different--and unfortunately we had people that didn't understand this one guy.  But he was good.  He brought in all kinds of money and grants for that school.  And we had more engineers in Ph.D. program--black engineers in Ph.D. programs in highly reputable institutions than any other university in this country.  Than any of them.  And the same started to become--our physics program.  We had a young African from, let's see from Mali, Mali [HistoryMaker Diola Bagayoko].  Of course if you remember your African history, Mali was one of the great civilizations and scholarly nations of the world.
Speaker 2: Yeah, University of Sankore at Timbuktu [Mali].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's, that's right, Timbuktu.  And so this fellow had an academy at Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] he called the Timbuktu Academy.  He worked hard.  You don't usually have that many physics majors in an undergraduate college, but he had fifty physics majors.  Good students.  And he worked hard to get the money to support them.  He didn't wait around for the university or the state to give him anything; he went out and hustled it.  So we had those things going for us.  So all of those people were in good--they were going and we didn't let them get away with just finishing and, and you know calling it a day.  No, you go to graduate school.  Now some of them received, received some offers from industry and business that were so good they just went on and took it instead of finishing up their graduate work.  If they got a master's [degree] and somebody said, "Come on, we got a job for you paying a hundred thousand [dollars] a year," they went for the job then.  And they said, "Well we can always go back to school."  You know, who can blame them?  It's like the football player (laughter); instead of finishing college, say you get a multimillion dollar deal for the next ten years or so, he says, "I'm gonna take this deal."  And I don't blame him because stick around in the college another year, he might break a leg.  So take it and then you can go to school and do like old Shaq O'Neal [Shaquille O'Neal] did: come back in the summers all season and get your degree like he did from LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (laughter).
Story_ID: 597896
Speaker 1: I just wanted you tell me some of the issues that--well tell me about NAFEO, your involvement with NAFEO and then some of the issues that affected all HBCUs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during the late '80s [1980s].  You said that the relationship surprisingly with Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] wasn't that bad.  I know we discussed it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well not in my estimation.  You know some of my colleagues disagree.  But as I look back and look at the record, it didn't seem to be to me.  I mean just factually.  NAFEO is of course the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education.  And it's the umbrella organization for all the historically black colleges and universities, universities.  And later was expanded to include all the predominantly black colleges and universities.  Like Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] for example, which was once predominantly white, but is now predominantly black.  So it includes both groups.  NAFEO has as its primary interest the education of the public about the role and mission of black colleges.  A very basic role is seeking funding from federal and other sources for predominantly black colleges.  It also provides resources to colleges that may be struggling in certain areas.  For example, in accreditation.  And so there are presidents and others who can offer assistance to these colleges and universities.  And lastly I guess NAFEO offers a chance for universities to come together for the exchange of ideas among presidents and then among people of like positions in colleges and universities.  I've been associated with NAFEO for a long time now.  Even when I was on the faculty [of Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; you don't have to be a president, though the president is really I would say the main body that constitutes NAFEO's force because they're responsible for carrying out the mission and, and all of the other things that NAFEO undertakes.  But NAFEO has a board of directors and I've served on the board of directors as well.  And that board of directors has, has often undertaken studies, for example, to look at funding, comparative funding for black institutions versus non-black institutions.  Establishment of certain funds like Title III funds for building infrastructure in black institutions.  And that's been a mainstay and a big problem for NAFEO in just trying to keep Title III from being wiped away 'cause there are a lot of people who, who say, well black colleges ought not be getting this money.  They don't think about now the fact that they're getting loads of money from other sources (laughter), but they're getting it.
Story_ID: 597897
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, when the Hispanics started their organizations, NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] really took them under their wing and taught them how to organize, and so they have the Hispanic organization [American Association of Hispanics in Higher Education].  Same thing happened with the tribal schools [American Indian Higher Education Consortium].  They each has--have their own organization and unfortunately, (laughter) they say we want some of the same things the black schools [HBCUs] have.  But here's the difference.  An Hispanic serving institution is an institution that has about 25 percent of its student population serving Hispanic students.  That could be a Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas], which is rolling in money, you understand?  That wants to have some extra money, though.  Because about a fourth of their student body is Hispanic.  Well with the money they have, you know one kind of wonders about that philosophy, but we haven't, we haven't--NAFEO has not attempted to interfere with it in any way.  As a matter of fact, we've tried to help them in any way possible.  NAFEO lobbies the Hill [U.S. Congress] every year and all during the year they have, had lobbyists who will keep in touch, keep in touch with the presidents about what's going on and keeps up with legislation that will affect not only black colleges, but all colleges.  There're now parts of Title III in which black schools can get money to beef up certain graduate schools.  Started out with Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia] getting a special allotment from the feds for its medical school.  Well of course Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] say well--and what's the one in California--Drew [Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California] said, well, you know, we're a black medical school, so why can't we get some money?  Said, okay, so they were put in there.  FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] said, well we got a school of pharmacy, which is the medical profession.  Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] said, we do too, so why can't include them in--?  In short, it ended up with money going to as much as say $5 million over five year period, maybe more now, to help build infrastructure for those graduate programs, Ph.D. programs, in which blacks are underrepresented in the sciences, engineering and what have you.  Now there's another piece that's being added because these programs will have already have to be, have been established by the schools.  It wasn't some money to establish a new program, but to help those already in existence.  But now there is some money to help some schools establish new graduate programs in underserved areas.  So NAFEO sort of keeps score on all of that, and it's a terrific undertaking.
Story_ID: 597898
Speaker 1: And it has problems of its own, NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], and here's why.  The national association of colle- of universities and land grant colleges [National Association of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges; Association of Public and Land-grant Universities] is the oldest umbrella organization of public universities and colleges in the country.  Now--what we call an NASULGC [APLU] for short.  I've been dealing with NASULGC for a long time.  As a matter of fact, I was the first African American female to serve as chair of the board of that organization.  And they gear themselves mostly to the public institution, but they have a special focus too on land grant institutions and schools like Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]; those are land grant institutions.  In totality of the number of organizations having all of these needs and who have to pay dues, the dues can be pretty heavy.  But they still aren't enough to really carry out the program of NAFEO as it should be.  NASULGC has many more schools.  The American Council on Education, which is another umbrella organization, not of just public schools, but private schools as well.  So it's got a whole bunch of schools it can draw on for dues.  Not all schools are members of these, so they don't get dues from everybody.  But they still have so much more to draw on so NASULGC has a problem in terms of its being limited in relation to the entities that it represents and therefore the monies that it can get from dues assessed to those organizations.  The others have problems too.  They go after grants.  For example when, when the Kellogg Commission [Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Universities] was created by NASULGC, it cost some money.  We went to Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] and they funded it.  And there was a commission that looked at the future of public colleges in this country.  And we wrote a series of white papers on it.  And one such paper was devoted to the 1890 land grant institutions.  But you know all of these things are, are relative in the sense of, of they all do some of the same things, and, but they also coordinate when they can.  The American Council on Education, NASULGC, NAFEO, American association of higher education [American Association for Higher Education and Accreditation], all based in Washington, D.C.  And so they will re- pool their resources often, especially when it comes to lobbying and, and looking for ways to, to get monies for their institutions or to have policies that are beneficial to students.  Financial aid for students for example is still a hot topic.  There was one time when the Pell Grant took care of about 75 percent of a student's need for college.  Now it's just a little trickle in the bucket.  Most students if they're gonna get to college will leave college with a very heavy loan debt with them.  And god forbid that they go on to graduate professional school.  I have a nephew who had an eighty thousand dollar bill when he finally got through his master's in tax law at New York University [New York, New York].  Luckily he's got the kind of job where he can afford to meet the payments on that bill, but that's a pretty heavy bill, eighty thousand bucks.  Not unusual, though.  So all these organizations are constantly begging [U.S.] Congress to do something about that.  Right now there's a kind of crisis with the credit crunch on that students who need credit now even in undergraduate school, may not be able to get the credit they need.  And that's going to affect the enrollment and the opportunity for students to go to school.  So there, there's just so many issues.  So NAFEO works on all of those issues and those other organizations do too.  NAFEO has a much greater in- interest in some of them like the student access problem because the students it serves are generally poorer.  I don't mean to say they are not all poor, but as a rule they're generally poorer and from--many still from first generation college--still first generation college students.  So NAFEO has a big job on its hand.
Story_ID: 597899
Speaker 1: In 1996 you left Southern [Southern University System], well I--well you joined I know in ninety- 1996 you became president of University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland], right?  Is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Well how did you leave Southern, and how did this opportunity come along?  And now this is another, from what I understand, another black land grant university in Maryland?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I had made up my mind somewhere around the beginning of that fiscal year, say July or so of 1996, that that would be my last year at Southern.  And I, you know my husband [Hermon Spikes] knew, my daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown] knew, my sisters [Ann Richard Fenelon and Elizabeth Richard Bellaire] knew and my two top people at Southern knew; nobody else did.  And I knew that these people weren't gonna say a word to anybody, and they did not.  Meanwhile, the president of University of Maryland Eastern Shore, William Hytche [William P. Hytche, Sr.], who has, who, who died this past year.  Bill called and said, "Dolores [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], the search committee called and asked if I would inquire as to whether you would be interested in coming up here to University of Maryland Eastern Shore?"  And I laughed and I said, "Bill, you know I told you that when I left Southern, I was not gonna be president at anybody else's college."  And so he said, "Well," he said, "why not you can't consider it?  What are you planning to do?"  I said, "Well what I'd really like to do is to go back and, and do some work in Africa," I was a consultant, and he had been a consultant too, "to the historically disadvantaged colleges in, in South Africa."  I said, "I'd really like to go back and work with those colleges again."  So he said--well he then started calling my chief assistant, Margaret Ambrose, who's now an interim chancellor up there [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and trying to convince her to get me to come up there.  So Margaret you know, talked, she said, "You know I just talked to him, but I told him you weren't going anywhere."  So I did tell him, and that was the mistake I made.  I said, "Well Bill, I'm gonna leave Southern at the end of this fiscal year, but now that's not to be repeated to anybody."  And he had been sort of a mentor to me.  He'd been president up there for about twenty-some years.  I said, "I'm not going, I'm not going anywhere else."  "Well if you're gonna leave anyway, why not split the difference?  Just leave six months earlier and come here?"  They had a search on, but there was a stalemate for some reason.  I said, "No, I'm not gonna do it."  So anyway I got a call--I started getting calls from, from members of the board up there.  People in the legislature, judges, (laughter) everybody in Maryland who (unclear) Bill Hytche to come, and his wife, whose name is Deloris [Deloris Hytche] too, called and say, she said, "Dolores, why don't you come on here because if--Bill has had two heart attacks, and if he has a third one, he's gone--he's not gone live through it."  So I said, "But I, I just can't make it."  But I was have--I had trips scheduled to--first to Washington, D.C. to talk to a congressman about some money for Southern.  And then I was on the national broadcast- public broadcasting's [Public Broadcasting Service] board of directors.  So I had to go to San Francisco [California] for that.  And then to Las Vegas [Nevada] for a meeting (background noise) of the Council of 1890 Presidents [Council of 1890 College Presidents].
Story_ID: 597900
Speaker 1: Somehow the chancellor, Don Langenberg [Donald N. Langenberg], whom I'd known for some time, found out that I was going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  He said, "Can I get you to fly into BWI [Baltimore Washington International Airport; Baltimore Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, Baltimore, Maryland] instead of Washington National [Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.]?  And--'cause my board is meeting tomorrow, and then I have a driver who can just drive you right back on to D.C. to your hotel."  (Laughter) So I, you see I didn't have an excuse.  So I said, "Okay, I'll do that."  Anyway we met.  By the time I got to, to San Francisco [California], I had a call with an offer, board offering me the position there.  I called my husband [Hermon Spikes] and said, "How would you like to go to Maryland to work for a little while?"  He said, "I don't know.  If you think you wanna go, it's all right, you go, go on to Maryland for a little while."  So I--my intention was to go for two years while they searched for a president.  Two years only.  Well I got there [University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland], to be quite frank with you, it soon became apparent to me that Bill [William P. Hytche, Sr.] really was sicker than he thought he was, and he started going down.  And you know I used to tell some of the men who worked under me, some of whom really did not like having a female for, for a boss, that I had enough room behind my skirt for all of them to hide behind when they didn't want to do their jobs (laughter).  And, and there were some who actually, literally could not--gender bias and people, you know, you hear talk about women for the politics here that, that gender bias is greater in this political race than is race bias.  And that's true.  I experienced that more and more as time went on.  And, but you know I always say that's your problem, not mine.  But went there and I guess I saw that the other presidents in the system [University System of Maryland] were a little bit too--a little bit lacking in courage, if you will.  They didn't stand and fight for anything.  Down in Louisiana, you know we had to fight for everything, so I wasn't accustomed to that.  So I started--you know I questioned everything about the resources and I started getting things that I asked for and I guess they noticed.  And so I guess when that started happening, I wanted to see exactly how far we could go.  So I said, well maybe I'll stay another couple of years.
Story_ID: 597901
Speaker 1: Well, at the end of the fourth year [as president of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland], I was having an executive cabinet meeting and some of my members said, "Go see your doctor."  I said, "Why?"  "You aren't well.  We can tell you're as pale as can be.  You don't look right.  Your eyes are just glazed; something's wrong, see your doctor."  I said, "Oh, there's nothing wrong with me."  And by the end of the week I was really feeling badly.  Called my doctor, he was out of town.  So I called my doctor here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and then my assistant called and he said, "I just came in from cutting grass.  I just wanted to find out how you were doing."  I said, "Jack [ph.], give me a flight out of here at six o'clock in the morning.  I'm going to Baton Rouge."  When I got in, he sent me to the, to the hospital right away.  He took test from about two P.M. to about ten that night and walked in with his finger in my face and say, "You have got to stop working now."  I said, "What do you mean?  I've got," (laughter), "I've got a school to run and we open up classes in a couple of weeks."  "No you won't."  And you know then he started this long litany of what was wrong and, and it wasn't long before when I started with the surgeries and everything else that I knew that I really was ill.  But at any rate, I had to come back.  I said, "Well I've got to go back."  They didn't want me to go back.  They didn't trust me going back.  My husband [Hermon Spikes] and my sister just left me, but they insisted on coming back with me so that I would come back to Baton Rouge.  But I met with the board and as I said they were very, very, extremely nice.  They said, "You've done a good job."  It takes five years to be vested in that program.  And they were kind enough to give me a one year medical leave so I could be vested.  And that was a nice thing to do 'cause they didn't have to do it.  But I did have to leave.  And they just said, "Give us a recommendation for an interim person."  And I did that.  And I had to pack my bags and the chancellor said, "You know, you don't really have to leave now, you could stay in the president's house."  I said, "Look, Don [Donald N. Langenberg], there's an interim president, there's a past president, president emeritus Bill [William P. Hytche, Sr.], and then there's me."  I say, "There is not enough room on any campus for three presidents of any kind to be there.  That's not good policy.  I'm leaving."  (Laughter) So I left out.  But I had bought a home up there and my daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown] and her kids decided they wanted to stay, they liked the Eastern Shore.  And that essentially was the end of my career then.  Suddenly, without warning and, and then the frustrations because I literally could not do much of anything after that.  Started to set in.  So I've been not doing too much since then.  Every now and then I'll tell somebody, okay, I'll do this or that, (laughter) but it's becoming less and less.  I've got to give a talk at the Catholic Life Center [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] on April 1st, and I promised my husband that that's gonna be the last thing that I'll do.  'Cause I do have to pay some--he's really sick and I have to pay some attention to him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it's been a great run, great ride--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --great experiences.
Story_ID: 597902
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would have done differently if you could have?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I wouldn't have gotten into administration.  (Laughter) I would have stayed in mathematics, teaching and research.  That was my first love and I never did get back to it.  I always kept saying I would and I didn't.
Speaker 1: But by the same token when you look back on what you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: People always ask me that, and I say I don't know, that's for--that's for somebody else to judge.  But if, if, if you're thinking legacy, I hope that they not think in terms of mortar and stone and stuff like that.  I, I mean I've gotten I would say at least 85 percent of the buildings on Southern's campus [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] right now are buildings that I got there.  I would say that 90 percent of the buildings at University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland] that are coming up now and have come up since I left were those that I got before I left there.  So, but I mean as mortar and brick.  Pro- academic programs, I started more, at least three or four Ph.D. programs, elevated the physical therapy program to a doctorate program at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore.  Doctorate programs to move Southern to another doctoral level here.  So we've done all of that.  But if, if a legacy is something that you want to be remembered for, it's something you leave behind.  I hope that it will be in the students who've crossed my path.  Nothing pleases me more than to get a note or a letter or just to hear somebody calling out from a car to me, "Hey, doc, remember me?  I'm that fella that you helped do so and so and I'm doing this now," (laughter) you know.  And I know that those people are gonna be all right and they will pass something along.  That's all I say.  I don't have any great need for self-adulation or anything of that kind.  The Lord gives us a life and a purpose in life, and we make the best of it that we can.  And you can't ask for anything else.  I've had a building named for me at Southern, the honors college [Dolores Margaret Richard Spikes Honors College], and that was awfully nice of them.  And as I told the interim chancellor Margaret Ambrose who happens to be one of my best friends too.  I said, "Margaret I'm not gonna do anymore of this induction into the hall of fame and all that kind of stuff.  I'm not gonna do that anymore."  She said, "I unders- I understand and I don't want you to do any of that anymore either because I think you need to rest now," and I do.  Right now I'm in remission from stage four renal cell carcinoma.  I have chronic kidney disease, stage three, three and a half out of five.  Pulmonary sarcoidosis, a host of other things.  But every morning I get up and I put my feet on the floor and I walk and I can get--take my thirteen pills (laughter), and then I can get breakfast and do one or two things that day, and give thanks.  And I've got to be here long enough to get my granddaughter [Bianca Pete] through college.  That will be enough for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in this life.
Story_ID: 597903
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: We have to address this question of poverty in the black community.  Now we all know that there are more black--other people than blacks who are poor, but as a percentage of, of blacks, there's a larger percentage of blacks of themselves, percentage of themselves, who are poor.  Now that leads to all other kinds of problems.  But there's no way that--and we'd like to say that education is the answer, and the key to all our problems, but it really isn't.  It's part of the solution.  But if you've got a poor person, you'd better have somebody from medicine, somebody from psychology, somebody from sociology, and the teacher there to help that student because otherwise, something's going to be missing.  That child is already probably psychologically impaired from the stigma of poverty.  That child is probably already not doing as well in school because there's no one to encourage him or her.  So when as a society we learn how to bring all of these resources together and then form what we call a school system, the collective use of all of these things together.  Only then I think will the challenge of poverty be fully addressed in the black community.  And in addressing that, we will also address some of the other things, you know, the educational levels and what have you.  Now there are lot of people who are not poor who aren't doing well on standardized tests and everything else.  I read an article recently in which a parent was saying, you know, some parents and I were talking about what we expected of our schools.  What do we want our children to do, to be.  And not one of us said anything about a test score.  We want them to pass this test or that, or a grade.  We talked about what we want our kids to do in terms of growing up to be young men and women who can articulate their views well.  Who can live side by side with their neighbors regardless of differences in color, race, ethnic background, religion, tolerance.  Who can be civil; civility is almost a lost art sometime.  We want our young people to be capable of not just making a living, but of having a career that he or she can look forward to.  Something that they don't mind getting up and going to work every morning for.  If we can do that, we've got an educated child.  But if you were to listen in Louisiana for example, about what an educated child is, an educated child is a child who first of all passes the LEAP test [Louisiana Educational Assessment Program] at grade four.  The LEAP test at grade eight and so forth.  It's about the test.  Always about the test.  And so until we become unfocused on a test as a measurement of what we expect our children to be, we've got problems in the black, facing the black community because for some reason collectively as a people, we don't do as well on these standardized tests.  I don't know what the reason is.  It's gonna take somebody more brilliant than me to figure that out.  Matter of fact, I said if I ever come back in another life, I wanna be a brain specialist so I can figure out what goes on up here.
Story_ID: 597904
Speaker 1: The other challenge I think with the black community is to overcome, overcome the long and I think harmful effects of this thing called government benefits without having an end in mind that puts a person back into the community whole and in good standing.  Take a look at young people who have been two or three generations of food stamp and, and government assistance programs, not working, no working adult in the family.  They don't know what it is to be prompt to go to work 'cause no--(laughter) they haven't known anybody who had to be prompt to go to work.  They don't know what it is to have good job interview 'cause they haven't had a chance to do it.  So when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] threw out all of this stuff, he threw out the baby with the bathwater because he did not give and mandate programs that would put these people back whole into the community.  Now what we have found from some studies at our universities, is that unless we can train these people to go into the workforce by teaching them some silly little simple things like being on time, about not talking out of place at the job, and how we dress for the job.  Unless we do that, we starting the same old stuff all over again.  Or we're starting something else.  We find we're getting into drugs and other kinds of habits to get money that we didn't have before that we were getting from the government before. Government's not giving us any money before.  So we got to get it from somewhere else.  Wherever we get it, we got to steal it, we got to get it the best way we can.  And so we've got to do something to make up from those generations that were lost because of that.  And we can do it.
Story_ID: 597905
Speaker 1: Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to the best of our knowledge, was the first school to offer a program in community service that was required, is still required of every student who graduates and who gets credit for it, university credit for it.  I started that when I was vice chancellor academic affairs.  The, the program that we envisioned was not one that you go out and make somebody feel good about themselves.  The students had to come back and write--(laughter) I mean they were learning.  They had to write well and they were judged on the basis of their writing too.  But they--one of the projects we had, one of the very first projects we had was with the Head Start project.  But it didn't start with the par- students, so we start with the parents.  We bused them up to Southern every weekend.  That first week they came, they came loud, chewing gum, late and all of that (laughter).  I guarantee you that by the third week, everybody was on time, hair combed, not blurting out, and--you know in an unwanted fashion, and if anybody was out of line, somebody in that group said, "Ah, you can't do that, you gotta do it this way."  They were learning skills that were necessary for them to pass on to their children for successful living.  Never mind the test.  These students got to know how to live in this world, and we've got to teach them.  Parents got to teach them.  So we ought to have classes for the parents to do that.  And they enjoyed it, they really did.  And then we asked the Head Start director to tell us what difference this made in the children whose parents had gone through this cycle.  It was absolutely amazing.  He told us that the strides that those kids made tripled, sometimes quadrupled in terms of their learning experiences, what they were doing.  Had better manners in class.  They were more disciplined.  Everything was better about them, they were learning to live a better life.  So those are a couple of the challenges that I think we've got to, to--got to handle.  Now there's some others.  I mean there are always the glass ceilings that are there because of the color of our skins, because of the gender, because of something.  Now we've got to break those glass barriers.  But more important to me right now is we break barriers period of our children so that these children can be strong enough to break those glass ceilings.  Otherwise they won't, they won't break them.  That's are--those are big tasks for us.  And it's one of those things that make me wish that I really could go back to work (laughter) because I think they would--that's what I'd be tackling right now, yeah.
Story_ID: 597906
Speaker 1: Now could you tell us something about your family?  You've got, I know you've got grandchildren now, right?  So--
Speaker 2: I have one daughter [Rhonda Spikes Brown].
Speaker 1: You've got one daughter, okay.
Speaker 2: She's divorced.  As a matter of fact, it's that picture behind you on that fireplace.  That's a picture of my family, daughter's family.  (Laughter) There's a picture after they were divorced, by the way, but they decided they still wanted a family picture.  But she has two kids.  My granddaughter's [Bianca Pete] a freshman at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  My grandson [Bronson Pete] is fourteen years old, he's in eighth grade.  I, I don't know, they tell me they're going to move back down this way this summer.  I hope so.  But we'll see.  I haven't pressured them too much about coming back, but my daughter's a nurse and so her father [Hermon Spikes] and I certainly could use her back this way right now (laughter).  So we're hoping she comes back.
Story_ID: 597907
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I need to ask before I ask my last question?  That I--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  If there's something that you need to ask me.  Is there anything I should tell you that you need to know (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  I guess that's the question.  But well it's--these interviews are what they are, but--
Speaker 2: I, you know I have, I'm just not the kind of person who, who likes to extol my own virtues or whatever I might have.  I have never insisted that our public relations officer from the university put my picture out or put something in every magazine about me or put anything about me.  I've always wanted to promote my institution and my students and faculty.  And so you won't--I mean it took you a long time to get to me, didn't it?  This is 2008, and I'm seventy-one years of age.  Now why do you think that's so?
Speaker 1: Well we only make so many trips to Louisiana--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --that's why (laughter).
Speaker 2: But you've been to Louisiana, or you've talked to [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis a good while ago.  You've talked to Joe Johnson [HistoryMaker Joseph Johnson] a good while ago, probably while they, maybe while they was in Louisiana, between Louisiana and Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he was in, he was in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: He kind of moves between the two.  And you've talked, you've talked to some others.  I think it was because so many of these other people had more of a public profile than I have.  And there's some that, you know, that explain to another, a young lady the other day who wanted to nominate me for some kind of award and I said, "Please don't.  There's so many unsung heroes out there."  And the lady I told you about, the ninety-nine year old teacher [Mildred Clark], ex-teacher who I had, is one of those.  Devoted her life to children, serving children.  I said, "That's who you ought to nominate."  And you will--and so my profile in the higher education community is known in the higher education community by and large.  But it is a low profile, and it probably does not extend much beyond that.  And I have no desire that extends beyond that because I have done what I set out to do in one area, in the administrative area.  Not in the area I know the best, but in, in the administrative area.  And I think that's sufficient for me.  The, the greatest moment for me during my years of working has always been commencement day.  There was no greater thrill for me than to see kids, first generation or second generation in their family to graduate from college.  And the mamas and the papas who struggled so hard to see that they got there, see that they would make it.  I mean that's the best feeling you could have.  So I have no, I have--I don't really have any need to--for--even for this.  If you chose not to run this, I would be okay.  It's an honor to be considered by this organization, it really is.  But it's based on my own personality, not a break your life, make or break your life sort of thing.  It is for some people, but it isn't for me.  So that I don't know that there's anything anymore that I can say except that I'm blessed.  Have had many difficulties in life and still feel blessed.  Have had some things that I haven't told you about and won't tell you about for fear that--and the reason I won't write any memoirs is that if I do it, if I'm honest, somebody unless the, the time for charging them is expired, will go to jail (laughter).  And, and these people have children and spouses who are innocent and, and who are not responsible for their, whatever they did.  And, and I wouldn't want to embarrass them.  So I don't write them you know.  If I write anything, it'll be about myself and myself only.  But I don't consider myself as having a life so full that I can write a whole book of memoirs on it, you know (laughter).  So I'm, I'm, I'm content at this stage of my life.
Story_ID: 597908
Speaker 1: Well our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: My father [Lawrence Granville Richard] said that he could not give much to, to us in the way of material things.  But we had his good name, and he said we must wear it well.  And so if I can be considered as having worn my father's good name well, then I will have I think done extremely well because that's what he wanted.  My middle name is taken from my mother, Margaret [Margaret Patterson Richard].  Hope I've worn her name well.  My first name is that--is Dolores [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes], which was the name of my godmother who was a businesswoman in this community [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  All my names came from others who expected me to wear their names well.  I pray that I've done that, done that, then I'm okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're quite welcome.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's been a pleasure talking to you.
Story_ID: 597909
Speaker 1: That's a school picture from St. Francis Xavier [St. Francis Xavier Catholic School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Dolores Margaret Richard [HistoryMaker Dolores R. Spikes] at that time, '46 [1946], '47 [1947], must have been about sixth or seventh grade.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next.
Speaker 1: That's Dolores Margaret Richard, not Spikes yet.  But on the way there.  That's an engagement picture used to put in the paper for my engagement announcement.  That was '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: That's a family picture with my--I was president of Southern [Southern University System], I'm there in the cap and gown and my nephew and godson Scott [ph.] is receiving his bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering.  Also got commissioned into the U.S. Army and other family members are there with.
Speaker 1: Seems like a party of some sort, huh (laughter)?  Sitting there with a corsage on.  I don't remember quite what date this is, but that's my daughter Rhonda [Rhonda Spikes Brown] sitting next to me in the red and white, and my niece Gina [Gina Bellaire Williams].  And I don't know who those three with the little ascots are on the side, but that's my sister on the, on the far right.
Speaker 2: I guess--I'm Dolores Spikes posing I guess at what looks to be a Confirmation.  That would have been around seventh, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: That's my husband Hermon Spikes to the far left.  [HistoryMaker] Lezli Baskerville who's president of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], and Dolores Spikes.  This was at a ceremony honoring me by the Louisiana conference of colleges and universities [Conference of Louisiana Colleges and Universities].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: This is in April of 2006.
Speaker 2: That's the same event, right?
Speaker 1: Same event.  Hermon, Joe Johnson [HistoryMaker Joseph Johnson], Dolores Spikes, and it looks like that might be Lula [Lula Young Johnson], Joe's wife on the end, but I'm not sure from this distance.
Speaker 2: That's the inaugural ball, University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland].  That's Hermon and Dolores Spikes at the ball, or outside of the ballroom.
Speaker 1: What is that, two thousand what?
Speaker 2: Two thousand--no that, that may have been closer to nineteen ninety- 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that probably was my first commencement at Southern, and that's my sister Elizabeth [Elizabeth Richard Bellaire] standing next to me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary.  Me and Hermon and my daughter Rhonda.  Number fifty is coming up this year, August 23rd.
Speaker 1: That's at the fortieth anniversary of my sister Elizabeth.  Hermon, Dolores, Robert Fenelon, Ann Marie Fenelon [Ann Richard Fenelon], Elizabeth and my now deceased brother-in-law.  Almost one year and a month ago he was shot and killed in his driveway while helping his daughter [Gaylyn Bellaire] unload some groceries--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --by three teenagers.
Speaker 2: That's terrible.
Speaker 1: Yes it was.
Speaker 2: Did they ever find out why?  Were they trying to rob him or what?
Speaker 1: Didn't have any money.  That's what they said, robbery, but we don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead
Speaker 1: Yeah, that (laughter), that's my granddaughter when she was about five years old.  She's back waving her diploma as if she owns the world.  She's graduating from kindergarten.  Bianca Pete who's now a freshman at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: That's Dolores Spikes.  Looks like some earlier, a little thinner day at probably at, at Southern University.  I can't say what year it was.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: That's, yeah you see standing to my right there, the mighty Chester.
Speaker 2: Chester Spears.
Speaker 1: From Chicago [Illinois].  And the rest of the Spears family, his sisters, two are in Chicago and one lives here.  That's at the fifth anniversary of our class reunion.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 1: I think that's another family photo of my sister's fortieth anniversary.  About the only time we can get together.  Yeah, judging from that, I think that's what it is.  That was about five, six years ago.
Speaker 2: That's Grandma and Dolores who probably doesn't wanna be in this picture.  And I, I--there's one baby.  It might be my sister Ann.
Speaker 1: I think that's you?
Speaker 2: Me on the side.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's you there.
Speaker 2: No, that's somebody, that's me there.  And there are two other people are there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the baby here--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Baby, that's my middle sister Ann.  I didn't see that over, yeah.
Speaker 1: My father and my mother during their earlier days.  My father is Lawrence Granville Richard and Margaret Rae Patterson [Margaret Patterson Richard].  (Background noise) That, that had to be--my mother was about five years younger than my father.  And she was married when she was about sixteen, seventeen years old.  That must have been about, I'd say about five, looks like about five or six years later than that.
Speaker 2: Well you might not recognize the (laughter), the kind of skinny young lady out behind the groom.  But that's Dolores Spikes, and that's Henry [Henry Bellaire] and Elizabeth getting married.
Speaker 1: Class of 1949 of St. Francis Xavier School, eighth grade.
Speaker 2: And you are?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh, go little farther over.  Come on back.  I'm on the end of--I'm in the back row, yeah, no, no.
Speaker 2: Okay, right here?
Speaker 1: Keep on coming back.  Go ahead.  Keep going, and then you stop.  There you go, right there.
Speaker 2: Okay, right here?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
