Story_ID: 629906
Speaker 1: I'll start by saying I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole; I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is our videographer.  We're here with [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson.  Today is August 7th, 2016.  We're at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  Would you please--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Correction, it's August 8th.
Speaker 1: That's what I was about to say.  I'm like--
Speaker 2: Today is August 8th--
Speaker 1: August 8th.
Speaker 2: --two thousand sixteen [2016].
Speaker 1: August 8th.
Speaker 2: Would you, please, say and spell your name for me?
Speaker 1: My name is Ruben Santiago-Hudson, R-U-B-E-N, S-A-N-T-I-A-G-O, hyphen, H-U-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: And what is your profession?
Speaker 1: I'm an actor, I'm a writer, director.
Story_ID: 629907
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna start with some People magazine type questions to get us going.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Rice and beans.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: I love rice and beans 'cause my father [Ruben Santiago] ate them every day and, and I, I--if I was with him, I was eating them.  So, it's that--it's the Boricuas, the Puerto Rican in me.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think the fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is, is probably--I love so many colors.  I, I--really, it's hard.  It depends on what day it is.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That I have been to or I want to go to?
Speaker 1: Your choice.
Speaker 2: I love Puerto Rico.  I, I love--I love being there.  I love the family there.  I love the smell.  I love the beaches.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I have so many of them, so you ask the question, I can't pinpoint one thing about--you know, 'cause I have so many things I heard and it depends on what the occasion is.
Speaker 1: You can tell me more than one.
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  Recently, recently, it's been just love is love.
Story_ID: 629908
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family heritage and let's start with your mother.  Would you tell me her name, when and where was she born?  Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Alean Hudson, Alean Hudson.  She was born in McKenzie, Alabama.  You know, I've been trying to get to the roots of it and it's been very difficult 'cause her, her father was a sharecropper.  So, she was born in McKenzie, Alabama, I think seven brothers and sisters, and they--and they moved up in the industrial age and revolution up to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Clairton, Pennsylvania.  And that's as far as I can go back with her, McKenzie.  I don't know where they--where they came from to McKenzie, but I know they went--they--I, I--I've traced them back to McKenzie.
Speaker 1: And do you know what--where she was in the birth order?
Speaker 2: She was the baby.  She was the baby.  They actually called her Bae, short for ba- baby.
Speaker 1: And you said her father was a sharecropper?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know--what was his name?
Speaker 2: A.G.
Speaker 1: A.G.  And what did--do, do, do you know any stories of him as a sharecropper.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I think the, the story goes back the furthest--I only saw him once in my life.  I saw him once 'cause he, he went north on his own and left my grandmother [Jessie Hudson] there, from what my aunt told me, left my grandmother and the kids there in Alabama to, to get the crop in and he went up to try to find a job in Pittsburgh where they were making steel.  And he came back and got the money from the crop that he needed to sustain up there in Pittsburgh.  And they scuffled in Alabama.  I think the boys had one pair of shoes they shared from what I hear and the girls had a pair.  And he came back and he left, and my--he, he--then he didn't come back and my grandmother grabbed the kids to went to, to find him and found out he had another family.  And she went out--she raised those kids on her own, you know.  And he and his other family lived in the same town, Clairton, Pennsylvania, and I saw him once.  I saw him 'cause I used to go to Clairton every summer, but we'll probably get to why I was in, in Clairton.  But, that's, that's far as I remember A.G. Hudson.
Story_ID: 629909
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother?
Speaker 2: You know, I was with my mother off and on for, for--more off than on when she--you know, my mother, well, became a heroin addict for twenty-three years, so she was in and out of jail and in and out of her addiction.  When she was clean, I saw her, and for that first twenty-three years, she was more in the addiction and that, that whole process than out.  But, I lived with her from--she, she took me first grade to fifth grade, so she wanted to bring her--all her--all her kids together.  She had three kids, three of us by three different men.  She had one when she was sixteen, one eighteen, and me when she was twenty.  And she brought us all together.  You know, she had a guy who she thought was a good guy and we lived together.  I made it to the fifth grade, you know, and then she kind of went back spiraling.  She was clean for those four years that I was with her and then she started spiraling.  And when she started spiraling, I went back to Nanny.  I called Nanny.  I was going to visit Nanny, you know, as--you know, Rachel Crosby from 'Lackawanna Blues,' every weekend anyway 'cause she had me up until--from birth to, to first grade.  And so that's--I, I knew her more as mama than my real mama, you know.  But, Alean [Alean Hudson] is a beautiful, beautiful woman, brown skin, great figure, just great hips, little--tiny little waist.  Just men, legendary men talk about how beautiful she was.  And I always felt real proud when she would take me by the hand and walk me down the street 'cause everybody would be watching us.  And I, I didn't know why they were watching us, but they actually was watching her.  You know, and my father [Ruben Santiago] loved her.  My father was a--was a very gentle, loud, generous, gracious, big hearted, funny Puerto Rican, and all the women loved him, and he fell in love with her.  And she decided she didn't--she told me one time, you know, the, the last twelve years of her life she spent taking girls off--drug addicted girls off the streets of the Hill District of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  She became a matron and a sponsor for drug addicted, mainly girls.  She felt girls needed, needed--they were giving boys a lot more attention than the girls.  So, she told me that my father was too good for her.  He was just too good of a guy.  He was just too right and that was--her nature was to live a little dangerously.  'Cause we, we became real close in that last twelve years.  It took a while 'cause I was very angry at her.  I just didn't understand, you know, and she finally just--we just sat down and had a real adult conversation when I was--I was grown, she was grown, I had four kids, and I was--you know, I just--I'm confused.  Some time I'd be angry with her and some time I wouldn't, and so we just hashed it out.
Story_ID: 629910
Speaker 1: In your early years with your mother, what are--what are some of your earliest memories of being with her?
Speaker 2: I remember us being together when she had the three of us, me, Chauncey [ph.], and Lonnie [ph.], and I remember on Friday nights we watch the double feature creature feature scary and, and ate ice cream and, and pound cake.  That was the better--best memories I have of her.  That was, you know, second grade, first grade, and that kind of thing.  And also I have the bad memories when I didn't--I didn't see her for two days and it would just be me and Chauncey 'cause Lonnie went back to--we called him Pierre, my brother--middle brother.  He was the biggest of all of us and probably the handsomest, but he was gay and we knew he was gay from when he was little.  And I had to fight--Chauncey had--Chauncey was the toughest, the oldest.  He was notoriously rough and he taught me how to fight so I could defend Pierre who was the biggest.  And, and, and Pierre went back to my grandmother [Jessie Hudson] because the man my mother was with was really rough.  He was a [U.S.] Marine Corps boxing champion and he could pound you.  You know, he could like punch you in the chest and try to make a man out of you.  And Chauncey could take it and I was little, you know.  My nickname was Little.  So, I would take the punch, but I couldn't--I couldn't sustain it, but I wasn't afraid to take it.  Pierre couldn't take it.  He would just start crying if, if you raise your voice at him, so they, you know, called him a bunch of names and just said he was too soft, sent him back to my grandmother.  So, it was me and Chauncey and Chauncey made me rough.  You know, he said, "You're gonna be with me, you're gonna be rough."  So I started, you know, hanging with Chauncey (laughter), so--but that ended in like I said the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: So when you were living with your mother, you said the, the not so good times when she would disappear for a couple of days and--but her boyfriend was still there?
Speaker 2: No.  They'd go.  They was hustling.  They weren't--they weren't shooting dope then.  They were hustling, you know.  And their main thing I found out--come to found out later was boosting, basically going to the best stores and taking the best clothes, and then they moved up further to just breaking in places and taking like truckload of clothes.  So, that would be an adventure they would go on, you know, to, to go get--do their hustle.  And me and Chauncey would go for ourselves.  Now, I'm, I'm in the fifth grade, you know, when I finally couldn't take it anymore.  So, Chauncey, you know, at that time, you know, fifteen, sixteen, and I'm ten, ten years old, you know, so--and I'm running the streets with Chauncey who is sixteen year old.  A sixteen year old boy is just out there having fun, adventure, finding girls, drinking beer.  And so some time I, I would be just me.  Chauncey would decide to go do something and it would be me and I call Nanny [Rachel Crosby].  I'm, I'm scared and Nanny would say, "Get in the cab.  I'll pay for it when you get here," just get in the cab and go, go with Nanny.  And mom would come back, she would be mad 'cause Nanny gonna scold her.  "Why you do that?  Why you leave that kid?"  And that's how I end up just being with Nanny.  Nanny said, "No, I, I ain't--no, no, no.  No more.  You gotta do better or you can't have him," you know, so--
Speaker 1: And Nanny is Alean's [Alean Hudson] mother?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 629911
Speaker 1: Who is Nanny (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nanny was Rachel Crosby.  Nanny was the woman from the movie 'Lackawanna Blues,' had the rooming houses.  She had two rooming houses, which they didn't talk about in the movie.  One was for the more sophisticated tenant who, nicer rooms, you can eat off the floor, people that were like up, upwardly mobile actually in Lackawanna [New York], people that were coming there, getting jobs at the steel plant, the guys had conks and cars outside.  And the other--where I stayed with Nanny was people from jail, people from mental hospitals, people off the street, people that just walked in hungry.  It was the much more colorful group, illiterate.  All of them--ninety percent were illiterate.  Nanny was the like guardian of the community.  She was that person if you came to Lackawanna, New York, your cousin would have told you go see Miss Rachel.  So, you would knock on her door whenever you got to Lackawanna, whether it's two o'clock, three o'clock, eleven in the morning, and you would walk in and you would give your credentials.  "Big Sonny [ph.] sent me."  "What Big Sonny?"  "Big Sonny from Chicago [Illinois] live on So and So and street." "Is he cousin of, of Latabelle [ph.]?"  "Yeah, Latabelle's cousin married my brother," and then they would start talking.  I'd be sitting there looking and then she would say, "Well, sit down, baby, you hungry?"  "Yeah, I need a room and a job."  She would give them a room, next day get, get them in her Lincoln and take them to get a job, racetracks depending on what time of year, farming, steel plant, grain mills, docks.  She would--she was connected.  She knew everybody and she would bring them good workers 'cause these people came to work.
Speaker 1: So, she, she was not actually related to you.
Speaker 2: No.  She wasn't related to any, any, any--she--anybody but everybody.  That was just Mama.  Some people call her Mama, some people call her Nanny, and she was Nanny's--Nanny was our landlady when my mother [Alean Hudson] and father [Ruben Santiago] broke up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --way before I moved to Buffalo [New York] with her and, and this other man she was with named Donald [ph.].  Way before that, she had a room at Nanny's up- upscale--she said, when she left my father, "I need a room," she went to Nanny.  "I got this baby and we need a place."  Nanny gave her a room.  Excuse me.  But she was working at a, a bar called the Flame [ph.].  Lackawanna was hot, I mean jumping.  We're talking about '56 [1956], '57 [1957].  Steel, people chunking steel, railroads, grain mills.  I say that in 'Lackawanna Blues,' the docks, everybody had money.  And so they were spending money.  You got money, you're spending money.  Black folks have a good time on the weekend, everybody know that.  And the Flame, the Rim [Rim Lounge, Lackawanna, New York], Maxie's [Maxie's Lounge, Lackawanna, New York], all these bars, and my mother worked at the Flame--
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: --and would leave me in a room sleep and Nanny didn't like that, so Nanny would take me and take me in her apartment, I would sleep there.  And when my mother come home, I wouldn't be there and Nanny would say, "Don't do that."  So, Nanny always was the disciplinarian and, you know.
Story_ID: 629912
Speaker 1: So, I want to go backward and we'll--I'll have you give me a complete description of Lackawanna [New York], but before we get there, your father.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Ruben Santiago.
Speaker 1: And where is he from?
Speaker 2: Penuelas, Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: And do you know--do, do you know--can you tell me about him and how--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he grew up?
Speaker 2: My, my father--I can kind of trace those roots further back because they--those, those people would stayed right where they were.  You know, his, his mother was more Taino, was more indigenous.  His father was a, a mix, you know, much--had some Spanish in him and, and, obviously, the, the, the Taino.  But, they lived right outside of Penuelas in an area called Coto, barrio Coto.  Barrio is the barrier.  You know, that's the--that's your little area, and that was all my family.  You come off that street and you go up the--of Coto and everybody left and right was my family, cousins, cousins and uncles and aunts.  And my great-grandmother who lived to be 114 documented, at least 114, they said probably more, died of a broken heart because her daughters, two of her daughters died and she just couldn't take it.  But, I saw--I would see her and she didn't speak English, obviously, but she would tell you stories about her grandmother, and so--in Spanish and my cousins would interpret it.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Matilde [Matilde Santiago].  I think her--I--my grandmother's name was Matilde.  My great-grandmother, I don't--I don't know her name.  But she was a sight to see 'cause she was just a, a--just wrinkles from top to bottom 'cause she was over one hundred when I met her.  And, and she look at me and she call me my father, you know, and she would slap me a little bit on the cheeks and just want to cook for me and just start telling me stories, you know.  So--and I didn't understand a thing and my father or my cousins would interpret.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go to Puerto Rico?  Were you--when, when was the first time you went?
Speaker 2: My father took me the first time when I was about three.  My father wanted me to know his roots and, and my father and I stayed tight.  Even though my mother [Alean Hudson] and I were estranged, my father actually moved two doors from Nanny [Rachel Crosby] so he could see me every day 'cause I wouldn't move with him 'cause I loved Nanny's deal.  I loved this circus around me every day.  And so he took--would take me to always to visit my Puerto Rican side, to his sister, Olga [Olga Santiago], in Chicago [Illinois], to Puerto Rico several times.  My first time when I was about three.  And--but in that area in Coto, you know, you would hear the stories of our--of our family, and once you say that I was family, nothing--money was never any good and, you know, I just--everything was free and everybody wanna cook for you and just treat you like a king, you know.
Story_ID: 629913
Speaker 1: Your parents, where did they meet and how did they meet?
Speaker 2: They met in Lackawanna [New York].  Like I said, my, my father was a, a--it's funny.  My father was a really beautiful man, but when he was a kid, he had--he got bit by a mosquito and had malaria.  I believe it was malaria, and he had several operations, so he stayed in the hospital when he was a child I think for like six, seven months or maybe even more, several operations on his eyes, so he had one grotesque eye.  You know, it was large and it was a lot of scars around it and he always wore sunglasses, and in those sunglasses you would think he's a movie star.  He was just really beautiful to look at, you know.  And the, the women loved him.  I mean, even now if I run into old women that, that remember my father, they say, "Oh, your father.  Everybody loved Ruben [Ruben Santiago]."  And my mother was like the prize catch.  So, I don't know when and how they met and got together, but they became a, an item.  And all the black men in Lackawanna--'cause basically it was black, very poor white people and, and Puerto Ricans.  That's before the, the Arabic community came in, the Yemenite community, which is very, very prominent there now, but then it was just Puerto Ricans and black.  And all the black men used to, to want to fight my father and he used to fight.  I remember being a little kid seeing fight, two guys jump him, three guys jump him, he would fight 'cause he didn't back off anything.
Speaker 1: And why were they wanting to fight him?
Speaker 2: Because they felt that he shouldn't be with her.  And so instead of going to her and say, you know, "You, you shouldn't be with that Puerto Rican," they would go to him and say, "Leave our women alone, leave my woman alone."  Go--I don't know why they be fighting, but they be rumbling and, and he wouldn't back off nothing.  And to--for, for him, to see him fight because he was so sweet, just a very--I mean, he never laid a hand on me in, in my life and I did some things that needed a hand laid on me.  He just wouldn't.  He'd get mad.  If he got mad, it was like--he whooped you, you know.  And, and I don't know how they met, but they, they didn't stay together more than--I don't think more than two years.
Speaker 1: So, they didn't marry?
Speaker 2: No, he wanted to marry her.  He wanted to marry her and take care of the other two boys and be their father 'cause their father--Lonnie's [ph.] father never claimed him.  Chauncey's [ph.] father did claim him and not until years and years and years later.  A little bit before my mother died, she told me that Chauncey's father had raped her, which no one ever heard and my aunt who was still living when my mother died told me, "That's a lie."  And I said, "Why would she lie?"  Why would anybody tell that lie?  So, that's what she said, you know, to me and I was like, what?  And she said, yeah, but she would never tell Chauncey.  But she told me 'cause then we started getting close.  She started revealing a lot of things.  I mean, I was like, whoa, this is--that's kind of deep.  But, he took care of Chauncey.  You know, he took care of Chauncey.
Speaker 1: Chauncey's father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They were--they were close.  Chauncey stayed with my mother forever.  They stayed together and Chauncey became a drug addict.  Pierre--Lonnie, Pierre went with my grandmother.  I went with Nanny [Rachel Crosby].
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother, Alean's [Alean Hudson] mother--
Speaker 2: Jessie Hudson.
Speaker 1: --that's where Pierre went?
Speaker 2: That's where he--that's--that, that was--that was his--that was where he--who raised him.
Story_ID: 629914
Speaker 1: And you went with Nanny [Rachel Crosby]?
Speaker 2: Nanny, yeah.  Now, the, the Pennsylvania family wanted me.  They did not like me not being with them, so they fought and they took me.  They came and got me.
Speaker 1: And this is at fifth grade?
Speaker 2: No, they came and got me pretty early, you know, pretty early.  I mean, I was little, I mean, three?  And my father [Ruben Santiago] was totally distraught.  And so he drove to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to appeal to them to let him be with me and his mother who was Nanny.  Nanny wasn't his mother but he called Nanny Ma and they said, "Okay, we'll let him be with you and your mother."  And they didn't realize that Nanny wasn't his mother.  But they said, "But the one rule, he has to come to Pittsburgh every summer and stay with us for the summer so he'll know his family." So every summer, I was there until I was seventeen, eighteen.
Speaker 1: So, now, how did your family get to Lackawanna [New York]?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know how Alean [Santiago-Hudson's mother, Alean Hudson] got to Lackawanna.  My father got to Lackawanna--I know his story more.  I, I kind of know him 'cause I was with him, you know.  He came from Puerto Rico, he was chopping sugarcane and he said--and every Friday his boss sent him up this mountain to get moonshine.  And he sh- took me--when he took me to Puerto Rico showed me the mountain.  And he said--and, and you should see that mountain.  It goes into the clouds and that's where the moonshine guy was, and my father said, "I'm not going up that mountain anymore.  I'm going to go to America."  His brother, Pepe [ph.] and his sister were in, in Chicago [Illinois], so he go--my father said, and go to Chicago.  So, he went to Chicago, it was too cold.  So--well, actually he first went to Florida, he said, as he called Florida to pick oranges.  He said he might as well stay, stay chopping sugarcane.  Oranges was harder than sugarcane in his opinion.  So, he went to Chicago for a minute, didn't like it as much and then came over to Buffalo [New York] because he had a cousin, Pedro [ph.], who worked on the railroad, and he said, "They're hiring on the railroad every day," came to Lackawanna.  And literally in two days he was on the railroad, and he worked there for twenty-eight years or more off and--you know, they, they laid him off 'cause they didn't want him to get his full pension and you had to have twenty-eight straight years without a three month delay, so--layoff or interruption, so they laid him off for three months so he wouldn't get his full pension, which I found out later and fought and lost--actually won, but I had to buy his pension, which made it a loss.  They gave him his full, but I had to pay.  So, it was the way they did minorities, you know.
Story_ID: 629915
Speaker 1: So, he went to Florida, Chicago [Illinois], then Buffalo [New York] with Pedro [ph.], got that job.  He had like three jobs he said before the week was over and he had to choose, so he chose the railroad.  He liked the sound of the train, you know, and he--and that's where he spent his--he--and they never promoted him.  He kept the same job.  They gave him a raise, a little raise, but he said every year, they would bring a new young white guy in to be his boss and he would have to teach the guy how to be his boss.  The guy would ask him to do something with a certain tool and he'd say, you know, "No, no, no--you don't--you don't--you don't do this like that.  You, you take the--you hit with this?  No, you don't move it.  You, you don't (unclear), but if I move this, you--show you how to do it."  And he--my father [Ruben Santiago] would show him and the guy would say, "Oh, okay, now I know," every other year.  And I think what broke his heart more than anything 'cause he gave his life to the railroad and, you know, he wasn't one of them sit in the house kind of guys on the railroad, he was a track man.  That means, anything going wrong with the track, you take care of it.  So, in Buffalo in the winter when the track is supposed to switch so the train can go to the destination, when it get icy, it won't switch, so he had to make it switch.  He had to go on there and thaw it, beat the track over, get it lined up, lock it in, and watch the train make that move, and then he can go back to--so, and that's what he did his whole, whole career.  And he said the thing, the biggest thing that hurt him there, 'cause in the summer they would hire--if your kid was a college kid, the railroad would give you a job for the summer.  You could work with your father, make five dollars, four dollars an hour, which was a lot of money in 1974, and they wouldn't--they never hired me.  And he took me to his boss, to the big Penn Station--Penn, Penn Central--New York Central Railroad offices in Buffalo. It's, it's now abandoned, gorgeous building, took me up to the biggest boss up in an elevator and--, "This my son, you know, he, he go to college, he, he going to--he very smart, you know.  He can working, too."  They never hired me.  He did it twice and they didn't hire me and that hurt him.  And he never said anything until he was almost gone, you know, when he was like in his sixties, he admitted it to me.  He said it hurt that they didn't hire me and they hired everybody else's son.  Every white guy that brought his son got hired, but not me.  And even--he even had me come to his job and meet him while he was working on the tracks, "Meet me at so and so," and I would meet him and took him--meet his foreman and say, "Put a word in for my son.  He's good.  He's in college."  Never hired me, and that hurt him, you know.
Story_ID: 629916
Speaker 1: As a Puerto Rican man in Lackawanna [New York], did he share any other stories of--basically, of racism?
Speaker 2: No, the blacks and the Puerto Ricans mixed very well, you know, other than, you know, women conflicts which every man gonna have, but they, they partied, they--I--you know, in the movie 'Lackawanna Blues' in the beginning of it, you see all these montage of pictures, many of them are Lackawanna and some of them are Teenie Harris' [Charles "Teenie" Harris] pictures, but most of them I think are Lackawanna.  And you see pictures of, of weddings with Puerto Rican men and black women and mixed redding--weddings and it was a strong, strong family of these two cultures that mix and I think they appreciate and enjoy each other.  The black folks would go to the Puerto Rican weddings and parties and the Puerto Ricans would go to the black ones.  It was--it was kind of really beautiful at that time.  No racism there from that community, of course, racism from the white community.  We were in a segregated community pretty much unless you was dirt poor white and you had to stay with us.  And still then, you can move to the Second Ward [Buffalo, New York] when black people couldn't.  We just couldn't go over the bridge.  There's a thing that happened this weekend that was reminiscent of my youth and made me--reminded me--my--there was a park called Cazenovia Park [Buffalo, New York] and it was totally white.  It was two, three miles from where we lived and black people knew that we couldn't go there and swim in the pool.  But my father [Ruben Santiago] would put us all--he loved to swim, mainly in the lake.  He'd go to Lake Erie and swim with the waves bigger than this room, but he would take us to the park on a hot day, Cazenovia Park where you ain't supposed to go.  He would take like eight kids, "Get in, get in, everybody get in."  And he would get a cooler and he would have soda and make cold cuts and sandwiches and stuff, and we--salads, and we'd go and he would--Cazenovia, and these white people would see us get out of this big Buick, and he always kept an old Buick, an Oldsmobile, and looked like it was new even though it was old, and we would get out and the kids would be skeptical 'cause we'd be looking around at the white people like, what they getting out of here for?  And he would go and put his swimming shorts on, "Come, come, put on your--we going to swimming."  And he would come out and dive in that pool and all the white people would get out.  And he would come up after a long time and blow the water and he would say, "Get in, everybody, kids, and people, you can drink soda pop, you can eat my salad, you have a good time," to the white people.  They thought he was crazy.  And we would eventually ease into the pool and swim a little bit, but we were always uncomfortable.  Anyway, flash forward to last week.  The Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] decided they're going to have a rally in Cazenovia Park, 2016, they're gonna recruit people in the Klan.  The community, which is a mixed community around there now, which mainly white, though, poor white people and black and some Latino, decided no, the Klan ain't gonna rally in Cazenovia Creek, Cazenovia Park--Cazenovia Park, and they ran them out of there, put a whooping on them, went upside their head, snatched the shirts off of them, ripped the signs off of them (laughter).  The police had to come.  This was like two weeks ago.  And I'm like, wow, I remember my father used to go there and make us jump in the pool, you know.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: But he wanted people to know, us to know that this is a free country and he would say, "It's free, it's America, you know, free.  We can go where we want to go.  I no afraid to go.  I, I, I like everybody.  Everybody no like me, I don't care, but I like them."  And that's how he was.  And so we--everybody--they used to laugh at my father when I was little, you know, 'cause of his accent and that eye.  But when we got older, all of them dudes used to say, "I wish I had your father.  I wish I had your father."  When I played basketball, he would come kiss me and--before the game started and I hated that.  (Unclear) and I'd come over and he'd kiss me on the cheek, kiss me on the lips, "I love you."  I'd say, "Okay," and I'd go play basketball and everybody would--, "Ooh."  When we got older, everybody wished they had him.  You know, he was--he was--he was a hell of a good dad I thought, you know.
Story_ID: 629917
Speaker 1: So, I wanted to go back to your childhood.  What is your earliest memory as a child?
Speaker 2: It's really an odd memory, my earliest memory, and I remember it, too.  I was a little baby.  I couldn't even walk and I remember climbing out of my crib.  My father [Ruben Santiago] and mother [Alean Hudson] were together.  I was, you know, maybe nine months, I don't know how many months.  And I got under the crib and why I remember it so is because my mother was screaming and hollering and panicking and my father come home and they were looking for me and somebody looked, I don't remember who it was, under and I was there just under hiding, under the crib, you know, way up near the wall.  That's my earliest memory of my life--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --of, of people looking underneath and--you know, and, and, and he didn't get mad.  Nobody got really mad.  They--my mother I think was a little angry, but--or she thought I, you know, snuck out the house--you know, I don't know, somebody stole me or something.  But, that's my earliest memory in my life, of being under a crib and people looking in there.
Story_ID: 629918
Speaker 1: Take me to the house where you grew up and tell me what you remember, the sights, the sounds, the smells of your house, the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Grow--you know, growing up in, in, in--at 32 Wasson Avenue, which is basically where that movie 'Lackawanna Blues' takes place, was fascinating to me because all these people that nobody in the world wanted, nobody wanted, nobody even wanted to really look at it and--you know, Nanny [Rachel Crosby] took them in and somehow made them feel whole, I, I guess that's the best word, complete, as human beings, that they were worthy.  But these people like were children even though they were grown men, and Nanny had to manage everything of theirs.  Some people just had regular gigs and they just--what they knew was being in a rooming house.  I mean, some guys worked for the city on the dump trucks.  Some guys worked in the steel plant.  Some guys worked--this is even in the where Nanny had all the ne'er do wells with all the--excuse me.  But, they knew--they loved this rooming house 'cause Nanny took care of their needs.  She fed them.  She monitored many of their money, the people who had mental history, mental problems in their history.  Like, Nanny would dole out how much money they should have for the week, how many ci- how much cigarettes.  She would give them their cigarettes, give them their liquor.  She would have to monitor 'cause they would just go crazy and lose all their money, and in those days, they would call it getting clipped where you get drunk, somebody take your money off you, and that's why Nanny would have their money.  And she--they were like kids and she took care of them.  They were her kids.  And then the guys that could do their own, they were proud 'cause they--you know, they didn't need Nanny to buy their liquor.  They buy their own liquor and have it in their room or--but most of them still needed Nanny to feed them, and she fed you three square meals a day and, and whoever else was with you.  So--and if she didn't have it on the stove, she would start warming it up, and she usually had many pots on the stove, you know. So, growing up there, it started for, for me, a, a, a, a lust for life in stories and history because they--these people were--they were full of history.  They were full of stories and history and they were always willing to share and wanting to share, and I was always fascinated by what they shared because it was my history that I didn't know about the migration, about the South, about myths and things like haints and African rhythms and things they heard and blues.  And this was always a part of their stories and--the [U.S.] Army.  And they would tell you everything, and then you would find out your history by hearing their stories.  They don't mean to be giving you history lessons, but somebody would be talking about World War II [WWII] and somebody else would say, "Well, you wasn't nothing they didn't give you no gun."  And then I, I was wondering as a kid, why ain't getting no gun.  If you in a war, you're supposed to have a gun, right?  So I had to go run and look up at my encyclopedia.  So, Nanny bought me these encyclopedias from the people that walk around, we're selling encycloped- you know, so I could look it up, World War II.  And you would be looking trying to find out why black people didn't have guns.  Then it's, oh, they were cooks and cleaners and building bridges and cleaning up bodies and so I would--I would gather my history by listening to them tell stories.  And, but also trying to understand their disposition in the world.  Why are they all--why when the door opened 'cause it was a, a storefront where Nanny cooked, you know, like a restaurant.  It actually--that restaurant, when I was a k--a little kid, a white woman and her son ran that restaurant.  It was called the Quick Lunch [Lackawanna, New York].  And we just had all--we just had all the rooms, but we didn't have the storefront.  So, Nanny's apartment was above the restaurant.  That was our apartment, though our bathroom was in the hall--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in Buffalo [New York], in the hall.  So when that downstairs door opened in the winter when it's like thir- thirty [degrees] below, that chill come up.  So, Nanny eventually bought that from the lady.  You know, she left and Nanny had the whole building, so that's where Nanny did all her cooking.  It was a long counter, a, a, a, a glass case for bric-a-brac and all that stuff and any tool or anything Bill [Bill Crosby] brought in, her husband.  And so I was--I was raised there amongst some--incredible colorful people.  Most of them, like I said, were illiterate.  But they, they treated me like this little prince because I was special to Nanny.  If you were special to Nanny, nothing could happen to me there.
Story_ID: 629919
Speaker 1: The world was pushing in on me in school and in--you know, where they look at me like this little kid that's living in a rooming house whose mother [Alean Hudson] is in jail right now and his father [Ruben Santiago] is not with him, so everybody thought my father had left me.  My father was two doors from me.  And so, you know, they would watch me, like send social services to look at me and watch me, he's living in this dangerous place.  You know, there's crazy people there and there's--you know, watch this kid.  So, cars would park and watch me, follow me from school to the rooming house, and finally they came in and, and, you know, went into my room and asked me a lot of questions.  There's a scene in 'Lackawanna Blues' where I'm sitting there with a little bowtie on and Nanny [Rachel Crosby] is really nervous 'cause she thought they were gonna take me.  And, and Bill [Bill Crosby] just said, "You all can't take him.  Get the hell out of my house."  And I thought they was gonna take me for sure then, but they were scared of Bill.  They realized--and particularly one--there was one teacher, a white teacher.  Her name was--in the second grade, her name was Miss Patton [ph.], and then she married another teacher named Nowak [ph.].  I remember this very clearly.  In the fifth grade, they were married, so--and that's when I was getting ready to leave, and she took a real interest in me.  She's the first one who put me in a play, I believe it was.  I was with my mother at this time in Buffalo [New York].  And this woman kind of felt something was up with me.  You know, 'cause some time I come and, and my coat sleeve would be this long, I'd have on a beautiful leather jacket, like a jacket that they couldn't afford, but the sleeve, it would be--instead of me wearing a fourteen, it would be a men's thirty-eight, so the sleeve would be--you know, where's he doing to--you know, so she followed me a little while and I think she reported that I was, you know, something was up at my house.  And so they, they trailed me a little while and they tried to get me, but I didn't wanna go anywhere.  I didn't wanna leave Nanny.
Story_ID: 629920
Speaker 1: --I'm a little confused as to what--when you were with your mother [Alean Hudson], you were in--Lackawanna and Buffalo [New York] are two--
Speaker 2: Two different places.
Speaker 1: --different places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, just--what--
Speaker 2: Lackawanna, New York.
Speaker 1: Did Nanny [Rachel Crosby] also move?
Speaker 2: No.  Nanny--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nanny came from Farmville, Virginia.  When we talk about Nanny, I'll give you what--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I know about her.  But, Lackawanna is a l- is, is a community that's surrounded by three steel plants and it thrived so big that it, it was its own community and it was a hot, hot little spot.  I mean, Buffalo was ten min- downtown Buffalo was ten minutes from Lackawanna--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in your car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Boom, Buffalo.  But, it's distinctively different than they--you know, than Lackawanna which is this little community, really small community, I don't know how many people, twenty-eight thousand, I don't know, but had tremendous pride that we were Lackawanna.  And we always competed with Buffalo, which is a huge--was a huge city.  It was the second largest city in the State of New York at that time, I think the fifteenth largest city in the nation in--at that time.  It was huge, big money in that town, Buffalo.  And--but they came to Lackawanna 'cause I, I saw Malcolm X in Lackawanna, I saw Muhammad Ali in Lackawanna. Billie Holiday sang there, Hot Lips Page, Wynonie Harris.  All these blues belters come through Lackawanna because mon- money, people just flying--money flying, all these steel plants.
Speaker 1: Because of the steel plants.
Speaker 2: So, but still, Buffalo had the money, too.
Speaker 1: And so Lackawanna is near Buffalo.  How far is it from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], which was the other--the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five--in those days, it was like a five hour drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, straight down the 90 [Interstate 90]--81 [Interstate 81], straight down the highway.  It was an easy--you know, in those days, it was a car society, so you would--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --drive to Cleveland [Ohio] like this, drive to, to Toronto [Canada], boom, drive to Pittsburgh, wasn't nothing.  People get in the car, "Ah, I got a new car, Doc, let's go."
Story_ID: 629921
Speaker 1: So, when you were describing the rooming house, this was in Lackawanna [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lackawanna.
Speaker 1: This was in Lackawanna.
Speaker 2: Only time I lived in Buffalo [New York] was with my mother [Alean Hudson] in an apartment.
Speaker 1: Right.  And that was when the teacher--
Speaker 2: Teacher, Miss Patton [ph.].
Speaker 1: --was, was following you.
Speaker 2: Kind of watching me.  So, she wanted to adopt me and she put all--full court press on I want to adopt this child.  And she actually came and met Nanny [Rachel Crosby], and Nanny really took a liking to her, but Nanny wasn't ready to give me to nobody, but she always would go to me and say, "What you--what do you want?"  "And I want to be with you, Nanny.  I don't wanna go nowhere but be with you."  But she would let Miss Patton show me a different life.  So, Miss Patton would take me out to her home and we would plant little pine trees and I would eat dinner at their house and, you know, just show me a different life, show me what a, a standing house with just a father, mother, and kids looked like and what a little community outside of this so called ghetto looked like, to show me a different life.  Nanny would let me go to her house, you know, and she'd bring me on home, just really nice (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever want to go--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --stay with Miss Patton?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't stay with anybody but Nanny.  I didn't--I wouldn't stay with my mother.  I wouldn't stay with my father [Ruben Santiago].  I would go nowhere.  Nanny's deal was the best deal in the world.  I can do anything I want in that place.  I can build anything and mess with any tool, discover anything here.  'Cause Bill [Bill Crosby] had tools everywhere.  He was a mechanic.  And I could--he--you know, Bill would--any given day, he'd be working on something.  "Come on, Doc, we're going--we're going take a motor out of this car."  "What?"  "You know, you take all these bolts out and call me."  He'd go drink and I'd be taking bolts out.  "Uncle Bill, I got all the bolts out."  All right.  He come. "All right, now we're gonna lift it out here.  We're gonna--," you know, so it was--it was--it was fantasy island.  It was the funnest thing.  And then it got some time they would start fighting about things and knives would come out and blood would be flying.  You know, pistols would be drawn.  And Nanny would walk in the middle of any of it.  I swear to you, she could stop pistols being drawn, knives out.  She just walk in the middle and say, "Put that away.  Don't--no, no, no, not in here.  Put that down.  You're gonna have to take that argument--so, and sit down, boy.  You know, come here.  You go on over there."  And I'd be like--I've seen it.  I've seen it so many times.  I'd be like why they didn't kill Nanny.  'Cause I'd be scared.  I wouldn't be like Nanny gonna handle it.  I'd be like oh my god, Nanny gonna die.  And then Nanny--no--nobody, no one ever reared up at Nanny.  I don't know why.  It was just respect.
Story_ID: 629922
Speaker 1: How many rooms were in the house?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Had to be about twenty--I would say around twenty, yeah, about twenty rooms.
Speaker 1: And were they normally all filled so they were--
Speaker 2: Always all filled.  Maybe she'd keep one in case a cousin or somebody showed up and she had to--she'd keep one, you know.  Some people stayed, stayed, stayed with her their whole lives.  Some people did better and went and got apartments.  Most of her roomers stayed with her, you know.  Some of them she had gotten from the mental hospital who had been writing her letters, "Come and get me out, I'm ready, I'm clean, I'm ready, my mind is together," and Nanny [Rachel Crosby] would go and interview them.  There's a scene in 'Lackawanna Blues' where she gets Mr. Taylor [Ol'lem Taylor]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --with the one leg, Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] played, that's true.  That happened a lot.  I'd ride with her.  "Come on and ride with me, Doc."  Called me Doc 'cause I thought I would be a doctor, and I did become a doctor eventually, but not the kind of doctor they thought I'd be.  But--so they were kind of like bound, you know, to this rooming house, you know, and most of them couldn't read, you know.  So, Nanny would get their checks, get--take them to their doctor appointments.  If their mother or somebody in the family died, she would either put them on Greyhound bus and put a little money like pinned in the side of the--or, or either she would take them.  So, it was just--it was just--it was beautiful to see that community, you know, that is lost now and no longer--and, and, and it's gone now.  But, I, I understood what community meant and in that rooming house, this immediate community and then Lackawanna [New York], the larger community, I understood the importance and rel- relevance and responsibility that each one had to the next one.
Story_ID: 629923
Speaker 1: Nanny [Rachel Crosby], so she obviously was the pivotal person for you as a child.  Tell me her story.  Where, where is she from?
Speaker 2: Nanny came from a little town called Pamplin, Virginia, right outside of Farmville, Virginia.  Lynchburg [Virginia] was the big cities, Farmville, Lynchburg, Pamplin, and every summer, she would take a bus load down there.  If you had like twenty dollars, she put you on a bus.  And she lost money on that every year.  She would take a bus down there, people with forty cars would drive down there too.  But anyway, Nanny came--Nanny came up to--the story goes that Nanny came up to New Jersey with her husband whose name was Johnson [ph.], and they came to New Jersey and he got a job I think in a bakery and she got a job cleaning white people's houses, and that's how she came north.  And from there, her sister, Vi- she had two sisters, Viola [ph.] and Clarece [ph.], and they were always very, very close.  And there was another adopted sister named Aunt Mittie [ph.].  We called her Aunt Mittie.  And they--her--Aunt Mittie's mother, Aunt Jenny [ph.], raised those girls when Nanny's mother died when Nanny was young.  Aunt Mittie--Aunt Jenny took Nanny and her two sisters and that's how they became sisters with Aunt Mittie, little four of them, and they had a brother.  He ended up dying pretty early, but he had a family as well.  So, so Nanny came up to--and she just started like working for white people and, and cleaning their houses.  And one time, this white lady just totally humiliated her, just humiliated her beyond reproach, and she couldn't take it anymore, and so she just said, you know, "I'm gonna be my own boss."  And she got an apartment that had like three rooms and rented the three rooms, and still did her work and took her car and would take people back and forth to work.  She was just industrious and she just--it just grew.  It just grew.
Story_ID: 629924
Speaker 1: We have to talk about--there was one other woman who was my godmother between these two women.  They were the foundation of who I am.
Speaker 2: And who is she?
Speaker 1: Her name was Mattie Overton.
Speaker 2: And where--was she in Lackawanna [New York], too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lackawanna.  My whole life is in Lackawanna.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: And so tell me about her.
Speaker 1: My--I--we--I called her Mama Overton.  Mama--Nanny [Rachel Crosby] was not a disciplinarian to me.  I, I had free rein.  It was like--and I took advantage of it.  I had two kids when I was nineteen.  I just did anything I wanted to do.  But I wasn't a bad boy in that respect, I just had free rein.  Nanny thought I needed more discipline and so this woman in the community was a very upstanding woman, big church, church going woman with her husband and a house and she had adopted a few boys from her family, Mattie Overton had.  Nanny--and I was very close with two of the boys she adopted and Nanny asked her would she be my godmother and help with me, with the discipline aspect, give me what they call the ugly stick and kind of give me rules.  And so she was the--when Nanny couldn't discipline me, she'd say, "Go see Mama Overton.  Mama wanna talk to you."  And I would go down there and Mama would lay the law out, you know.  And so those two women were the foundation of who I am.  Mama Overton had a husband, Adolph Overton, who was the first black councilman in Lackawanna, one of the first black businessmen later when Lackawanna integrated.  When they integrated, all the black businesses were gone, Papa Overton still had two businesses, you know.  So that family had a--the things Miss Patton [ph.] had, a house with a father and mother, backyard, furniture outside, you know, real regular living, not rooming house living.  And so Nanny wanted me to have that.  And we're talking about three blocks.  So, I'm sta- I got a room at Nanny's, I got a room at Mama Overton's.  So, depending on what I wanted to do, be where I'd go, you know.  So, it just was a b- it was--you know, it was a beautiful upbringing, you know, just love.  The most important thing that I think that they all offered me was a lot of love.  It just had a lot of love because the world was telling me I wasn't loved.  I mean, teachers were saying that I wasn't special, you know, and Mama Overton--Nanny wasn't great.  Nanny went to third grade.  Mama actually had a little piece of college.  I think she went a year and she's from Bessmer, Alabama area, and she would go to school and argue about it, that I was special, that I was smart as any kid in there and that I should not be--you know, I should be with the smartest kids and Mama fought for it.  And they put me in all the advanced classes and I proved myself.  And if anything went wrong and somebody had to go to school, it would be Mama 'cause she, she just was--she was--she was a harder--you know, the way she would present herself to, to them.  Nanny was a little more--she could get along easier in--with--you know, she was from, from the South and older than Ma, and so she would--she wouldn't like lick your boots, but Nanny could listen and, and Mama wouldn't--certain things you would say to Mama, she wasn't gonna hear it.  She'd say, "This is how it's gonna be."  You know, "That boy, if you do--you know, if he go wrong, you call me.  Don't you put your hands on him.  You put your hands on him, I'm coming here, and if I come here, it's me and you."  That's Mama Overton.  Nanny would be like, oh, you had to put a paddle--'cause the teachers in them days would paddle you.  And they didn't--you know, they didn't care a lot for me.  I mean, the guidance counselor said I wouldn't be anything, I shouldn't go to college, you know, things like that.  And Mama would say, "Don't you ever tell that boy that."  And Nanny would be like, "Well, you should do what you want to do, baby.  It would be, be nice to go to college.  But, you know, if you want to work, do what you want to do."  And Mama would be, "No, you're going to college."  So between (laughter) the bal- balance of these two women, you know.
Story_ID: 629925
Speaker 1: What was the school system like in Lackawanna [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, they had--they had the Catholic school and they had the public school.  And, you know, I was a welfare kid, so I--you know, I couldn't go to Catholic school, so I went to the public school.  Until you got to the--which was all black until you got to high school 'cause only one high school, one high school, so that was integration.  So, they bused us to the one Lackawanna High School [Lackawanna, New York] and we were greeted terribly from the--and--but the older upper classmen would tell us young boys that were going--young boys and girls that was coming in, you're like when we walk in school the first day, you gotta find your classroom, we all walk in together.  The bigger guys are gonna be in the front and we're gonna be in the back and you all little small fries stay in the middle.  You know, don't break the pack.  Because the white kids would be lined up on each side of the hall watching us come in.  There would be two hundred of us.  And you would hear certain things.  Certain white kids, you know, they were happy to see us, didn't mind.  Other white kids would be calling you names and spitting at you.  And we walk--you know, and the bigger guys were, were rough.  You know, you didn't want to mess with them.  And we'd find our classroom, then we had to split.  You would be one of two black kids in the classroom with thirty white kids.  And so that's when we didn't count.  'Cause on the black school, you counted.  They knew your name, they knew your mama, y'all all went to St. Mark's Church [St. Mark's A.M.E Zion Church, Lackawanna, New York] or Mt. Olive [Mt. Olive Missionary Baptist Church, Lackawanna, New York] or Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church, Lackawanna, New York] or First Baptist [First Baptist Church, Lackawanna, New York] or Third [Third Baptist Church, Buffalo, New York], so we all knew each other, even the teachers, Mr. Battle [ph.].  Mr. Battle was the history teacher, but on the weekend, he had the soul mobile where he would sell records out of a truck.  So, we all knew each other, you know.  So--but going to that white school, you raise your hand all day, they never called me.  So, I went from a 95 average to literally a 65 [percent], and that's when they gave me the psychological tests.  See, we ain't talked about that.  When they said, "What's wrong with this boy?"  I didn't care.  I just gave up.  You know, and so I--and then I just got started--then, you know, I started fighting, you know.  Mainly, you know, that's when we started having race riots and they had to call in the--it was rough.  Lackawanna High School had a rough history.
Speaker 1: And did Mama [Mattie Overton] come to Lackawanna High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They didn't want to--they didn't want to see Mama.  Mama would show up, you know--'cause, you know, I would be fighting.  You know, I was like, you know, starting with Chauncey [ph.] we said earlier on and I, I, I started thumping.  You know, so I, I thumped.  You know, they called fighting, they're thumping.  You know, I thump with you, you know.  And I wouldn't be disrespected.  You know, I mean some time you stand in a hall and white kids would stand two floors up and they would just spit on the top of your head, just drop spit on the top of your head.  You feel something going--you look up and you see somebody just, you know.  You would be like, yo- you be running up the stairs.  You know, and I see him.  I say I'm gonna get him at lunchtime.  Lunchtime, boop.  You know, so I wasn't the only one, you know.  And we would all say we're gonna meet in the cafeteria at this time and we're gonna start rumbling and we'd start rumbling.
Story_ID: 629926
Speaker 1: So, they called the Peace Corps and people in--
Speaker 2: The Peace Corps came to your school [Lackawanna High School, Lackawanna, New York]?
Speaker 1: The Peace Corps was trying to tutor all us black kids and keep us kind of calm.  And the first guy, I done jumped the story way ahead.  But, the first guy, I couldn't stand him and he didn't--couldn't stand me.  And I told him, "I don't--white man, I don't need you teaching me nothing." I was militant then.  I'm black man on the head, 'Black Fire' ['Black Fire: An Anthology of Afro-American Writing,' Amiri Baraka and Larry Neal] in my back pocket and my black glove on my left hand.  "I don't want--I don't want to talk to you, you know."  "I'm here to help you."  "I don't--I don't need you, need your help."  I don't--you know, but the second guy was instrumental in me going to college, Robert Ambrogi.  He just refused to not help me, not let me--
Speaker 2: And he was from the Peace Corps as well?
Speaker 1: (Nods head) Ph- out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: And that--what did he do to encourage you?
Speaker 1: He was ridiculous.  He would not leave.  He would--if I went to play basketball, he would come play basketball, and could play.  If I--if I--you know, when I came out of my house in the morning, he would be sitting on the steps of Mama [Mattie Overton]--Mama's house.  He would be sitting there on the porch trying to give me bio questions so I could do the bio region.  I don't want to--you know, it was a summer school for bio.  I don't want to do bio.  I'm not gonna do bio.  So finally I said, "Let me tell you something, white man, if you eat chitlins, I'll take the bio and I'll study it if you eat chitlins."  He said, "Yeah, I'll eat chitlins.  What's chitlins?"  I said, "Okay."  So, I ran out, I said, "Mama, Mama, the white guy sitting on the porch said he gonna eat chitlins."  Mama said, "Not if you don't clean them."  I said, "But, he, he gonna eat them."  She said, "He ain't eating nothing, you ain't eating nothing if you don't clean them.  I ain't cleaning all them chitlins."  So, me and Bob cleaned the chitlins and mom cleaned them again, obviously 'cause we didn't do good.  I wasn't a big chitlin guy either.  But, so we cleaned them, Bob ate them, liked them, and I passed the bio.  And me and Bob, Robert Ambrogi.  He's in Princeton [New Jersey] now.  He, he lives in Princeton now.  I've--I tracked him down after thirty, forty years.  We found each other, you know.  And, and I always told the man, you know, "You, you, you helped me get to college [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York]," you know, 'cause you couldn't get to college if you didn't pass your sciences, you know.  So, it--he was helpful.  The first guy before him, all I wanted to do was fight him.  I said, I'll fight you.  I'll take you outside and fight with you.  He's like, "Why are we gonna fight?"  And he was rough, too, big old thick neck, you know, short guy but very well built.  He said, "You don't wanna fight me 'cause I'll knock you out."  I said, "No, if you knock me out, where you gonna live 'cause I'll find out where you live."  And he would be like, "This dude is crazy."  You know, I'm just--
Story_ID: 629927
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned really the cost of integration, you know, that when integration occurred in Lackawanna [New York], the businesses, black businesses closed.  Can you talk a little bit about your growing up and when integration began and what, what you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember just the--it was a big change 'cause everything--you know, the pharmacy, there were black people working behind the counter at the pharmacy.
Speaker 1: And about when was this?
Speaker 2: It was early '60s [1960s], somewhere in the '60s [1960s]--excuse me--excuse me.  Like, Nanny [Rachel Crosby] would send me up to, to the fish market and--where they had live chickens in the thing and the lady would take--kill the chickens and bur-dah-dah-dah-dah, the thing would take the feathers off and she would gut them and put the little packages inside, and, and, and the fish was just on ice and Nanny would say, "Go get me two dozen butterfish, about a little bit bigger than your hand."  And my--I would be--my hand, when I get there, I say, "Miss Loretta [ph.], I need two dozen butterfish a little bit bigger than that."  You know, so, then all of a sudden Miss Loretta was gone and everybody was going to the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] and everybody was going to Tops across the bridge.  And the black doctor, Dr. Dunne [ph.], you know, people were going to white doctors then and Dr. Dunne and--I just noticed the pharmacies and everything started closing 'cause everybody took the better deal where they got a quarter less, a nickel less.  They went over to the white stores and the black stores just closed.  And all the delis which were black or some of them, major--you know, all became white or they became eventually Yemenite, Arabic.  And there was only one black store, you know, we called--deli in New York, and we called it the colored store 'cause it was owned by black folks.  And I just hated to see all that go, you know.  It just--it just--the money was just going out of the community and the--and, and the community was going down, you know.  And so that was--it stayed.  It stayed on my mind.
Speaker 1: Did--in, in the conversation at Nanny's, did people talk about integration?  Because it, it, it was something that people wanted or the thought was that they wanted it, but the effect may not--
Speaker 2: We wanted access.  We wanted to be--we wanted access to where we wanted to go and I think that accessed--access opened up a different world and different possibilities, and people liked the different possibilities and neglected what they had.  They didn't realize what we had.  The black bars started closing 'cause you can actually go to a white bar and go to Curly's [Curly's Grille, Lackawanna, New York] and go to those places whether they wanted you there or not.  You can actually stop and have a beer with a guy you work with whereas, you know--you know--you know, it was some mixing going on, but not--you, you knew when you weren't wanted.  You knew where you were not wanted, like Cazenovia Park [Buffalo, New York].  You know, they made it clear, you're not wanted here.  There was only like one black family in the Second Ward [Buffalo, New York], the, the--a very good friend of mine, and there was one black family in the Third Ward [Buffalo, New York].  There's three wards, First, Second, and Third.  The First Ward [Buffalo, New York] is the--is the--where we stayed, which is right next to the steel plant.  So, they didn't talk a lot about integration.
Story_ID: 629928
Speaker 1: Some of the guys were kind of like community activists kind of guys, but they could be bought, most of them.  I, I, I realized as I got older, they were getting bought by the politicians, getting--given job--promised jobs, I'll get your son a job if you get all these black people to vote for me.  And so the politicians ran.  They were always white until my godfather, Papa Overton [Adolph Overton], was elected as the black--first black councilman.  But they put another black councilman up against him and tried to split the community, and they did a decent job.  And people were getting bought.  They would come into Nanny's [Rachel Crosby] and try to get you to vote.  Many people voted the way Nanny voted, so when the politicians--they always came to get Nanny's.  If Nanny went a certain way--but she would never talk to people about who she voting for, but she didn't want, want to hear a whole lot of political stuff.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year Overton won that election or around what time?
Speaker 1: Pop- it was in the '70s [1970s].  It was in the '70s [1970s] and he, he was adamant about doing stuff in the community.  I mean, he paved the playgrounds that were all cracked.  He put new baskets up.  He put lights in the--in the playground, we can play at night.  We never had lights.  The white folks had lights.  We, we wanted to play at night, we had to get in our cars and go over to the white section until they got a little gang and ran us out and then we get back in our cars and run back.  But, we usually had enough guys that you wouldn't want to really challenge us.  But, they didn't want us playing on their courts.  But they had lights.  We didn't have lights.  So, if we got into a beef at night, oh, man, I'll bust you.  Well, come on, let's play.  Well, it's too dark over here.  Let's go on over to Ridge [Road] or let's go over to Bethlehem Park [Lackawanna, New York], you know, in the white section and, and we'd get in our cars and go over there and play.  And then Pops said, "No, you ain't gotta go nowhere.  We're gonna put lights."  Put lights, had a--made a basketball summer league tournament, you know.  He empowered us and it, it--that was--that was wonderful.  That was a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 629929
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned the race riots.  So, there were--they were happening all over the United States in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  When were they happening in Lackawanna [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when--in the '60s [1960s], '67 [1967], '68 [1968] when Buffalo [New York] had the--you--they were burning Buffalo down, and Lackawanna started rioting, too.  That was the race riots there, but the integration in the schools, that was a different thing.  That was us in the schools not wanting to put up with anymore junk.  I mean, I, I mean--some, some--I, I got to be very, very friendly with a--with a lot of the white students and to this day still respect them.  I don't--I don't go to any class reunions or anything like that and they try to get me every year because I've become, you know, this fixture in Lackawanna.  I have probably one of the first black pictures to go up on the wall of fame because my son, Broderick [Broderick Santiago], "My dad should be up there," but they didn't want me up there 'cause I had caused so much junk when I was there.  But, you know, I--if I see them, I communicate with them in that respect.  I don't--you know, I have a lot of respect and--but, I was not treated well.  I mean, the principals there--and part of it is my fault.  You know, I wasn't very warm to them.  I was not happy with them.  I was not happy not--I didn't matter, and I always mattered.  I always, always was in the spelling bee, always was in the science competition, always was, you know, doing my acting at the Friendship House community center [Lackawanna, New York], which is the--was the center that we all came to do our athletics or our art.  And that was in--all in Lackawanna.  That was, you know, us.  Then I go to this place and I don't matter.  I'm not this actor.  I'm not this singer.  I'm not this ball player.  I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm not this great student with these little buttons that I would win, winning who's the smartest competition.  I didn't matter.  And so I just said, well, I don't matter?  Okay, cool.  I'm gonna play the hell out of it.  You don't matter either, and so I got angry.  And so little things would happen and people would do certain things and, and we just--we not having that.  So, it's gonna--it's on at lunch.  And the word would get around and everybody would get together.  If you were scared, just stay the hell away from there and we would throw down.  But, we followed the big horses.  We had some big horses with us, some tough dudes.
Story_ID: 629930
Speaker 1: So, high school was--represented a shift for you because you weren't celebrated the way that you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just acknowledged--
Speaker 1: --at home--
Speaker 2: --not even celebrated.  You know, my teachers acknowledged me when we were at the black school.  We were at Lincoln, Lincoln Junior High School [Lackawanna, New York] which was--you know, we had black teachers.  We had white teachers, too.  But, Miss King [ph.] and Mr. Battle [ph.], and--we had black teachers.  And, and we had very good teachers and they knew us.  They knew our families.  They knew us, you know, and the white, white school in Lackawanna High School [Lackawanna, New York], and, and it was that way for me all through my education, going to white institutions, going to--that's why I wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at one time and, and, and Loften Mitchell at Binghamton wouldn't let me go, so I stayed at Binghamton University [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  And--but we're always struggling when we're in somebody else's institutions to find out who we are.  And when you go to--that's the one thing I do love about the, the, the historical black colleges [HBCUs], that's why I support them, because they teach you who you are.  You learn who you are.  And they don't shy away from the history where people are heroes that look like me, you know.  You know, going to all white schools, every hero was a white guy (laughter), you know.  It would be like white guy invented this, white guy did that, white guy did that, white woman did this, white--you know, white, white, white, white, white.  Wow, I need to be white.  But the black schools, they would be telling you who you are and, and I admired it, you know, so--
Speaker 1: And you had that in elementary and junior high school?
Speaker 2: I had that--yeah.  Not so much elementary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I was back and forth.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But junior high, yeah.  You, you could find out who you were, you know, particularly just looking at black leaders teaching you.  You felt like a black authority figure.  Other than Nanny [Rachel Crosby], you know, and then Papa Overton [Adolph Overton] became a councilman, that was huge, but, you know, race--some people will paint it rosier.  I'm just telling you the way I saw it.
Story_ID: 629931
Speaker 1: So, talk about the social scene at your high school [Lackawanna High School, Lackawanna, New York].
Speaker 2: You know, it--you know, you, you--when you mix all these, you know, these, these, these volat- these, these volatile people together, particularly--and, you know, we always had some great athletes.  You know, we, we had to--we said we're gonna excel in something.  We're gonna kick you all butt in something, so there always was some--I think Papa Overton [Adolph Overton] was on the first integrated--he was a great athlete, by the way, coming through high school.  I think he was one of the first black students on the--in Lackawanna [New York] to play in--on the high school team.  But--and the cheerleaders were always all white, all white.  You know, our basketball team, you know, when I played, it was like eleven black men, black teenagers and, and two--maybe two, three white and, you know, all white.  So, the basketball players started dating white girls, you know, and I, I said I'm not dating no white girl.  I'm not even looking at no white girl.  And finally I think one of my brothers, somebody said, "You gotta take a look at this girl.  She's--she won't even talk to nobody and she's looking at you."  I said, "I ain't taking no look at--." I looked at that girl, I was like, whoa.  So, so I, I met her a couple times, you know, just hanging out trying to see what, what is this about?  And the white kids went crazy and they literally wanted to fight and it got deep.  Mama Overton [Mattie Overton] said to the--as a matter of fact, I, I remember this boy that was her ex-boyfriend, the girl that was looking at me and I went out a couple times with, went and threatened her and so I said you--I said, "When I come back to school, I'm gonna choke--I'm gonna choke the hell out of him."  So, I went in his classroom and caught him, grabbed him, and, you know, put a grip on him and started choking on him.  And they were like--just send me to the principal's office.  And he said, you know, "Are you nuts?"  You know, and the principal closed the door--closed the door, he said, I'll kick--he said, "You want to grab somebody?  Grab me."  He was a big principal, Mr. Bayland [ph.], it's in history.  And Bayland said, you know, closed the door, he said--he said, "I will kick your ass," to me, and I told him, "Then where you gonna live 'cause if you do anything to me, I'll burn your house down," that's what I told him.  He got--he just--you know, "What you need, you need a--you need a psychological test, you, you is crazy."  I said, "No, I'm just not letting you hurt me."  You know, when you grabbing people and dah, dah, dah.  Mama came to school and she said, "Don't you ever threaten him, threaten me."  She said, "Let them kids do what they're gonna do, they're kids.  Let them do what they're gonna do."  And so, so Mom had a talk with me.  She said, "Do I want you to be going out with white girls?  No.  I want you to be going with some of this little cute girls around here, but you do whatever you want to do.  This is a free country.  Whatever you do, as long as you don't do wrong, I'm gonna be here for you."  You know, so we couldn't go see the little white girls.  The white girls could come to my house.  So they come, you know, a little car pull up and three or four white girls come out (laughter), be like, where they going?  To Mama's house.  And Mama wasn't crazy happy about it, but she said, "You know, if you all going to meet, you all going to meet, I'd rather for you to meet here," and that lasted (snaps fingers), that long.  You know, but it, it, it really was the start of integration for us.  You know, women and men, that always changed just like the movie 'Loving' coming out.  That changes things.  You know, people when you get a tingle in your loins as Mom used to say, you know, it changes, changes things and we started seeing each other in a different light in that, that respect.  Nobody ever really got serious about anything, but the thrill that, that it was something different and new because our girls in Lackawanna were going with, with the hot shots in Buffalo [New York].  You know, we couldn't get--you know, they, they--, "No, I don't wanna talk to you, you're a Lackawanna boy.  I'm going to Buffalo big shots."  So we--where are we gonna turn?  So, you know, we would go on to Buffalo, too, but the Buffalo boys would be jumping on us.  They want to beat you up, you know twenty of them.  You know, the brothers want to jump on you.  I'm like, man, can I--you're taking my women, you know.  So, anyway, we, we were looking at options at the time (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 629932
Speaker 1: You mentioned that by the age of nineteen, you had two children.
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Where were your children in this--so, you were in high school [Lackawanna High School, Lackawanna, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you ever take care of them or were they--
Speaker 2: Always took care of them, still--
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: --take care of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Still take care of them.  You know, only thing that was required of me was to don't have no more babies.  Mama [Mattie Overton] and Nanny [Rachel Crosby] both put the gauntlet down and to be a father. Whatever I couldn't afford, they would take care of.  Whatever I could afford, do.  Every summer, work my butt off, spend my money on my kids, take care of my kids.  Other than that, be a father, never stop being a father.  And so I, I had the luxury of still being daddy, teaching them baseball, taking them to games, teaching them basketball, teaching them math, and didn't--and didn't have to be broke all the time because Nanny and Mama Overton, and almost the entire community would throw in somehow to make sure that the kids, you know, did well and went places they needed to go, had rides.  And so my kids and--and I took them with me a lot, even when I was in college [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], you know.
Speaker 1: Where did they live?
Speaker 2: Lackawanna [New York].
Speaker 1: Did they live with you or with--
Speaker 2: Both of them lived with their mothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, one of them came and he came with me in the--he--in, I think he was in the fifth--maybe--excuse me, maybe he was--might have been seven years old or less--excuse me.  His mother moved and took him to Omaha [Nebraska] and got into an incident in Omaha, and they called and said, "Is this your son?  You should come get him or we're gonna put him in a home."  And so I went--Nanny said, "We gotta get the baby."  So, we got him and brought him to Lackawanna.  He stayed with us.  Then with the mother, when she cleared up her slate, she came and Nanny got her an apartment.
Speaker 1: And what are those children's names?
Speaker 2: My, my oldest son's name is Broderick [Broderick Santiago].  He--he's a minister in Atlanta [Georgia].  He's a beautiful dude, man.  I mean just--very proud of him.  He's a great--he's a--he's a master percussionist and on, on Saturday night, you could hear him playing with, with--at the club with, with the big Cuban orchestra and on Sunday, you can hear him preach.  So--and he's just as honest about both of them, love, love him.  And, and Ruben [Ruben Santiago III] is the middle one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who I thought was my only son.  He's younger than Broderick, but the community told me I had an older son and I, I--you know, they kept telling Nanny and I was trying to avoid the possibility of that.  And then I came one day, Mama Overton had the baby--Nanny used to have the baby at the rooming house, but Nanny didn't push the baby on me.  Nanny would have the baby on the counter and--, "Ain't that a cute baby?"  But Nanny didn't say, that's your baby.  But, Mama Overton heard rumors and said, "Bring the baby to my house," so they brought the baby to Mama's house, and Mama called me, "Come on down here."  And I came and the baby was in the bassinet and she just looked at the baby and had a--I have no baby pictures of me, so she had my youngest picture, which I was about four, and she said--and had him.  She said, "Look at this baby."  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Look at his ears and then look at his fingers, look at his fingertips, look at him, look at him.  Who he look like?"  And I said, "He look like a cute little baby."  She says, "Who he look like?  Just be honest with yourself."  I said, "He look, look a little bit--he could be--we from, from the same tribe but, you know--," and she said, "No, no, no.  That's your baby."  And she said, "If you're gonna be a man, you're gonna take care of your baby because if you drive by this baby and the baby is laying in the gutter and you're driving your Lincoln Continental and pass him, you say that's my baby and I never looked at him," she said, "or you look on TV and see he's the president of the United States, you'll say--."  I'll never forget she said this to me.  She said, "The president of the United States and you'll say, 'Man, that's my son.  He don't even know me.'"  She said, "Take care of your, your kid if you believe that's your kid."  And I said, "Yeah, my--that's my--that's my kid."  And from that day on, I went downtown--(laughter) this is an interesting piece of history.  I went downtown.  I said it was gonna be my son, I'm gonna go downtown and claim this boy, so if she ever needs anything, they'll know this is my son.  So, when I went to sign my name, people looking up like this out of the cubicles like, somebody signing their name for a kid in the black community?  You know, it, it was like--bam, I signed my name.  From that--they handed me a bill before I could walk out of the door, the hospital bill.  I was like six thousand dollars?  What the--what--so and I--I, you know, took care of him, took care of both of them my whole life.  I used to bring them to New York [New York].  When I first started working good in New York, I used to bring them here a lot and, and take them all around, take them all around, see stuff, try to cook for them and, you know, be like--my son, Ruben, was here a couple weeks ago with his daughter and he was laughing about when I made my first pancakes 'cause he was always smart.  He knew I couldn't cook.  He'd be like--I said, "Ruben, how many pancakes you want?"  He'd be like, "One, one or two."  I said, "Broderick, how many you want?"  "A lot, lot, lots, give me a lot," (laughter).  We couldn't eat them pancakes.  They were like hockey pucks, you know.  But, yeah, I'm, I'm crazy about them boys and I have two younger ones.
Story_ID: 629933
Speaker 1: So, tell me--we'll get to the younger ones [Trey Santiago-Hudson and Lily Santiago-Hudson] when we get to your wife [Jeannie Brittan] and that part of your life.  College, you, you said that the man [Robert Ambrogi] from the Peace Corps really was instrumental in helping you to decide to go to college.
Speaker 2: Not dec- not decide, to help me pass what I needed to pass, do the SAT to get a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Got it.
Speaker 2: --good enough score to get into college.
Speaker 1: And so you went to Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  Why did you make that choice?
Speaker 2: It was--it was--it was odd because I applied to all these schools 'cause I liked the names of them, you know, like Lincoln University or Brockport [The College at Brockport, Brockport, New York] or whatever, and I had a buddy and he got accepted to Binghamton, we were very, very good friends, so we said, let's go to Binghamton together.  You know, let's go somewhere together, somebody from Lackawanna [New York] be with you and understand your Lackawanna ways.  So, we went to Binghamton and--which was a whole different--you know, was a lot of New York City [New York, New York] kids there and Lackawanna was like the country to them.  But Binghamton is country-er than Lackawanna.  Binghamton was like ten years in the past.  You know, at least Lackawanna was up to speed far as--'cause we still were a little country.  I mean, I still wearing tailor made pants and, and guys from New York were wearing Cazals and playboy shoes.  I wasn't that far yet, but I was hip, but not New York hip.  You know, I didn't know what a bagel was and things like that and I had never really mingled with white people as friends in that capacity.  Like, New York is everybody smashed together.  It's like, we know Puerto Ricans, we know Chinese, we know--we didn't have a Chinese restaurant in Lackawanna.  We had to go to Buffalo to a Chinese restaurant, so--or takeout, you know.
Speaker 1: And so did, did you get a scholarship to go there?
Speaker 2: No, I got into a program, a EOP program [Educational Opportunity Program] for educationally and economically disadvantaged kids and because my average by the time I graduated was 84, 83, 84 [percent], I was not smart enough to get in regular Binghamton and just dumb enough to get in the program that said that I wasn't really gonna make it.  So, I was so poor, I was poor from the rooming house, so I had enough final- financial aid to help pay for it.  It was cheap, anyway, in them days, you know, six dollars to go to school or something.  I was poor enough and I was so called not bright enough, so let's give him a chance.
Speaker 1: Even though 84 is a B.
Speaker 2: That ain't enough to get in Bingham- that--no, 84 is almost a B.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It might be a B, B minus, C plus, not bright enough to get into Binghamton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Binghamton was--and even now, even higher.  So, I got into the program.  So, it was just--I, I wrote a paper, said this program is designed to fail 'cause then I started kicking in my knowledge.  At first, I didn't.  At first, I was stumbling around, really stumbling around, really stumbling around.
Speaker 1: And why?  Was that because you were in a new environment?
Speaker 2: Why I was stumbling?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was coming from the mentality I came from.  I was coming from my dukes up, the--my line in the sand way out here, a tired of racism, tired of segregation, tired of trying to fit in, and so I got offended by a lot of things and I start fighting.  Fighting is a big part of that--earlier part of my--I don't want to fight now.  I'm an old man, I don't want to fight nobody.  I'm too smart.  You know, one--but what, what I found out was I was going nowhere thumping people when I was upset with them.  Like, if I walk by and there's a Confederate flag in the window in Binghamton, Binghamton, New York, if I see it three days, I'm tired of seeing it, I'd break the window and stay there, stand there and when they peek out, say we're gonna come kick your butt and I'll be--I'll be standing right here.  You know, that's how I was.  And, and my boy was with me, Doby [ph.], and he, he was big.  You know, Doby was probably 235 [pounds], solid, and me and Doby could go.  Lackawanna boys fight, we known--so, I would end up in security, you know, locked up at the, you know, why I'm fighting?  Be in the gym, somebody--or, or I was dating a little girl and a streaker came by and stood in front of our window and shook, butt naked, shook his little situation in front of me and this girl and I chased him and caught him, thump, I'm locked up, you know, in the--in the campus security and, you know, like, campus police.  You know, so every time I turn around--then, I wasn't getting no grades.  I was gone by my sophomore year, I was out.
Story_ID: 629934
Speaker 1: You were thrown out?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  You know, but the thing is, certain people took to me and they, they, they knew who I was and they wouldn't let me fail, Loften Mitchell, Bob Bell [ph.].  Bob Bell became my big brother, so he wanted me to be--do positive things, so he had a big brother program, a real big brother program.  He made me be a counselor.  Plus, if he would see me getting in trouble--he was a--he was a grown man.  You know, he had been in the Marines [U.S Marine Corps] and he is a grown man, been on his own since he was fifteen and he was older than me.  He was--Bob is maybe six years older than me, would snatch me in the collar.  And I couldn't whoop Bob and I knew I couldn't whoop Bob, and he would say, "I'll break your jaw, you know, before I let somebody hurt you.  Come on, boy."  And he would go cook, you know, bake some chicken thighs and pick some peas out of his garden and rice and we would sit there and eat and he would try to school me about who I was and quit--and then I remember Loften Mitchell saying to me, the great--he wrote 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' and 'Land Beyond the River' ['A Land Beyond the River'] and all the great plays, "If you find out who you are, you won't be so sensitive.  Bring your line in.  Find out the kings and queens you from and laugh at Confederate flags and laugh at people calling you nigger 'cause they don't know who you are, but you gotta know who you are.  So, that building over there, the brick building called the library, you need to go up in there and find out who you are, spend an hour a day reading something by somebody that look like you."  And that's what I did and I started finding out who I was, and I was fascinated.  I was like, damn, we invented that?  We're from that?  We had these communities?  We did that?  And all it was, was a reflection of where I was from, that kind of community, which was a, an offspring of reconstruction, communities coming together and--but, but anyway--
Speaker 1: So, Loften was at--
Speaker 2: Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].
Speaker 1: --Binghamton at the same time you were.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was writing 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he took off and left.
Speaker 1: And is he the same age as you?
Speaker 2: Loften Mitchell?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Loften is gone.
Speaker 1: That's what--
Speaker 2: Loften is very old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Loften was old then.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  So, he was not a student.
Speaker 2: He was a professor.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--I was just confused.  He was a professor then.
Speaker 2: In the theater department, he was like the writer laureate.  He was like--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Loften, you know--
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: --Mitchell was like royalty.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And he took to me as like one of his--
Speaker 1: So, you were in his class.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took--I took Loften's class, but I was one of the two black kids in the theater department, so he and Percival Borde who had the dance, he was the black dance instructor--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so between those two--Per- Percy didn't like me the first year and a half.  I drummed for him but, you know, who--I wasn't easy to, to--you know, I, I was--I was finding my way.
Story_ID: 629935
Speaker 1: But I was gone by my sophomore year.  My grades didn't cut it.  I had been in trouble too much.  I was on probation and, and I came with Cs and Ds again and, and, and they just said you gotta take a--this is a very important part of this story, very important.  They said you gotta take a semester off in Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  I went into the office of the guy that ran the EOP program [Educational Opportunity Program].  It was two guys ran it, one guy named George Crenshaw who was from Iowa and he was, I think, an all-American wrestler, never seen a black kid like me in his life, I don't think.  He had never met this little half Puerto Rican half black rooming house hubris--he had just never seen--didn't like--didn't care that much for me I didn't feel.  John Yeldell [ph.], the other brother that ran it looked like Don Cornelius, did like me, liked me beyond--more than he should have.  So, when I got kicked out, he called me in his office, he and the financial aid guy named Art Jackson [ph.], and John Yeldell said, "Listen, you got two kids [Broderick Santiago and Ruben Santiago III], you're failing out of here, you got a chance to do something with your life if you want to.  I'm gonna give you one lifeline.  I don't want you out of school, I want you in school.  You can't be here, but you're gonna be somewhere else, and I'm not supposed to do this, nobody is supposed to know this.  You gotta go to another school.  Where you wanna go?  Any state school, I'll get you in.  But you--if I get you in, you better not never look back.  This is your--this is it.  You gonna take care of these kids or what you gonna do?"  I said, "I wanna go home.  I want to go to Buffalo [New York], Buff State College [Buffalo State College]."  He said, "Buffalo State College or UB [University of Buffalo, Buffalo, New York]?"  I said Buffalo State College 'cause I had a friend, Keith Lewis that was going there.  I said, "Buff State College."  He said, "Well take these papers to So and So," and bah, bah, bah, bah, bah.  "Don't say a word to nobody."  So, I never left the college grind and I changed my whole program.  Nanny [Rachel Crosby] had cancer, had a mastectomy and she looked like she was gonna die, I had had my second child.  I failed out of Binghamton, I got kicked out of the basketball gym, kicked off the radio station which was my thing I loved.
Speaker 2: What were you doing on the radio?
Speaker 1: I was a disc jockey.  That's where my voiceover career started and I was very popular.  You know, my attitude and my personality and my passion, they loved--they called me the tyrant that lived on the hill, the tyrant because I was so cruel.  And, and I'm a nice--I'm a big sugar bear and, and trying, trying to have this reputation.
Story_ID: 629936
Speaker 1: Yeldell [John Yeldell (ph.)] sent me to--let me go to Buff State [Buffalo State College, Buffalo, New York] and I landed on that campus and I said, "I'm not gonna look back, I'm gonna make him proud."  I auditioned for the first play, I got it, boom 'Our Land' [ph.].  I got a nice role in it.  Took my classes, got all A's, Bs, came back to Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  Now, this is January, February, March in Buffalo, April, May, I did great in Buffalo.  Nanny [Rachel Crosby] got better, saw my babies [Broderick Santiago and Ruben Santiago III], I was happy, came back to Binghamton in August, called my ex-roommate, Mike Hill [ph.], and he said--I said, "Get a two bedroom, I'm coming back, man," and I came back.  And I never--and my whole reputation was different 'cause everybody knew me from that first year and a half.  My reputation was in front of me, so people knew, if you want to fight, challenge Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson].  If you--if Ruben walk in the room and, and you in there with a girl, leave 'cause it ain't gonna be good.  He ain't gonna necessarily fight you, but he ain't leaving.  He gonna take the girl and go have lunch.  That's just, you know, Lackawanna [New York] mentality and the small mentality, but I didn't challenge anybody.  I didn't challenge anybody on the basketball court, I didn't challenge anybody for girls, I didn't challenge anybody in a fight, I didn't--I wouldn't bother no--and it like shocked people. They challenged me, "What, chump?"  I'd be like, "Yo, man, okay, cool, cool.  You know, I ain't--," you know, let's just play ball opposed to chump?  You know, whop, whop (laughter).  No, I was--it really shocked people that I was so, not docile but not com- combative, not even for competing--not even a dance contest.  I just wanted to get through and I just only wanted A's and Bs.
Speaker 2: And you think that came from the conversation you had with John Yeldell?
Speaker 1: It came from me losing everything or, or, or facing the loss of everything that was precious to me.  I loved to play basketball, I couldn't go to the gym no more.  I had fought so many times there.  I loved the radio.  I couldn't--the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] took my license because I--they said I incited a riot 'cause these white guys raped this black girl and then on the radio I said, "We gotta do something about this," on the radio, "we're meeting at the social room, we're gonna get together, we're gonna track them down, we're gonna get a lynch mob together, we're gonna find out who did this."  FCC, you gone.  You don't do that on the radio.  So, I lost my license so I couldn't deejay.  No basketball.  You know, my mama was dying, I had two kids, and this guy gave me a chance, so desperate situation.  I had to become a man, become a man and quit acting like a kid, and that was a turning point for me.  And I refused to get A's and Bs and I changed my whole--I wouldn't sit in the back of the class, I'd sit in the front.  I, I--within the--two days, I would go to--introduce myself to the professor.  "Hi, my name is Ruben Santigo and, and anything that I can do to help my grades or I want to check in with you periodically to make sure I'm on, on, on par to get my A's and my Bs," and the professors dug that.  I wasn't sitting in the back, sleep.  I was in the front and it showed in my grades and--Loften [Loften Mitchell] left to do 'Bubbling Brown' ['Bubbling Brown Sugar'] Percy [Percival Borde] took me under his wing and let me teach--assistant teach a class for him, acting class.  Don Boros, another professor, white guy, was instrumental in me going to grad school [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  He made me go to grad school to get my master's [degree], all scholarships.  By that time, I was like top in the nation.  I was--not only as an actor, I was winning all the acting competitions at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and (unclear) and all the play--but not only that, I was an A student, dean's list, dean's list, dean--dean's list and mentor--
Speaker 2: So you completely turned your life around.
Speaker 1: Had to turn it.  I turned it.
Story_ID: 629937
Speaker 1: When did you know you wanted to be an actor?
Speaker 2: I knew I loved acting.  I knew that I would act my entire life.  I didn't know at what level.  I didn't know I would make a living at it.  Who knew--who knows that.  I didn't know that.  It, it wouldn't let me go and I found out that as a basketball player, I was very limited.  As a deejay, it was all in somebody else's hands, whether I would be, you know, big, you know.  I wasn't a good hustler.  You know, I tried to hustle.  I, I wasn't good.  You know, I would end up getting killed out there trying to hustle.  I wasn't as good a fighter as I thought I was.  I didn't need to get my ass whooped.  So, I found out on stage, though, nobody was better.  I was everybody--I worked real hard.  I could do accents.  I could do characters.  I got in touch with my emotion very quickly.  I loved reading plays.  I loved doing plays.  And one day, somebody paid me to do a play and I was like, huh?  He said, "What you gonna do for this?"  I said, "I'm gonna go get a job and--." "No, no, no, no, no, we, we, we, we pay if you do this play."  And I'm like, "What?  You, you pay?"
Speaker 1: When--at about what time was this in your life?
Speaker 2: Sophomore, when I came back [to the State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I did regional theater production at the Cider Mill [Cider Mill Playhouse, Endicott, New York].  Then I did two, then I did three, and I was like doing professional theater, making money.  It was actually giving me a couple hundred dollars.  So that kind of affected my little financial aid.  I was like, hold on, don't tell nobody.  Can you--can you pay me cash (laughter), you know?  I gotta take care of these kids.  So, now I actually pay child support, you know, and Nanny [Rachel Crosby] and them didn't have to take care of them.  And so I brought little Ruben [Ruben Santiago III] with me to school for a semester.  It was funny.  It was funny trying to do rehearsal.  So, if I dated a girl, she had to be able to babysit.  Can you--can you watch him while I'm in rehearsal?  Or I would have him in rehearsal and if I couldn't take him, I would send him back home, you know.  So, that was cool.  That, that was real--then I realized I loved it and it loved me and I just--we were just gonna get married, me and acting, and we just got married.  I declared my major and then I just said to myself I'm not gonna let anybody outwork me, you know.  And, and in Binghamton [New York], there was a big break I got because there was a grad student [Andrew Hunt] and he wanted to direct 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' [Athol Fugard]. I had been stumbling around with the black actors, doing my thing, right, but the theater department itself, though they liked me, they never gave me lead roles except in little bitty studio productions.  So, I do my stuff with the black theater, you know.  Anyway, long short, this one grad student was directing 'Sizwe Banzi' and had a nervous breakdown in rehearsal 'cause he couldn't direct me and Chuma [Chuma Chukwu], this African brother was doing, me and him, and I just said, "Just relax."  He said, "I'm not gonna get my dissertation."  I said, "Just sit down, I'll direct it.  Just--you can get the A, I'm gonna direct it.  You relax.  Get you a soda pop or something, relax."  I directed it, I did it, and it took off.  Everybody thought--I mean, dignitaries from New York [New York] was coming to see it, I swear to god.  They were saying, "You gotta go see this dude do Sizwe Banzi" 'cause Chuma, they came because Chuma was Nigerian royalty, and they were like, "Oh my god, you know, this, this person is so--you're so wonderful, what part of Africa."  I said, "No, I'm from Lackawanna [New York]."  But, the, the theater took note of me and then I did a lead on the main stage.  And then Don Boros took note of me.  He wrote me this letter, though, recently that was just--made me just cry, Don Boros, after he retired.  He said, "You changed my life.  I never seen an actor in touch with so much of what's real."  He just broke, broke it down.  I just start crying.  He said, "I gave you an assignment and you didn't do the assignment, you did what you wanted, but what you wanted was so much more important to you than anything I could ever give you and it showed me that you were the most special student I had ever had."  And he supported me from there and he made me go to grad school.
Story_ID: 629938
Speaker 1: And I went to a grad school--even though I got accepted at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I went to Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] because they are classical repertory theater, and the only one in the nation.
Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: In Detroit.  And because--a professor said, "You think you're hot--you think you're a hotshot actor, okay, you're pretty good, but you can't do Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  Your lips are too big and, and you--and that's where you're gonna get caught when you try to do Shakespeare."  And so I went to a grad- that's--all they do is Shakespeare, and I went there.  That's why I went, as a challenge.  And that, that--that's, that's interesting to me.
Speaker 2: When did you--when did you move to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 2: So you graduated from Wayne State in eighty--
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 2: In '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: I love Detroit.  I stayed in Detroit with my own theater company, with--me and the Dr. Von Washington had our own theater company.  And I just love Detroit.  I love the people.  I had never seen a black community that big and that functioning that--I mean, '79 [1979], Detroit was still functioning.  It was going down.  Motown [Motown Records] had just left a little bit before that, so it was a big empty building, looked brand new, and I didn't know why that happened, you know, so--then, later on I found out, you know, the economics of it all and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's mission and what he was doing.  But, I loved the spirit.  I loved the work ethic of the people.  I loved the city.  And the people just embraced me.  I went to an all-white theater company.  I was the only brother there and they made sure that I knew I was the only brother there.  I did nothing but slaves, fan boys, rug bearers, bystanders, ruffians.  I didn't have--I didn't even have names to my characters the first year, and I couldn't take it anymore.  I was a star in Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  So, I walked off stage one day, walked off the stage.  There was a sister there who was working on her doctorate, Terri Turner [ph.]--I love me some Terri Turner--and Von Washington was working on his doctorate, but they were in the company when they needed them.  Me, I was in the company all the time, so I was carrying rugs and fans.  I was coming from a star to pion.  And they actually said that's what I was going to do the first day because when, when you stand up the first day of orientation when you're at the university, they say, "What's your name?"  "Ruben Santiago [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson].  I'm from Lackawanna, New York."  "What do--what do you want to do?  What's your goals?"  "I want to play the great classical theater roles, the great tragedians.  I want to have an opportunity to do Shakespeare."  And one of them dudes laughed at me.  He was a senior.  He was a se- not senior, working on his doctorate.  He laughed.  And I sat down and I said, "Why you laughing?"  He said, "You're gonna be a spear carrier."  He said, "That's what happens when--your first year.  You're gonna carry spears, white, black or whatever, you're carrying--you might carry more spears."  I said, "That's just bullshit."  First play, I was a spear carrier, second play rug bearer, third--by the third play, I was sitting there carrying the rug on--I put it on the floor and I'm watching this white boy do this language and I'm mouthing it because I know the role.  He auditioned with me to get his role.  Everybody wanted to audition with me and I'm there, and I'm like I'm better than them and I'm--and I'm not doing--I'm leaving.  So, I looked over at the white guy that carried the rug with me and he looked at me and was like, why you looking at me like--and Terri who was playing the maid servant to Cleopatra looked at me and said, "Why you looking like that?"  We're on stage, the play is going on, I said, "I'm out."  She said, "Don't you walk off the stage."  I said, "I'm out."  And I--
Speaker 2: In the middle of a production.
Speaker 1: Walked off.  The white guy ran off behind me, said, "You gotta help me take the rug off."  I said, "I ain't carrying nothing off.  That's it."  And so they called me into the meeting, you know, the head of the department, and we had a conversation.  I said, "I, I, I can't do this.  I can't do this.  Y'all not gonna reduce me to this.  You're not gonna take away the only thing I have, which is my talent, you're not gonna put that in a cage.  You're gonna have to let me do it.  I'm, I'm, I'm leaving.  I'm getting on a bus.  I'm going back to Lackawanna," (laughter).  And Von was working on his doctorate said, "What, what have you done over there?  They done gone--what have you done there?"  And I said--and I told him, he said, "You don't know how to talk to white people."  He said, "Listen, let me--come with me.  We're gonna go talk to them."  So, he goes in the office with them and talks to them, leave me in the hall.  Von comes out and says, "Okay, okay, okay, what do you want to do?"  I said, "I want to do great roles."  He said, "Well, what, what, what do you want to do?"  I said, "'Native Son' [Paul Green and Richard Wright]."  "Stay here." Goes in the room, close the door, come back out, he say, "Okay, good news and bad news."  I said, "What?"  He says, "They gonna give you to the black--," 'cause Von ran the black theater touring company while he was working on his doctorate and then the Hilberry [Hilberry Theatre, Detroit, Michigan] occasionally.  "They're gonna lend you to me to do 'Native Son,' good news, yeah.  So you ain't gotta work with them.  You ain't gonna carry no rug in the next three plays.  But, we gotta do it at the Bonstelle Theatre [Detroit, Michigan]," which has been closed for two years, three years.  "So, we gotta open it up, clean it up, and get it ready."  Nobody wanted to go to Bonstelle 'cause it was nothing but dope fiends.  This was before crack, nothing but dope fiends hanging out there, sleep, wine heads pissing all in the doorway. So, that was the deal.
Story_ID: 629939
Speaker 1: They gave me to Von [Von Washington] for 'Native Son' [Paul Green and Richard Wright].  We had to open up the Bonstelle [Bonstelle Theatre, Detroit, Michigan].  So, we go to the Bonstelle.  There was a janitor named Bill [ph.].  I call him Still Bill.  I used to fish with him.  Detroit [Michigan]--I love Detroit, I'm telling you, Still Bill was my fishing buddy.  He was a, a janitor and he was going to open up the Bonstelle for us.  So--he used to give me toilet paper and light bulbs when I didn't have them, you know, 'cause he--, "What, what you need, young blood?  You need some toilet paper?"  Give me some toilet paper, you know, so--don't tell nobody.  I said all right, you know.  So, Still Bill goes down to Bonstelle, me and Von, we pull into the parking lot.  Weeds are taller than me.  Cracked up, you know, piss--when you get to the doorway, whoa.  Still Bill said, "You all wait over here.  Now, when I open the door, I'm gonna get to the lights, and then you all come in.  Let me get to the light switch."  So, he opened up the door and all you could hear was chu-chu-chu-chu-chu-chu, rats.  I swear to god.  I was like, oh my god, it's pitch black, all of a sudden, you, you, you could look in and you see the lights to like around the corner, some curtains.  So, I walk in and I walk around the curtains and it's the stage.  So, I walk on the stage and I look up and there's this big dome and there's balcony, mezzanine, I'm like--I said, "Hey, Nanny [Rachel Crosby], I made it."  I scream up to the top, "Nanny I made it," and I start crying.  We cleaned that place up, opened that theater.  It hadn't--it did 'Native Son.'  I found out it did 'Native Son' in 1943 with Canada Lee, and I was coming to do 'Native Son' again in nineteen eighty--1980?  Broke records.  Black folks from Detroit poured into that place.  People from Lackawanna [New York] drove up to see it, buses--Nanny brought a bus (laughter), you know, and I was on my own.  I was on my way.  I was on my way again.  You know, so it's, it's--these people rescuing me and not letting me fail, which is, is, is the--is the--is the real moral of that story, people just being in my corner.  That's why I, I like to give so much.
Story_ID: 629940
Speaker 1: You had this great experience with 'Native Son' [Paul Green and Richard Wright].  What happened at school after that?
Speaker 2: They wanted me back then to the Hilberry [Hilberry Theatre, Detroit, Michigan] and they actually gave me a, a role in a terrible play called 'Merry Wives of Windsor,' Shakespeare ['The Merry Wives of Windsor,' William Shakespeare], and they gave me the role of Dr. Caius, which is out of all the roles in it, it's thankless, it's terrible.  I had to speak in an Italian accent, which is one of the accents I do not master.  And, and so it was bad.  It was the worst review I had ever gotten in my life to--even to this day.  And I wanted to go back with the black theater company [Afro-American Studio Theatre].  So, Von and I started our own so I could do things, you know.  I left them after that again, you know, and I was on, on the end of my second year and I was gonna graduate, so I graduated.  This is an interesting anecdote to this story.  There was a class called the Development of the Drama.  You had to read thirty-four plays to develop American--the development of the American drama now.  Not a one was black.  And I had read every black play--Von Washington will tell you right now, I come in his office with a book and I would read a whole play to him.  "You ever heard this play?"  And he would say, "No."  And I would say, "Well, well, you got--," and I start reading it.  I'd read every role.  And he--I was like a dictionary of plays.  I'd just find these plays (unclear).  Anyway, there was no black plays on this thing, so I, I, I told the teacher, "We should put a couple black plays on this."  He said, "What, what black plays is there?"  I said, "'No Place to be Somebody' [Charles Gordone], for one, and one of 'Pure Surprise' [ph.]," and I said, "I can name a couple other plays, but let's start there.  Add that," and he said, no.  So anyway, so when I wrote my final paper in my grad school for this Development of the Drama, I added 'No Place to be Somebody' in the paper and he--the professor did not like that and said, "That's not on your reading list.  That should not be in the paper.  Your assignment, do your assignment, the plays that read, write about how they helped develop--don't add."  And I said, "No, but you're not gonna tell me that no black plays helped the development of the American drama, and I'm not gonna accept that."  He didn't give me a grade.  So, everything else I had grades, A's and all what I needed and one incomplete.  And I refused to rewrite the paper and he refused to give me a grade, so I didn't get my master's degree.  In '81 [1981], when I left that school [Wayne State University, Detroit Michigan], I didn't get my degree.
Story_ID: 629941
Speaker 1: I didn't graduate until '96 [1996] when I won that Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], I got a phone call.  "We see you ha- you, you don't have your master's [degree] from Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  We want you to have your master's from Wayne."  Ninety-six [1996], I had two babies [Trey Santiago-Hudson and Lily Santiago-Hudson], two twin--twins, pair of twins, set up twins, and I didn't want them to, to have me as incompleting anything, so my mindset was, I should complete it, rewrite the paper, eliminate 'No Place to be Somebody' [Charles Gordone]  and get my master's.  So, I told the guy to call me.  "You know what?  Let me rewrite this paper and I'll get the, the complete," 'cause that professor had retried, that racist had retired, and I said, let me rewrite the paper.  He said, "No, no, no, no, no, what we'll do is we'll pull the paper out and we'll go to the university process, which means we'll get a committee, you choose a moderator, we'll all review the paper, you can defend the paper, and then we will decide, is that paper appropriate or not to give you your grade or not give you your grade, and then we'll proceed."  I said, "Okay."  So, I asked Von [Von Washington] who I should choose and it was a black English teacher named Alvin Aubert.  I didn't know him, but he was revolutionary, had a revolutionary poetry thing that he would print once a year.  I liked--I liked the name, I liked the--read his poetry.  I said, "This could be--would you be my moderator?"  He said, "Okay."  So, he got three people from other departments, read the paper, Aubert was the--was the--was the--was the moderator.  I went out of the room, they discussed it, I came back in the room to defend it and they said, "No, no, no, that's an A paper.  So, next year you--this coming up graduation, you graduate."  Then they can put me on alumni magazine and so they gave me my master's.  They honored me, gave me the highest honor, alumni honor, had a dinner for me, the president of the university and, and I spoke, did a workshop for them and, and got my master's and that was that.  Later on--I mean, two years ago, they gave me an honorary doctorate as well.  So, that's how I got my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From Wayne State?
Speaker 1: That's how I got my master's.
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: I did the work.  He didn't like that--me adding that black play.  He didn't like me adding that play, not that I didn't do his work and I didn't get a master's degree, two years of education until that Tony.  Who else had a Tony from Wayne State?  So, I was on the cover of the magazine, celebrated, you know.  So that was--that's--you know, I shrugged that one off.  You know, I was like, all right, you know.
Story_ID: 629942
Speaker 1: So, you moved to--well, actually you didn't tell me the name of the theater company that you created in Detroit [Michigan].  What was that called?
Speaker 2: Afro-American Studio Theatre.
Speaker 1: And it was you and?
Speaker 2: Von Washington.
Speaker 1: And did Von stay in Detroit or did he also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Von became a professor, went over to Western Michigan [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] and ran the black theater department there and became a, a, a distinguished professor there and he just retired two years ago.  When I came to New York [New York], everybody was--they gave me a party and they was crying.  It was like, "Man, you're gon- you're gon- you're gonna die 'cause New York ain't no joke.  And I know you're a star in Detroit, Rube [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson], and I know you won't go back to Lackawanna [New York] 'cause you stubborn and, and, and, and you're just gonna be in New York as a bum and we'll come get you, but--." It was deep.  And I--
Speaker 1: And these were your friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they love me not 'cause they put me down, they didn't believe it 'cause they wouldn't go to New York, these extremely talented people, Von, bad ass, bad director, bad actor, all these.  I got a sister now from Detroit who is in my company, star in company, trying to get to New York now.  She been to New York twice.  She keeps leaving 'cause she won't go through the whole journey.  You gotta go through the whole journey.  Ain't nobody gonna just choose you and knock on your door.  You're coming into the--this is where the sharks got shark teeth.  You better be ready and be ready to take the hits.  But anyway, so--
Speaker 1: So you came in--
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: --eighty-three [1983].  And you came--where did you go when, when you got here?
Speaker 2: It was interesting thing.  I was doing a play called 'Home,' Samm-Art Williams' play called 'Home,' which was a big hit at the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC].  [HistoryMaker] Woodie King, Jr., had procured the national touring rights for 'Home' and was touring it nationally.  I--my theater company happened to get hired to do 'Home' at the same time he came through Detroit with 'Home' with the national touring company.  Ron Milner, the great playwright, Detroit playwright, said to Woodie--they were tight, they were real tight buddies--, "You need to see this dude do it.  I know your dude is good, you ain't seen Ruben do this play."  "Who?"  Woodie said, "Who?"  He said, "Ruben."  He said, "I'm gonna take you to see him do it.  You wanna see?  'Cause I done seen your version.  This boy will teach your boy how to do it."  Woodie said, "Yeah, okay.  Some boy in Detroit gonna teach my boy from New York."  And Woodie came to see it, walked in my dressing room said, "You want to come to New York?"  He said, "I--you can take my guy's place.  I want you in this national tour."  I said, "I can't get there until I finish my commitments, so I'll be there in April--May, May."  I came to New York in May, staying with a buddy of mine in Long Island [New York] for two weeks.  Him and his wife had just got married.  And the wife's moth- somebody mother said, "You shouldn't have a man living in your basement when you all just got married.  He got to go."  So, I went and found this man who ran African Cultural Center [Buffalo, New York], Ed Lawrence [Edward Lawrence].  In Buffalo [New York], he ran the, the, the Afr- the ma- the African Cultural Center when I was a kid.  And I used to go there and watch plays and do plays, and I sought him out.  I heard he was in New York, was a doorman, and he let me sleep on his floor for two weeks.  So, two weeks, two weeks, and then I said I gotta find a play to take me on--take me out of here, you know, so I can have a place to live and I ain't gotta sleep on somebody's floor.  And that--you know, 'cause Woodie didn't have the job that he offered me when I got here.  Samm-Art decided he wanted to do the play so Woodie couldn't give me the play.
Story_ID: 629943
Speaker 1: So, I was broke and in New York [New York] and looking for a place to live.  So, this, this, this is history.  I go to the Actors' Equity [Actors' Equity Association] 'cause I have my equity card, waiting in the lounge 'cause I got no place to stay and I can't be in this man's house all day, so I'm hanging around the actors lounge, and I see this man from 'Five on the Black Hand Side,' Leonard Jackson, L- Leonard Jackson, great New York actor.  He was in the original 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson].  But that's before I saw 'Ma Rainey.'  'Ma Rainey' was the next year.  I knew him from 'Five on the Black Hand Side.'  And I see him, this, this, this movie star.  So, I go, I said, "Hello, sir."  I said, "Mr. Jackson, I loved you in this play and so forth and so on and, and I'm looking for a man named Ed Lawrence [Edward Lawrence], do you know him?"  He says, "Well," and then I see this other tall guy next to him kind of like, you know, like Leonard is gonna tell me where the guy live, you know, who he is and where he work.  And he said, "Well, son, I, I, I, I can show you where I've--I seen him in this area," Manhattan Plaza [New York, New York].  I don't know nothing about Manhattan Plaza.  So, I said, "Okay."  So, we walked through Shubert Alley with the tall guy, Arthur French [HistoryMaker Arthur Wellesley French], who I've worked with so much since then who is a hero of mine.  Actually, he was a--I love Arthur French.  This--I don't know Arthur, Arthur don't know me.  The--we're talking about 1983.  Walk on down past Shubert Alley, walk to this--and I'm standing there looking around and he's--and Leonard says, "Somewhere in this area I think I've seen him," and him and Arthur leave.  I'm waiting for hours and this guy walks by and I'm like, "Ed Lawrence?"  And he stops, he said, "Who, who wants to know?"  I said, "Ruben Santiago [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson] from Lackawanna."  He said, "Lackawanna, New York?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He said "You know Howard Elliott [ph.]?"  I said, "Yeah, me and Thomasina [ph.], his daughter, went to school together."  I said, "Miss Magaline and, and Nanny are very good friends."  "Miss Magaline Elliott?"  He said, "You know Lackawanna Smitty [ph.]?"  I said, "Yeah, I know Lackawanna Smitty."  I said, "He was at Nanny's--you know, Nanny."  He said, "Nanny who?"  I said, "Rachel Crosby."  He said, "Nanny your mama?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Come on, what you want."  I said, "I need a place to stay."  So, he gave me--he let me sleep on his floor for two weeks.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And that--that's--and I booked my first children's theater play, 'Play to Win' by Jackie Robinson [sic. James de Jongh].  I didn't complete it because I ended up booking a play at the Crossroads [Crossroads Theatre, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and I left to do that.  From that, 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller].  From that, 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III].  So, I just stayed on the road, saving my money to get an apartment, and, and that was the launch of it.
Story_ID: 629944
Speaker 1: My whole goal was to get 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller].  Coming to New York [New York] was I wanted to get in 'Soldier's Play.'  So, I went to--first place I stopped that day, that week was the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], 1983 May.  If you look it up, they were just--they had left and gone on the road.  I didn't know that.  I walked in and people were moving the lights, taking the lights down, three guys, and I walked in with clothes on and my new portfolio case Nanny [Rachel Crosby] had bought me, and they're looking at me like--and I walk in, I go to the desk, I said, "I want to audition for 'Soldier's Play.'"  And they said, "Well, well 'Soldier's Play' is on the road.  They just went on a national tour."  I said, "Well, when they gonna have auditions?"  He said, "Well, what's your name?  I'll take your name down."  And I said, "Ruben Santiago [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson]," and they laughed 'cause my name wasn't Santiago-Hudson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's Alean Hudson, my mother's name, Hudson.  So I said, "Why you laughing?"  They said, "Ain't no Puerto Ricans in 'Soldier's Play.'"  I said, "There's gonna be one now if you give me an audition."  They were like, "Yeah, yeah."  So, I put my briefcase down and asked the three guys taking the lights, "Could you watch that for the second, I'm gonna go to the men's room. Where's the men's room?"  I come out, the briefcase is gone.  Long and short, the little portfolio is gone.  I said, "Where's my portfolio?"  They said, "I don't know."  They start laughing at me.  And they said--there was a Red Apple [The Red Apple Rest] on the corner of 55th [Street] and 8th [Avenue] and 9th [Avenue].  They said, "You see that man sleeping on--by the Red Apple," and I said, "Yeah."  These dudes are taking down the lights.  They said, "That could be you.  Where you from?"  I said, "I'm from Detroit [Michigan] and Lackawanna [New York]."  He says, "Well, don't come to New York and messing around 'cause your ass will be a bum.  You know, Negro Ensemble Company ain't no joke.  You got to be the best of the best to get in."  I said, "Well, I'm gonna get in."  They said, "Yeah, okay."  I said, "All right."  So, I fought, fought, fought, did all these other things until I finally got an audition.  Mama Overton [Mattie Overton] said--I said, "Mama, they won't give me an audition, they say no Puerto Ricans in it."  She said, "Put your mama's name on it."  I said, "My name is Ruben Santiago, like my father."  She said, "Put--boy, do you hear what I say?"  That's she would say, "You hear what I say?  Put your mother's name on it.  You're a Hudson, too.  Put it on there.  Take the S, just make Santiago an S," so it was Ruben S. Hudson, and they gave me an audition.  By then, I was making waves in soap operas and coming up a little bit.  And, and they gave me an audition.  They didn't--they didn't actually give me an audition, I, I went and I waited for Doug [HistoryMaker Douglas Turner Ward], put my name down, Ruben S. Hudson.  Doug came out to go to the bathroom, I said, "Mr. Ward, I would like to audition for you."  He said, "I ain't got no time.  You know, I gotta--do you got an appointment?"  "No, I ain't got no appointment."  "Well, no, no, no, no, no, we need to try to get an agent here."  Sir--so, he came out the bathroom and I started doing a monologue from 'Home' [Samm-Art Williams].  "I ever tell you about the time I learned how to speak Indian [Native American]?  Well, back in crossroad, there was a light skinned colored man, told everybody he was a Cherokee Indian, couldn't speak no English.  He was a drifter, took up with (unclear) Bill McCoy [ph.] over in the hollow, Pete McCoy [ph.] sister.  How they ever got together, only the lord knows.  Well, anyway, we were down in the hollow," and Doug is looking at me like, "Well, when, when, when we finish, if you're still here, I--I'll, I'll let you come in," and I came in and I read all the roles.  He had me read this, that, and the other.  December 23rd--I came in May.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Story_ID: 629945
Speaker 1: I was in Macy's basement going to a friend of mine's in Jersey City [New Jersey], said she gonna cook for me.  I had no money.  And my beeper went off.  It was my manager.  I had a manager.  I had no agent.  And he said, "Call him."  And I used one of my quarters, called him.  He said, "Good news and bad news."  "Give me the good news."  "You're in 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller]."  "Give me the bad news."  "You're the understudy."  I said, "I gotta get on stage."  He said, "You're the understudy.  They're paying three hundred dollars a week, three hundred twenty-five dollars per diem."  But I gotta get on stage.  He says, "Take the job and work your way on stage."  I said, "No, I gotta be on stage."  "You want me to tell them that?"  "Yeah."  He said, "How much money you got in your pocket?"  I said, "Three, three dollars."  He said, "Listen, if I tell him that, you're gonna lose this job."  I said, "Tell him."  He told him.  They gave me a small role on stage and understudy three people, but I had to be in Cincinnati [Ohio] in January.  I get to Cincinnati in January, go to the theater, we're doing the tour of the theater, guy is hanging the lights, he comes off the ladder, he looks at me, he says, "You're the Puerto Rican that came into the NEC [Negro Ensemble Company]?"  And I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Aw, man (laughter)."  I said, "I told you.  I told you I was gonna be in 'Soldier's Play.'"  And that's--that was the beginning of, of my hit, my real hit, 'Soldier's Play.'
Speaker 2: So, it was in the same year, within a year?
Speaker 1: Six months.  Six months.  And so I did the tour for a year.  And Doug [HistoryMaker Douglas Turner Ward] picked one of us to do 'Ceremonies' ['Ceremonies in Dark Old Men,' Lonne Elder III] in New York [New York], to do a six month 'Ceremonies' tour and then come to New York City to star off-Broadway.  I had never done an off-Broadway play and he, he picked me.  Everybody was mad, Duke [O.L. Duke] and Bob Gossett [Robert Gossett], and everybody was mad.  And I came in and, and Edith Oliver, the critic, gave me a review that was sensational.  This young actor is the preeminent new actor in New York, and she said something incredible.  And I'll never forget when I met her, I fell to my knees and kissed her hand 'cause from that minute on, I can get any role I wanted (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was from 'Ceremonies'?
Speaker 1: From 'Ceremonies.'  Any room I wanted to get in, my--I got a agent, I got a manager, I had a manager.  Edith Oliver's review changed my--changed my life.  You know, I was going in and auditioning for 'Miami Vice' and, you know, different things, you know.  It was--it was--it was--that review, that woman, that, that word in New York Magazine, you know.  I remember these things clearly.
Story_ID: 629946
Speaker 1: So your start in New York [New York] was electric.  I mean, it was quick.
Speaker 2: It was hard.  Sleeping on floors, you know, not--you know, eating rice, you know, with just gravy.  There was a little Chinese lady on 8th Avenue and she would--I would come in with--for my rice and it was like seventy cent or something and she would put gravy on it.  And if her husband wasn't looking, she would drop a little piece of chicken or, or beef in there with it, just a little a piece just so I get a taste of that.  So, it was--it was--it was--it was hard, you know.  It wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where were you living?
Speaker 2: I was on the road.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing plays on the road and if I found a, a young lady with a kind heart, you know, I--I would crash until I got a play on the road, you know.  And when I got off of 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller], I had saved up a good amount of money.  I could get a--I could get a sublet.  So, I came into New York, start doing like a little day player work on soap operas and doing my play at night, you know, and, and I just start trying to save my money, you know, all that they didn't garnish--she--or take for back child support.  And one day I just said--I told the judge--judge was real hard on me in Buffalo [New York].  Every time--I would have to go report, you know, where--you know--you know, "Where have you been?  You didn't pay your child support for three weeks."  I'm like, you know, "I'm trying to get a job.  I'm an actor."  "You know, you're gonna need to stop that acting.  If you don't pay your child support, we'll put you in jail on the weekends and get you a job.  We'll find you a job.  Quit playing games," he said to me.  And I told the judge, "One day I'm gonna--I'm gonna pay back that child support from when I was in college [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], that back child support."  And I said, "I'm gonna write one check," excuse me--and I came in and wrote that check.  I wrote that check.  That was the happiest--one of the happiest days of my life.  I said, "Take the interest off of it and I'll pay it right now."
Speaker 1: This was after 'Soldier's'?
Speaker 2: After 'Soldier's Play' but way after that when I done first TV pilots.  I--you know, I did--I've done twenty-two TV pilots now.  So, I did a couple pilots and then--and I had this cash.  Instead of me banking it, I just wanted them off of me and I wanted to just take care of my kids [Broderick Santiago and Ruben Santiago III] the way I'm taking care of them and I don't want nobody clocking me.  I don't wanna to report to nobody.  I don't wanna be chained to nothing.  So, I just walked in.  I could've done something with that money.  It was like eighteen grand [eighteen thousand dollars] or something.  You know, so--which was twenty some grand, twenty-four, twenty--you know, I--and it was six thousand or eight thousand was interest.  And I was like take that interest off and I'll pay it and wrote that check, kah-pah-pah-pah-pow.  And the guy said, "You're an exemplary father."  I said, "I--I've been telling you that from, from the minute I walked in.  I love my kids.  I love them and I'm always gonna take care of them," and I have never looked back from--to them no more, you know, so that was--that was cool for me.
Story_ID: 629947
Speaker 1: You talk about doing the soap operas and I saw some of the clips from the soap opera.  So, back then, as you were being a serious theater actor, you're also doing TV.  Soap operas were really popular then.  What was your motivation for doing them 'cause it's totally different?
Speaker 2: First of all, I needed some money, you know.  Plays don't--didn't pay and they still don't pay.  You can't make a living really as a theater artist, not with--not with two kids, not in--you know, I don't--I, I mean I guess you can somewhere, but not--I couldn't.  So, I needed money and I needed to learn how to work in front of a camera.  And this woman, Sus- Suzanne Ringrose and Judy Wilson [Judy Blye Wilson] was her assistant and Judy has now I think got four Emmys or something, you know, for the soap opera she's cast.  But, they just kept me working, one thing after another and people got hip to me.  And, and certain casting directors, you know, wouldn't let me in the room and certain casting directors said this guy is the real deal.  I, I was quick memory, so I can--you know, soap opera, you get a different script every day and I could learn them quick and still make stupid things sound like they're fresh.  And (laughter), and I found out that was the key, you know.  I would say the same line over and over on 'Another World.'  "What the hell is going on here," was my line every time I walked in the room and there was a body or somebody crying on the couch, "What the hell is going on here?  What the hell is going on here?  What the hell is going on here?"  You know, and I could--it was new every time.  And, and, and, and I just--they kept me working.  Judy Wilson kept me working a long time, 'Ryan's Hope,' 'General Hospital.'  Then when I landed on 'Another World,' I stayed there a little while.  Not 'General Hospital.'  What's the other one that used to be with 'All My Children'?
Speaker 1: You said 'Another World.'
Speaker 2: 'Another World' was the one I spent the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --most time on.  That's the character people know me most from, Billy Cooper.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they were--they were--they, they let a lot, lot of black folks on 'Another World,' everybody, Howard Rollins, Joe Morton, Michele Shay, Petronia Paley, we all were on--a lot of people don't remember I was on there, but I was on there two, three years, you know.
Speaker 1: How--and did it help to raise your profile in terms of getting other roles?  'Cause I think--
Speaker 2: It helped in my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for some, it didn't.
Speaker 2: It helped my TV cue.  It helped my recognition in the community.  I would walk in the bank and, and the Jamaican babysitters would be, "Oh, Mr. Billy Cooper, why I'm always so angry?  Him need a woman, that's what he need.  Billy Cooper always angry.  Come, you know, you don't look that way."  You know, and I would be like, well--you know, so the people in the community walking down the street knew, Billy Cooper, you know, so I got a higher profile in the community, but it didn't--it didn't--it don't get you movie jobs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They, they don't--they didn't respect soap opera actors then, you know.  I don't know if they do so much now.  But, it was a good foundation for me to learn comfort in front of cameras and to learn stuff in--'cause all they--you walk on and it's five, four (gesture), "What the hell is going on here?"  You're in there, you know (laughter) what I mean?  So, I was hitting it, you know, and, and it was--it was--it was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 629948
Speaker 1: You came to New York [New York] when August Wilson was--well, he, he had just had--
Speaker 2: He hadn't arrived.  He was on his way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: All right.  So, he--you came just before he arrived, right?
Speaker 2: He might have been here but he hadn't hit is--in New York, his stride, 'cause Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards] was still insulating him from the harshness of this business in New York City and still developing his work and letting his craft and his brilliance bloom, so he hadn't really--'Ma Rainey' was the first thing I saw of his.
Speaker 1: And when did you see 'Ma Rainey'?
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984].  I walked in the theater.  I, I didn't want to pay all that money for the ticket.  I walked in in the intermission, sat on the stairs, and those actors start acting, Joe Seneca and Robert Judd, and Bill Cobbs, and Rock Dutton [Charles S. Dutton], and Theresa Merritt, and they start acting and I leaned in.  I had never seen anything like that.  I said, I'm home.  I'm safe.  There is life.  There's--the life I know.  There are people as flamboyant and as beautiful and, and as colorful and, and--with stories like I know, and they're my people.  I gotta--I gotta be with them.  And so I start chasing August, chasing him, chasing him, him and Lloyd.  Lloyd was from Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], so I would write him letters.  You know, I'm alum--I'm an alum, never got a return.  You know, and he beca- he and I became just--you know, he became my, my mentor.  And August, nobody ever returned anything I wrote.  I left him four or five notes.
Speaker 1: And so over time, you were chasing him, describe the--describe what was happening.
Speaker 2: Just wanting an audition.  They had their family of actors they were using over and over again and I, I wanted to be in--I, I wanted in and I wanted an audition, and I, I finally got an audition with 'Two Trains Running' [August Wilson].  I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] shooting, a, a, a pilot and getting ready to go do a movie and, and I was pretty hot, you know, so they gave me an audition.  My--and my agent and manager had a little power then.  You know, get--see my guy.  So, I came in to audition for 'Two Trains Running' and Lloyd and August were there.  And August is sitting there with his eyes closed, rocking, wouldn't even look at me and Lloyd was so small and the table was big, I couldn't hardly see him.  So--and I'm reading and Wendell Pierce is the reader, and I loved--I said, who's this guy reading?  He's dynamite.  I wonder why he's not in the play.  But, I'm reading Sterling [Sterling Johnson].  So, I, I--Lloyd would really look at me and August was--his eyes closed, so I, I squatted down and started talking to Wendell who was playing Hambone, repeat after me.  "Black is beautiful.  Say that to me, you say that?  Say black," you know, and I'm doing it so--Lloyd couldn't see me, so he started peeking over the desk.  I could see him on my periphery, see his head peek up to see me.  So when I finished, they asked Wendell to leave the room.  Wendell left the room and he and I became friends right on that spot.  I said, "Man, thank you, man, that's the best acting, you know."  And he was like, "Man," he says, "you're a monster, man.  You're killing it."  I said, "Thank you."  They didn't cast me.  They cast a wonderful young actor named Laurence Fishburne who won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].  So, they--smart move, I guess, on their behalf, you know.  August remembered that audition, so when 'Seven Guitars' [August Wilson] came up, he called me in.
Speaker 1: And how much time passed between the two?
Speaker 2: We talking about now '95 [1995] and that was--I don't know when 'Two Trains Running' was.  It had to be a few years, two, three, four--maybe two, three years.
Speaker 1: And so he remembered you, that audition and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wrote it down--
Speaker 1: --contacted you?
Speaker 2: He wrote it down on paper.  He wrote it down in--on a piece of--on a pad that he showed me when I was rehearsing 'Seven Guitars' when he started really falling from my, my version.  He wrote the role for Rocky Carroll.  Rocky didn't do it, so my agent really pushed it and I got in and August remembered my name, [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson.  I had--I was putting Santiago full out 'cause I tried to erase Hudson and people didn't know me.  They would call me agent and say, "We want Ruben S. Hudson."  He said, "Okay, Ruben Santiago, we'll send him."  They said, "No, no, no, Hudson.  We want the Hudson."  "No, no, no, he's the same guy."  "No, we want Hudson," so I had to put Hudson on with my Santiago.  That's how that happened.
Speaker 1: That's how, okay.
Speaker 2: But he showed me later on after he started only really hearing me in the role.  After a while, a writer can only hear you if you done had it for so long.  You know, he start forgetting who he wrote it for and starts remembering who he's writing for now, and then he started writing it for me.  And he showed me the paper that says, same rhythm I have, same music, and--by my name.  And I knew then--I knew I was in.
Speaker 1: So in between your--that first audition and doing, it was 'Two Trains Running'--yes.
Speaker 2: 'Two Trains Running' to 'Seven Guitars,' yeah.
Speaker 1: To 'Seven'--so, from 'Two Trains Running' to 'Seven Guitars.'  What were you doing in your career?
Speaker 2: I was doing plays, television pilots, movies, soap--I was doing--I was doing everything.  I was quite in demand, a lot of voiceovers.  I was a big voiceover guy at the time, quite busy.  I, I had a career.
Story_ID: 629949
Speaker 1: And when did you get married?
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--so this is around this time.  I'm looking at--you, you were--you were doing your various television, a lot of television, a lot of voiceovers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and who, who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Jeannie.  Her name is Jeannie Brittan, just, just the--really gave me a lot of stability in my life, you know, particularly at that time.  I was thirty-four years old I think and I just--learning to be a man and like in a--in a--in a whole different way, always understood by that time, you know, I had to, you know, be a, a responsible father, but to learn to start establishing something for yourself, a future, and she brought that kind of perspective to me that I wasn't thinking about.  When you're thirty-four years old, you, you, you got a career going, you got an apartment in New York [New York], you got a couple dollars in the bank, not a whole lot, but enough to, to eat when you wanna eat and drink when you wanna drink, and go when you wanna go, and buy a couple things when you wanna buy.  You're not giving that up.  Men think they have the world on a string then.  They have--they can do anything they want.  You're not in jail, you ain't got no record, you're a brother, you look half decent, you got rhythm, you can sing, you know.  You, you, you, you know how to treat people nice, you know, you got manners, you know.  I wasn't ready to get married, but Jeannie just gave me a different perspective about what was important in life.  She wasn't ready to get married I don't think either, so we dated for a couple years.  We--I say we dated four years, she said we dated two.  The first two, she says she doesn't know what I was doing (laughter).  She always tells that joke.  I said, well, you know, I still had the world on a string, you know.  But, I didn't want to lose her, you know, 'cause she, she, like I say, grounded me, you know.  She was the first woman I had ever met that didn't need me for anything but love, didn't need me to make any decisions for her, didn't need me to hold her hand on any decision, didn't need my bank book, and she ain't--she wasn't rich, but she was a self-made woman.  She--what she had, she had earned.  Nobody--no trust fund, nobody gave her nothing.  Her father was an immigration officer.  Her mother worked--was a house mother, you know, grew up in a humble little house in Long Island [New York].  So, but she had made her way and she didn't need me for nothing but love.  And all these other cover girls and models that I was going out with, all needed me, is she prettier than me and should--can--and should I do this and should I do that and should--can I be--you know, and I was like, I gotta make my own decisions, you know.  I'll help you, baby, but--she just--no, just loved me.  And I didn't want to lose her, you know.  And in reality, Mama Overton [Mattie Overton], even said to me one day, she said, "You're the happiest I ever seen you in your life, you know.  You're the happiest I ever seen you.  You're, you're stable, you feel good, you talk good, you look good, you're, you're sleeping, you're eating good, you know.  Don't lose that woman, you know, and listen to Mama Overton."  Nanny [Rachel Crosby] was gone by then, you know, so--she died in '89 [1989].  So, that was--and then we got married, decided we wanted to make some babies.  That took a while, but we, we, we made them, you know, and, and that was it.  I said, I don't want any babies that I have to worry about at all other than just their wellbeing.  I don't wanna worry about shoes, no Pampers, and we had double Pampers 'cause we had twins [Trey Santiago-Hudson and Lily Santiago-Hudson], so it was double Pampers (laughter), you know, it was double milk, double everything, you know, so, that was interesting--an interesting time, very happy time in my life.  I was on Broadway when they were born.
Speaker 1: Doing?
Speaker 2: 'Seven Guitars' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: My--I got nominated for a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre]--they, they were--I got nominated--how did that go?  I think I got nominated for a To- no, they were born in April, my father [Ruben Santiago] died in May, and I got nominated for a Tony, and then I won the Tony in June.  So, it was like a roller coaster for me.  So, they were at the theater all the time.  Jeannie would bring them here and--Jeannie would come, bring the babies, you know, the twins, and, and I would see them at intermission and come home at night and tell her, "You get some rest.  I'm gonna hang out with the babies."  You know, so it was--it was--it was real cool.
Story_ID: 629950
Speaker 1: So, your twins, what are their names?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lily Rachel [Lily Santiago-Hudson] and his name is Trey Emmanuel [Trey Santiago-Hudson].  Lily Rachel--Lily--I loved lilies and Nanny [Rachel Crosby] had a baby, her only child died of pneumonia when she was two named Lillian [ph.].  Now, Jeannie [Jeannie Brittan] and I tell different stories about this.  That's the reason I wanted her to be Lily.  Jeannie says she don't remember me saying that.  But, 'cause Nanny's baby was Lillian and Nanny's name was Rachel, so Lily Rachel.  And Trey is named after Judy Wilson's [Judy Blye Wilson] husband, Trey, you know, Trey Wilson, the great--the great character actor who died of a brain aneurysm, and I said if I have a boy, I'm gonna name him after Trey 'cause I loved Trey Wilson.  I loved--he was just the best and so we named him Trey and Emmanuel after Jeannie's last name, father's last name is Ebal [ph.], you know, so Emmanuel.
Story_ID: 629951
Speaker 1: Where is he from, Ebal [ph.]?
Speaker 2: He actually was from Baltimore [Maryland].  He was like a--like a--almost like an orphan kid and rose up into the highest ranks of immigration.  And--but his people--I always mess it up, Swedish, you know.  So, I, I--one day, I wanna go find her, her town.  They have a town there.  Ebal means of the river [sic.].  So, it's a--so we've been trying to track it down.  I wanna go find my folk and then find her folk, you know, when I start traveling more.
Speaker 1: And what, what was Jeannie's [Jeannie Brittan] work when you met?
Speaker 2: Jeannie was a commercial girl.  Jeannie has done over three hundred commercials.  She was the--
Speaker 1: Actor?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And jingles.  I don't--you're, you're old enough to--well, I believe you're old enough to remember tiger in your tank, Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation].  It was Esso then.  She was the person that sang that jingle.  So, she was just beautiful to look at, you know, and, and personality.  But--so, she was like--she did Gimbels [Gimbel Brothers], she did Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.], she did like all these accounts.  And by the time we, you know, got married, it started going down 'cause women get to a certain age and you're not useful anymore.  It's like--it's (laughter) almost like slavery.  You know, you all outlive your usefulness.  You know, we don't know where to put you, you know.  So, she--her commercials kind of died out.  Then by the time we had the kids [Trey Santiago-Hudson and Lily Santiago-Hudson], we wanted to raise them.  We didn't want nannies to raise them, so she sacrificed what, what was happening in her career to be with the kids, you know, and, and, and I went on to say I'll take care of everything, you know, in my career if it's--if it's going right.  If not, you're gonna have to get back out there and do commercials and I'm gonna take care of the kids.  But, my career continued to, to, to blossom.
Story_ID: 629952
Speaker 1: When did you meet Epatha [S. Epatha Merkerson]?
Speaker 2: I met Epatha back in the '80s [1980s], you know, when, when I was running with Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] and Pick and Skeeter Ellis Williams [Ellis Williams], and--Pick is James Pickens [James Pickens, Jr.] on 'Grey's Anatomy.'  And I met Epatha at, at that time.  You know, she was dating a guy that was--that was hanging around with us and a good friend of mine.  I'm not gonna necessarily expose their business.  But--so we were all family like a group, you know, and I always admired her work, you know.  And, and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: We never were very, very running, running buddies or nothing.
Speaker 1: --who were the other actors, African American actors, who were coming up as you were coming up?
Speaker 2: O.L. Duke, Samuel L. Jackson, Robert Gossett, Larry Riley.  There, there was a guy named Reino [ph.].  The top guy who I emulated a lot was Charlie Brown [Charles Brown].  Generally, that was the--that was like the hotter bunch.  Most, most of them were in 'Soldier's Play' ['A Soldier's Play,' Charles Fuller].  Denzel [Denzel Washington].  Denzel was the--you know, he had just left 'Soldier's Play' and did a movie 'Hard Copy'--'Carbon Copy' or something and then got 'Soldier's Play,' you know, so Denzel was, you know, hot property.  Sam was just like us.  We was in the muck, muck, muck, you know, doing theater down in Brooklyn [New York] and little warehouses and, you know, me and him and Luis Guzman, and Bimbo Rivas, and [HistoryMaker] Suzan-Lori Parks and Laurie Carlos.  We were all doing experimental theater down at Playwrights Horizon [Playwrights Horizons, New York, New York] and [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange and LaTanya [LaTanya Richardson Jackson], Sam's wife.  We were doing this crazy stuff and, you know, communing, coming together.  LaTanya and Sam had a little raggedy brownstone that we was fixing up into being a refuge for all of us that didn't have anything.  And they would feed you and take care of you as long as you helped out around the house and helped, helped fix it up, you know.  So, it was a--we had a nice little community then.  And most people have gone on and done quite well and we still remain friends.
Speaker 1: So, the, the scene for African American actors during your ascent was a little more robust say than I guess the generation before.
Speaker 2: The generation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: --before me had way more than I did.  They had all--they had a--like a explosion of black theaters because after the riots, the government wanted to get these Negroes off the street, so they had all this funding, community centers, arts groups, you know, Free Southern Theater, New Federal [New Federal Theatre], Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company].  Up in Harlem [New York, New York], they had three, four different, you know, five, six different theater--everybody got funding.  Get them off the streets into something.  So, C.A., community action organization, all these things are, are--National Black Theatre--excuse me--all these theaters got funding.  They wanted us off the streets.  And--but by the time--they got content.  They got content by the time I was here and a lot of those theaters were gone.  Ernie McClintock and Frank Silvera's workshop [Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop], they start going down.  It was like black folks start- you know, getting movies and, and TV shows and got content, and we quit screaming we want a piece of the pie, and those theaters went.
Story_ID: 629953
Speaker 1: At this point in your career, if--let's say we're around '91 [1991], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], this is right after you get married [to Jeannie Brittan].  You are--what are you doing?
Speaker 2: 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe].  Ninety [1990], I was out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I was hitting it.  I was hitting a lick.  We call--as they--as they say in Lackawanna [New York], I was hitting a lick.  I did like one pilot and before I can finish that pilot, I would have another.  I would have a movie.  I would have some.  So, I'm out in L.A. and George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] is staying--I'm staying at Highland Gardens [Highland Gardens Hotel, Los Angeles, California], George Wolfe is staying at Magic Castle [Magic Castle Hotel, Los Angeles, California].  And I knew George because we had the same agent and I saw this brother, and we're both in the waiting room at our agent's and I looked at him one day, I said, "Why are we waiting for our agent?  Don't our agent work for us?"  So, we became kind of friends.  You know, we kind of--
Speaker 1: And was this the beginning of his career, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, early in his career.  And George never forgot.  He said, who is this guy that's talking to me, you know?  'Cause I would talk to people.  I'm country.  I'm Lackawanna.  I talk to--like I went up to Leonard Jackson.  And, and we kind of, you know, knew each other.  And we're in, in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and I see this car pull up and the window goes down, it's George sitting in back, he said, "I want you to come do this reading for me."  And I said, "What reading?"  He says, "This thing I'm doing called 'Jelly's Last Jam.' Come on down and read it."  I said, "Man, I ain't got no time to do no play.  I didn't come the--all the way to L.A. to do no play.  I'm here to try to make me some money."  You know, he say, "Just come do the reading."  I said, "I ain't doing no reading workshop."  He said, "Well, don't talk to me no more," and he put the window up, pulls in, I pull up, walk behind him, I said, "Man, what you--what you gonna tell me don't talk to you no more?"  I said, "I'll, I'll come down there."  He--I said, "But I ain't singing no song.  I didn't bring no music.  I ain't singing nothing."  "It's a musical."  "I ain't singing."  He said, "I--don't--did I ask you to sing?  Just come down," and--I go in and, and I meet them and we talk, Luther Henderson and Susan Birkenhead and, and Hope Clarke, and people.  And at the end of the meeting, you know, he wanted to see my personality, you know.  And at the end of the meeting, the white lady sitting at the piano, was the accompanist, and she waiting for me to pull out my sheet music, and I--and I get ready to leave.  She said, "You not gonna sing?"  And I said, "No, I told them I wasn't gonna sing, but no, I'm not singing anything."  She said, "Not even 'Happy Birthday'?"  I said, "Miss," I said, "do you know the blues?"  She said, "I lived with a black man ten years.  I got the blues."  I said, "Can you put it like this?  Can you do that?"  She said, "I can do it any way you want to do it."  She--I said--I, I said, "Well do it like that."  And she said, "What note, key?"  I said, "E."  So, Luth- Luther Henderson says, "E flat or E natural?"  I said, "Well, they call it (unclear)--," and he said, "Flat," (laughter).  So, she plays it, I sing a little bit of the blues, I'm in the workshop, and that's how I started 'Jelly's Last Jam.'
Speaker 1: So, this is in L.A.?
Speaker 2: L.A., L.A.
Speaker 1: The audition is in L.A.
Speaker 2: The, the workshop is at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The work--
Speaker 2: --Mark Taper Forum [Los Angeles, California].  It's only--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a two week workshop.  So, I'm playing like five, six, seven roles.  It's only like a few people.  And from that, then they call us back to do a bigger workshop with a lot of people, then they gonna do the production in L.A.  We did a production.  I stayed with it, had all these songs, had all this stuff.  And Obba Babatunde was playing Jelly and then they get it to Broadway and Gregory Hines is going to do it, not Obba.  Me and Obba was very--Obba was like a hero to me.  You know, when I came to New York, didn't have anything, Obba was the one that, that said, if you need something to eat, go to this restaurant.  He took me there and said, "Put it on my tab if he co- ever comes in here."  I, I--thank god I never had to go there.  I just wouldn't--I had too much pride to do it even when I was hungry, Obba Babatunde.  So, when he didn't do Jelly, when Gregory was going to take over the role, I didn't know Gregory.  I left Jelly.  I'm not gonna do it without Obba.  And Gregory called me.  He had seen the production in L.A.  "You got to be in this production with me, man.  I'm gonna take care of you.  You know, hang with me on this.  Hang with me."  I said, "I don't know man."  Then, George talked to me and I said, "All right, I'm gonna do it."  I talked to Obba, he said, "You should do it, man, do it."  So, I did it and I came in--they cut all my songs, you know.  I still had a great time and it's one of the best theatrical experiences I ever had in my life and that's when George and I really bonded, you know, and, and started our lifelong friendship, you know, and Gregory and I, too.  Gregory became as close or closer than any, any other male figure I had in my life at that time.
Story_ID: 629954
Speaker 1: When you--thinking about the people who were important when you were growing up, they were women.
Speaker 2: When, when it--when it came to the lessons in life to teach me about really how to be a man, you know, it take a real good woman to, to show you some of the things 'cause it's--the perspective that they have was different than a male perspective, which was always the fight in me, you know.  I'll knock you down or, or you can't outdo me where women had a certain different perspective, you know.  Don't take no, no--don't lick nobody boots, don't let nobody step on you or spit on you, but reason, have reasoning, have tact, you know, and always be a good, fair person.  You know, the main thing they always wanted me to be was responsible and fair.
Speaker 1: And then as you're--at this point in your career, it's, it's men who are really--with whom you are connecting like George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] and, and Gregory Hines, who--Gregory--I knew Gregory.  He was a--seemed like a gentle spirit.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gregory taught me more about business than anybody, how to conduct yourself, how to conduct yourself, what's expected of you.  And he really looked out for me, really--I don't mean by giving me things.  Yeah, I did the two movies that he directed.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Which were?
Speaker 2: 'Red Sneakers' ['The Red Sneakers'] and 'Bleeding Hearts.'  But just as a person, he made things special.  He made me feel special as an artist and told me, if you're gonna--you're a special guy and you're gonna be a star, then you gotta learn what that means, how to conduct that 'cause people gonna expect things from you and, and, and your behavior is going to be very important.  The way you say and do things to other people are gonna affect their lives forever.  They'll never forget, so--when you do really good things and when you do really bad things.  So, make sure you conduct yourself in a manner that's consistent with, with, with, with your status.
Story_ID: 629955
Speaker 1: At this point, you've gotten a lot of acclaim because you've, you've--well, people know you.  How are you making choices for the projects that you're working on?
Speaker 2: I want to make sure that, that--occasionally, I have to do a job that's strictly about money, and my only rule is that long as it doesn't deface, denigrate my people--I'm not gonna make us look stupid.  I'm not gonna make us look subservient.  I'm not gonna--I can play bad guys, good guys, any kind of guys, but I'm not gonna be--I'm not gonna denigrate my culture.  And so I take that money job, you know, which is rare.  That's like as soon as I get enough money to do the things I need, which is not a lot, then I don't take another job like that for a couple years.  So, I try to choose the things that I think help expose and change the distorted images of who we are.  I try to bring integrity and humanity into the world.  If I find that there's a place where I can bring the wholeness of who we are as black people to it and Boricuas to it, then I'm--then I'm--then I'm in.  Like, I'm going to do this movie with George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] now.  I'm only doing a couple d- I only have a couple days 'cause I'm going to direct 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson], so I'm going to do this Henrietta Lacks movie ['The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks'].  It's a story that needs to be told even though I only have two days and I have a smaller role, but it's a very pivotal scene.  And this character, this man, had an incredible integrity 'cause he's the one that hooked the family up with the scien- the woman who was doing their story to expose them.  So, I try to do the projects that help change and stamp out some distorted, totally wrong images of who we are.  And, and if I do a movie that, that I think the movie is not going to help who we are, long as it don't hurt us, I make sure my character embodies all the best of the people that I--that I've learned from in my life, not acting from, learn life from.  So, if I do an 'American Gangster' and I'm playing with--what the white director would say he's the driver.  So, everybody see me now, say, oh, you were the chauffeur, you were the body guard.  I played him that I knew he was, Doc was Frank's [Frank Lucas] partner.  I played the partner.  They called me the chauffeur, but every scene in that movie, the majority of those scenes, 80 percent, I'm not even written in the script to be there.  I just show up.  If I'm gonna be his partner, I should be there whether the director thinks I should be there or not.  My son, Ruben [Ruben Santiago III], was working on it on my door, hit my door, "Dad, Denzel's [Denzel Washington] going to the set," I go to the set.  And you--he'd be sitting in the restaurant, I'd be sitting in the corner.  His mama, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, came to him, wanted to talk to him, I'm standing by the elevator, and she looks to me and ad libs, "Can you give us a minute, please?"  'Cause I ain't in that scene.  When he goes and shoots Idris [Idris Elba], if you look real quickly, you see me in that scene.  I ain't in that scene, so they tried to cut me out of it 'cause I ain't written in the script.  So, a role like that, I have to embody what's not written, the subtext, the relationships, who this human being was.  Yeah, he was a gangster, but he was his partner.  There was a relationship there to the tune that, that, that if Doc walked in the bar and Frank wasn't with him, Doc would take a stool and push it up to the bar like that and nobody would move that stool, just in case Frank showed up.  If somebody threatened to kill Frank, Doc would go take care of him 'cause he wasn't gonna let that happen to his partner.  Sometime Doc drove, sometime Frank drove.  So, it's like, I had to find out all this so I could give this character more than anybody ever expect--particularly, when white people tell our stories, their expectations and level of who we are is never our expectations and level of who we are, so we have to hold up the measuring stick or we'll never measure up.
Story_ID: 629956
Speaker 1: So, in a role like that when you are inserting yourself, did you come across challenge, friction?
Speaker 2: No, I do it so easy, so cool, so cool, he didn't even--some time didn't know it.  The camera B operator said, "Man, you gotta watch this guy, he's--watch some of the stuff he's doing."  So, a lot of that stuff got into the movie ['American Gangster'].  Like when we go to the dope house where they're cutting dope and the director [Ridley Scott] says, okay--he sees me standing there with Denzel [Denzel Washington] 'cause I ain't in the scene if you look at the script.  He says, "Well, okay, Doc, you stand outside," and he goes behind the camera.  When they said action, I'm the first one up the stairs and he cut me right out of it.  Soon as I walk in the room, you don't see me no more.  Why would I stand outside and you got two, two machine gun holding guys standing outside under their coat?  Why would I stand outside, too, and I don't know what my partner is going into?  I mean, if you know hustling and two guys--and there's only two guys, there ain't no gang of us, we're going down--we're going down together however it rolls, so I just went on up the stairs.  Director didn't hardly even notice it, walked in and went to the side.  I was--so, no, he didn't--you know, things that he really wanted, the director wanted to, to--you know, you stay in the front seat, like in the wedding seat when Brolin [Josh Brolin] pulls us over and he and Denzel had that thing, I'm sitting in the front seat and he didn't let me get out and I just stand--but, if you look at that movie, I'm just staring at Brolin the whole way.  So then after a take, after the guy said cut, Brolin said, "Who is this guy?  Who is he?"  Denzel said, "Don't worry about, don't worry about it," 'cause I'm so into my character and watching this cop, watching my guy, I ain't gonna do nothing to him and at the same time, I got my hand on my gun, which will never be in the movie 'cause I'm in it.  If he do something to him, I'm killing him.  That's how I felt, you know, as a character.  But--because it's this bond between these two men that's inseparable and I play--every character I play, I'd have to be willing to die in it or I ain't got nothing at stake.  You know, even I'm playing Dr. Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] in 'Forgotten Genius,' you know, I'm willing to die to achieve what I need for the betterment of all of us.
Speaker 1: And working with directors as you are embodying your character and sometimes building out your role bigger than the director sees--
Speaker 2: Not bigger, deeper.
Speaker 1: Deeper.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not bigger, I don't--
Speaker 1: Fuller.
Speaker 2: I don't start throwing lines in and nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I just be present.  I'm present.
Speaker 1: And I can imagine that there could be directors who would be annoyed by that.
Speaker 2: No, you know, like a, a director like Harold Becker would--said to me when I did 'Domestic Disturbance' with Travolta, John Travolta, Becker said to me one day, Mr. Becker said, "You, you know why I hired you?"  I said, "Why?  No, Mr. Becker, was it my, my audition?"  He said, "When I don't know where to shoot, I just cut to you.  You're always present, always present."  So, if you ever see that movie 'Domestic Disturbance,' see how many cuts he goes to me when I don't--I'm not saying anything.  I never noticed it until I--he said that to me, and he wrote me a great note, you know, after that I keep in my archives.  You know, so, so, no, I don't--I, I understand--I unders- I don't--I stay in my lane, but [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards said something to me a long time ago.  He said, "This is--take inappropriate choices and replace them with appropriate choices."  So, is that the appropriate behavior if I'm his guy that I don't go with him?  If he looks and sees his enemy outside, which was Idris [Idris Elba], and he's gonna prove something to these guys by killing him, why would I not go?  Whether the director tells me or not, unless he tells me, "Do not go," I'm gonna go.  It's natural appropriate behavior if I'm his backbone, so I go.  I don't wait for marching orders.  You know, I march.  If you don't want--if something that's in the way, just tell me.  I'm--you know, I understand.  I'm their--I'm their--I'm their help, too.  I'm always leaning out the camera, I'm always giving them the right angles, one, two takes, I'm done, so I help them, too.  You know, I'll never hurt--I'll never hurt you.
Story_ID: 629957
Speaker 1: 'Seven Guitars' [August Wilson] was huge.  Your--when, when you, you were cast for that role, can you describe the, the preparation and, you know, what your experience was of, of being in that play?
Speaker 2: Well, I read the play and I was determined to get something in it 'cause one of them roles had to fall, and it was only two roles really open, Floyd [Floyd Barton] and Canewell.  So, I was gonna get one of them, that's the way I felt.  So, I, I, I came on in there.  I was dressed.  I was well prepared and dressed in the '40s [1940s] and put all my '40s [1940s] stuff on, came ready.  I normally don't do that.  And I ended up getting a TV series at the same time, literally the same--the next day.  Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards] said to me, can I play the harmonica, and I--and I said, "Yeah, a little bit," so he said, "Let me hear a little blues."  And I played some terrible stuff and he says, "Okay, I wanna call you back in a couple days, learn a little, just one little blues lick, one little riff from the blues."  I said, "Yes, sir, okay."  So, I run out and get all the CDs I could get of the blues and all the great guys and I found one little thing I could do.  I bought like three different harmonicas and I found one little thing I could do, and I came and, and--for the callback and I did it, you know.  And, and I had to make a decision to turn down the thirteen episodes of the TV show.  So, I had to really sit with my manager and my wife [Jeannie Brittan], say, "Listen, you know, can I afford to do this 'cause I--this is my dream come true."  And my, my business manager at the time said, "You can afford to do it for--you can afford to not work, work at this scale for about two years and then you'll be out.  You gotta pay--you got two mortgages, you got babies [Trey Santiago-Hudson and Lily Santiago-Hudson].  Two years, you got enough saved up.  If you don't hit nothing in two years, you got to get out there and--to Hollywood again and try to get some money."  And, you know, the rest is history.  I hit the Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and, and, you know, doors opened and expectations stayed the same, you know.  The brother, the best friend, the partner, the chauffeur, the--but the doors opened, you know.  "If we're gonna go for a doctor, it's gotta be him, you know, police captain, it's gotta be him.  You know, he's got a Tony, it should be him."
Story_ID: 629958
Speaker 1: You know, so I police captained it out until I finally just said, this last two years ago, I said no more police captains, so I lost a lot of work.
Speaker 2: And you said no because you're tired of it?
Speaker 1: Tired of the box they had painted me in.  No matter what I brought to the role, no matter what I brought, it's like, you know, I had to expand my--so I--so this show I'm on now, I play a, a music director, which will come out in January.  I play the music director of the--of the largest black marching band in the nation.  It's a great, great changeup (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's it called?
Speaker 1: It's called 'The Yard' [sic. 'The Quad'].
Speaker 2: 'The Yard.'  So, but, the, the--before we leave the, the police captain, tell me about the police captains roles that you've had.
Speaker 1: The biggest obviously is 'Castle,' you know.  But, you, you know the--you know, and I talked a little, little, little yang on that, too, because all these black people in Hollywood--and the first person to get cut is always the black person, whether they kill you or just cut the amount of shows you do, and that same season, they cut me back two shows, they cut C.C.H. Pounder, they cut Rocky Carroll.  They cut all these black actors and they were all complaining.  I said, "Why don't we get together and speak on it?  Why don't we do a--why don't we say something in the paper, in The Hollywood Reporter or the--or the--Ebony?  Why don't we just--," you know, "No, I ain't gonna mess up this good thing," and nobody wanted to say nothing.  So, then I took them four or five bullets, I was gone, you know.  It, it--it's--you know, I brought stuff to that role that they kept in that--in that story line forever.  I brought the relationship between her and I--she and I.  People always wanted me screaming at her.  You notice, I never screamed at her.  I'm the boss.  Why am I screaming?  I showed her I cared for her and Stana [Stana Katic] just took it and ran for it, that I wasn't just some guy playing the authority figure, the black boogey man.  Hollywood handles my anger or my authority; they're used to that.  My humanity scared the hell out of them, that when a scene ended, if I had to discipline her and she would turn to walk away, if I said, "Listen, you're off this case immediately.  Put your gun and your badge on my desk."  She would turn away and I'd do like this.  And that just said, he cared.  Damn, that hurt that I had to do that to her 'cause she's the best I got.  So, they started writing that she's the best I got.  I was just a hollering boss that I wouldn't holler, and, and people said, "You know, that's a good story line," and it went.  If I don't do that, if I just play the boss, "Put your gun and your badge on my desk and let's go," she turns and goes, I'm like, you see what I did.  No, it was like, damn, that hurt, that little bit.  And you, you just watch the--that's humanity, that I care.  You know, when, when they brought my wife and kids on there, I knew I was gonna die.  They said, "We're gonna bring a young lady to be your wife."  I'm like, well, they're gonna kill me.  They're gonna kill me.  They let me show love.  The want you to see a human being die and not a figurehead.  I'm so far ahead of the stuff they be doing.  I'm like, I'm getting read--I called Jeannie [Jeannie Brittan], I said, "Don't get comfortable, baby."  She was--we was in L.A [Los Angeles, California].  I said, "Don't get comfortable.  They just brought a wife on for me and two kids."  And, and the wife, you know, there was a scene where the, the wife was going to take the kids to school and I grab her and I pull her to me, she said, "What?"  I kind of just kiss her gently and said, "I love you," just added that.  And, and, and she said to me, "I don't like all that kissing stuff."  I said, "I ain't gonna be giving you--I ain't gonna slop no spit on you or nothing like that, I just got to show you some love," you know.  And, I was gone.  I was gone pretty soon.  But, you know, it was a good thing because my directing career took off.  I left there and went straight to Broadway.  I, I had a TV offer right after 'Castle' and I didn't do it.  I said, I ain't doing no TV for two years.
Speaker 2: So, what were the years for 'Castle'?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I was--I was on it three years, gave me tremendous stability financially, but if I--you need five years to have it made.  I never got five years.  I got three.  So it gave me stability for them years to, to just establish my directing career and then 'Castle' money was gone (laughter), you know what I'm saying?  So, but if I'd had did five years, you know, I'd, I'd needed a wheelbarrow to, to, to--you know, but it was enough for me to establish a, a, a, a, a different--another career, another aspect of my career.
Story_ID: 629959
Speaker 1: And so what was your first directing--what was your directorial debut?
Speaker 2: New Yor- I was directing a lot in Detroit [Michigan] and directing a lot in Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], but I quit directing.  And my, my--what brought me back, I--was 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson] after we closed on Broadway.  I did it at two major regional theaters, the McCarter Theatre [McCarter Theatre Center, Princeton, New Jersey] and ACT [American Conservatory Theater] in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: And when was that?
Speaker 2: You got--I don't know years.  I don't know--right when we closed on Broadway, that next year, so I, I guess 2006 or something like that or three.
Speaker 1: And, and so you began directing singularly or were you directing and acting?
Speaker 2: I never stop doing anything else 'cause I'm doing something more.  I just--I never eliminate anything I'm doing.  I add on to what I'm doing.  You know, I start writing.  I kept writing, acting, directing, produced 'Lackawanna Blues,' I produced--you know, just keep doing, adding on, you know.  God gives us infinite abilities and potential and I think you--it's up to you to hone it or grow it, you know, utilize it.
Story_ID: 629960
Speaker 1: You have appeared in some blockbuster films.  Can you describe your engagement?  And you, you told me about one, but--so, another is 'Shaft.'  Tell me about your experience in the big films.
Speaker 2: I'm always--I'm always tremendously grateful to, to have an opportunity to do film.  I have rarely scratched the surface of what I do in films because films are fitting in to a big puzzle opposed to plays, which are you are the puzzle, all y'all are the puzzle together.  It ain't fitting in.  It's more than a puzzle.  It's like a--just a big, big painting, you know.  And films, I get excited 'cause I like working, I like continuing to improve myself, I like to--I like to fight.  I like to battle.  I like to get out and knock it off and do another character and bring--embody them with something that's not there.  I like that.  But, I mean, they scratch the surface of what I do.  I mean, literally, they, they--it's so limited in what I get to do in film.  I mean, it just--I, I don't know what to say.  I don't want to be not graci- grateful.  I'm grateful.  I've had a great career.  I've done thirty-five films--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --something like that.  That ain't a lot.  There's people that's done two hundred films.  I mean, it's like, you know, 'Devil's Advocate' was a biggie, you know, 'Blown Away,' I guess.  You know, I mean, most of--everything that I've got that's been major, somebody saw me on stage.  Somebody saw me on stage and said, "Gotta put this guy in a film."  Rarely do I go into an audition for a film and get, get a role.  No, somebody sees me and they gotta get me.  You know, and, and 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' they, they--you know, they suggested me and Darnell [Darnell Martin] would say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, that would be--we can get him?"  You know, but--Henrietta Lacks ['The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks'], George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] called, "Come on, man, come do this film."  But, anyway, it's, it's--that's a hard discussion because what have I done in fi--you know, 'Forgotten Genius,' the documentary, I loved doing that.  Is it a big acting role?  It's not a real film, it's a documentary, but it means a lot to me.  I'll take that film and show it.  'Lackawanna Blues,' I'll take that film and show it to people.  I don't carry 'Shaft' in my--in my briefcase--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or 'American Gangster.'  Oh, you know, and coming--'Coming to America' was a great, great movie for its genre and what it did, but I don't carry that with me.  You know, when people on the streets see me and they say, oh, that's the dude from 'Shaft.'  I don't--I, I--I'd rather--I'll be--say, you know, I got a couple other things that, you know, if you say, 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' I'm a little more proud of that, you know--extremely proud of 'Lackawanna Blues.'  It was in the hands of people that handled my life and my mother's [Alean Hudson] life very tenderly and, and with incredible authority and dignity and integrity.  I can't name other films, you know.  They don't know what to do with me (laughter).  They don't know who I am.  They don't know that I bleed love.  Think about it.  Look at the films I've done.  I always bring something to it and you can remember me from it.  But, I mean--and even in 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' when I--you know, they wanted me to push Halle [Halle Berry] into the dirt.  And I said, you know--I, I got to pop her one time.  You know, that's, that's cruel enough.  When I go to push her, notice that I go to push her, if you ever see that film, and I, I can't push her.  Then I kind of like grab her and I kind of hold her there and that tear--and then I just--then I push her like this.  And she takes two steps, turns around with her suitcase, and I said, "Go."  I don't push her into the dirt and I said, "I'm not gonna push her into the dirt.  I'm not gonna be the man that mistreated every black woman and every woman in the world.  I'm not playing that role.  I love her.  I don't know how to show it other than buying her towns, giving her houses.  I don't know how to show her I love her."  Many men are in that position.  So--and no--and notice, if you see this movie again, when I push her and she decides to go back in the house, I stand there and one tear drops out of my eye, and I'm fighting that tear, I do not want it to fall, and it drops, and I'm--I grab it real quick and I look over to the porch and I see all of them, [HistoryMaker] Lorraine Toussaint and all of them, Terrence [Terrence Howard] and them on the porch looking at me.  But I wouldn't push her into the dirt.  And we had a little conversation about that, I said, I'm not doing it.  No, I hit her before and I know--I need to know better than that, so I did it wrong, I did it, you know, but I'm not gonna play that throughout the movie.  And so--yeah, that ruffles feathers a little bit.  You gotta know what you--because that representation ain't cool.  I don't wanna be the, the, the black wife beating husband in ev- in, in, in movies, you know.  If I gotta be that and I get my due, cool.  If I'm proving something and making your world better by saying this is the kind of guy you stay away from, cool.  But, he, he actually--Joey Starks [Joe Starks] actually loved her, you know.  That's how--that's how I see it.
Story_ID: 629961
Speaker 1: I wanna talk about 'Lackawanna Blues' [Ruben Santiago-Hudson].  When did you start writing it?
Speaker 2: I started writing it--I tried--I tried to start writing it in, in college, but I wasn't sincere.  I was afraid to expose a lot, so I, I put it away pretty fast.  One of the teachers said I was the worst writer he had ever seen and I should forget about that, you know.  It's like I should forget about Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  I mean, the whole way is forget about it, forget about it, forget about it.  You know, you never tell a kid that.  So, I didn't write again, but I kept telling Nanny's [Rachel Crosby] stories, anybody that would listen, subway down the street.  I just--even today, you know, I still tell Nanny's stories as you can tell in this interview.  And I was telling it to Rosemarie Tichler and John Dias at The Public Theater [New York, New York] and George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] was in charge of The Public, "You gotta go tell George."  I said, "George has heard these stories."  "You gotta go tell--just tell him the one you just told me."  So, we go into George's office and I tell the story, George says, "Yeah."  He says, you know, I'm tir- he said, "I'm tired of hearing these stories, you know.  You need to go write them down."  I said--you know, "They, they would probably be a great story and everybody need to hear and quit telling me and quit telling him."  And I said, "Yeah, somebody gotta write it."  He said, "Yeah, you," and walked out of the room.  "I gotta go to this other meeting."  And I'm like, we gotta get somebody to write this story.  So, I think a week later, I got a commission from The Public Theater, a couple thousand dollars or something to write this play.  So, I said, wow, I got accountability and responsibility, I gotta--I gotta do this thing.  I just gotta find a writer.  I'm not a writer.  So, we hired a grad student from Columbia University [New York, New York] to transcribe what I was putting on the tape.  They said, "What do you need?"  I said, "A tape recorder, my harmonica, and a light in the room," and I just start telling stories into the mic- microphone and she typed them out and typed them out all wrong.  If I say something, she would correct it.  Like if I say something like I heard somebody say at the rooming house like heard them fool got drunk, cut each other throat.  She would write I heard those fools had gotten drunk last night and cut each other's throats.  No, heard them fool got drunk, cut each other throat last night.  So, I had to start writing it to correct her, and that's how I started writing it.
Speaker 1: And this was about what time?
Speaker 2: This was--this was '90-something, '98 [1998], '90-something.  And then my boy, Bill Sims, Jr., who did all the music, I called Bill Sims, I said, "Man, bring your guitar in here, man.  I want you to play woodshed a little bit while I--while I do this monologue.  I want you to hear this monologue."  And Bill would come sit in that corner with his guitar and start playing.  "Do that again, do that again, do that again."  I would do it again and he would do a different thing to it.  Or he would be playing and I say--and then I would pick up my harmonica and start playing, and we just start gluing it together, gluing it together.  And I had a director who I brought in from Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], and George came to hear our first--my first pass at it, some of my stories with this director and he was a musical theater guy and he needed a break.  He wanted a break.  He had just moved to New York [New York] and he was a guy that I really liked at school, but we had fallen out and come back together.  He was a director and they brought in from U--UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and he was teaching at Wagner College [Staten Island, New York].  Anyway, I brought him.  He said, "Please, man, I want to get to The Public Theater.  Please, I'll do anything.  I'll direct the workshop, I'll do," George watched my first presentation.  He said, "I need to see you in my office."  I went to his office, he said, "What is that?  This is not a musical comedy.  This is the story of your life.  What, what are you doing?"  And I was like, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Who, who is the director?"  I said, "He's a guy I know."  Well, he said, "Get him out of here.  Get him out of here.  Do your story.  Quit playing at it.  If you're gonna do your story, do your story."  And I said, "All right," you know.  So, he made me get real serious about it.  So, I quit making everything comedy and let you laugh at the realities.  If you laugh, you laughed at my characterizations or something, somebody might say--like, Ol' Po' Carl might say, "Your mama was a fine woman.  Her lips was--she had the big pooty lips, look--lips was kind of like blue like she had been drinking black berry brandy," and you will laugh.  Or Old Paul or, or, or, or Ol' Po' Carl would say, "Yeah, I went to New York, went up to the entire state building."  You know, he was a (unclear) guy, so that would make you laugh instead of me joking everything.  Just tell a story, the way it is.  So, George kind of turned that around in me and Bill just got tighter and tighter.  And then we brought in--George gave us a wonderful director, Loretta Greco to guide it.  This is my story, but she--I needed a guiding eye, and she was a good guide for it.
Story_ID: 629962
Speaker 1: And so you opened at, at The Public [The Public Theater, New York, New York] or no?
Speaker 2: Opened up at The Public and sold it--people was out like it was a Yankees [New York Yankees] game, need tickets for 'Lackawanna Blues' [Ruben Santiago-Hudson] could not get in, could not get in, you know.
Speaker 1: How many characters did you perform?
Speaker 2: Around twenty-six, around twenty-six characters.  And I--and I--and I didn't--no props, just--some time four people in the same conversation, same--it would be me as the boy and it would be Freddie [Freddie Cobb], "You don't know nothing about me," and Jimmy Bell [sic. Jimmy Lee], "Ah, man, you wouldn't," and then, "Y'all stop that argument," Nanny [Rachel Crosby] why they--and just going back and forth and back and forth, and people would be--The New York Times said I was changing characters like switching on and off a light switch, you know.  And--but it's hard--it was hard for them--it was hard--it's hard for people to see that kind of love that Nanny gave me.  I remember being on tour--you know, I--we did it on--we went on tour for fourteen months, but 'Lackawanna Blues' had died so, you know, we had to close it because Public Theater only had one theater.  They were doing this major renovation, so another play had to take this theater, one or two theaters.  So, we had to close, so they said don't--
Speaker 1: Even though it was sold out.
Speaker 2: It was sold out for ten weeks or something, but you gotta close.  This other play gotta come in, but you're gonna be fine.  We're gonna bring in some producers, y'all are gonna do a presentation, and somebody else gonna pick it up.  So, me and Bill [Bill Sims, Jr.] said, "Fine with us."  So, they were gonna do 'Topdog' ['Topdog/Underdog,' Suzan-Lori Parks] and so they had--were building 'Topdog' set.  So, me and Bill went up on 'Topdog' set and we invited all these producers, the best of the best Broadway people, off Broadway people, everybody, every name.  We had a list.  The list was this long.  It was all the money people.  I ain't even gonna name them.  You know, they're still the money people.  Me and Bill laid that 'Lackawanna Blues' down, we walked off that stage and went down the stairs--we were doing a nonstop--we went down the stairs and the people were applauding so loud, the stage manager ran behind us, "Hey, guys, guys, you gotta come back."  Me and Bill came back, they still--it was standing up, still applauding.  These are producers and some friends.  We took another bow.  We walked off of the stage and they, they kept--wouldn't stop, so we just stopped, I just put my hands up, I said, "Thank--you know, just thank, thank y'all."  I mean, they went nut.  Me and Bill went down the stairs, we hugged each other.  I said, "Man, we're gonna have to pick and choose where we gonna go now 'cause this shit is on."  Not one call.  Not one call.  So, John Dias who runs Two River Theater [Red Bank, New Jersey] where I'm gonna do 'Ma Rainey' ['Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' August Wilson] called on our--my behalf, the people he knew.  Said, "Well, well--why are you not calling?  You guys wouldn't sit down.  You, you clapped." They said, "We don't know what to do with it.  We don't know how to--what to sell it as, what to make people--." He said, "It's been sold out for ten weeks here, people still want to see it."  "Yeah, but to take it to Broadway or somewhere, we don't know--we don't really, really know what to do with it.  It is fabulous, but we don't know what to do with it," that's what happened.  9/11 [September 11, 2001] hit and I got a phone call from the McCarter Theatre [McCarter Theatre Center, Princeton, New Jersey], Emily Mann, she was doing--gonna do a play about terrorists, had to cancel.  She said, "I can't do a play about terrorists.  They just bombed the World Trade Center [New York, New York].  Would you bring this 'Lackawanna Blues'?"  And I'm like, "How big is the theater?"  She said, "Eleven hundred seats."  I'm like, "I'm just coming from one hundred fifty seats.  I don't know about that."  She said, "Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson], I'm telling you it will be fine."  So I said, "Well, I have some--I have some things I need."  She said, "What do you need?"  I said, "I don't want to be back in a proscenium.  I want to push it out into the audience, so remove a couple of rows, rows of seats, extend the lighting grid out over the audience, bring me out in the audience some."  "Yeah, but we've never done that."  "Well, you're gonna have to do it if you--if I'm coming."  So, they dug some holes to hang chains to hang the lights over the audience and bring me out 'cause it's proscenium.  And then I said the other thing is--she said, "Well, I don't know what to pay you."  I said, "Well, have you ever had a one person show?"  She said, yeah--what's the woman that does the, the operator?  She does the grunt.  She goes--
Speaker 1: Haney [ph.]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: She's older.  She does this one person show, she's a comedienne, black hair.
Speaker 1: Oh, Lily Tomlin?
Speaker 2: Lily Tomlin.
Speaker 1: Lily Tomlin.
Speaker 2: They said, "We've only had Lily Tomlin."  And I said, "Well, whatever you gave her, that's my pay."  They were like, "Yeah, but Lily Tom--." I said, "Whatever you gave her, that's my pay," and it was a very nice pay.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: So it was like, wow.  So, people start flying in to McCarter to see--the people who missed it at The Public who couldn't get in from Carey Perloff from ACT [American Conservatory Theater, San Francisco, California], different people from different theaters, and they start booking it.  And I said, "Bill, we gotta do a tour," so fourteen months.  I managed it, starred in it, and we went on tour with me and Bill, and Curtis Hodge [Curtis V. Hodge], one other guy, and we went on--he did everything, stage manager, technical director, everything.  He kept me in check.  He was my cat.  And we toured and we sold out everywhere we went, broke records, six weeks, four weeks.
Story_ID: 629963
Speaker 1: And this is in 2001?  Which is--well, in--into 2002.
Speaker 2: And this is the interesting thing about 'Lackawanna Blues' [Ruben Santiago-Hudson].  Halle Berry got nominated for an Oscar [Academy Award].  Halle Berry won an Oscar.  Halle wanted to do a--give a thank you to all the people that helped her on her Oscar campaign, which is who threw parties for her, who made phone calls for her.  That's how Oscars are won.  You, you connect and people gotta pull for you.  And so her thank you was, "Would you do 'Lackawanna Blues' for my guests in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?"  I said, "Well, I'm on tour, I only got like these two weeks off."  "Well, could you come?  We'll find a theater, we'll rent a theater in L.A.," she and my manager, Vincent Cirrincione, and we're gonna give a thank you to our guests.  We're gonna find one hundred seat theater and do it, two shows.  This is all I got.  I went to L.A., I found a theater I liked on Melrose [Avenue].  So, we--we're gonna simplify it, get the lights in there and bring Curtis [Curtis V. Hodge].  We're gonna hook this up, me and Bill [Bill Sims, Jr.] gonna lay it out and get out of town.  So, Vince was concerned that most of the Hollywood wouldn't come.  A hundred seats, so we need--two nights, we need two hundred invitations.  They ain't gonna come.  So, we--he went to a black church and said you guys get free tickets to come see this play if the seats are available.  It's 'Lackawanna Blues' playing.  This ain't no movie, now.  This is a one man named [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson that don't nobody know, is coming to do this show.  So, we went to the black church to fill it up.  Curtis comes to the dressing room the first night.  He said, "Y'all ain't gonna believe this."  "What?"  And we're getting ready to go on.  He says, "You ain't gonna believe who out there."  I said, "Who?"  "You know, Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] and, and Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] and Ving Rhames and, and Courtney Vance [Courtney B. Vance], Angela Bassett, you know, The Temptations.  Everybody is out here."  We said, "Oh, man," you know.  So, I said, it's on, me and Bill.  Let's do this.  Let's do this number.  It's a hundred seat house.  They're sitting on the floor, they got chairs they brought in.  The fire department marshal came in and, and was--almost shut us down.  Some people had to go out and come back in when the fire department left.  Me and Bill went on and the church people, none of them could get in.  We turned--the--as soon as I hit that harmonica and Bill hit that guitar--wham, and we start playing, you see the people like this.  They couldn't believe it.  I'm this close to them and I looked over at Bill and Bill did like this.  I said, here we go, and I went into that play.  And I was good friends with Red Buttons, the, the Jewish comedian.  Buttons was there.  When I got to the last song I play called 'Angel' on my harmonica, a song I wrote for Nanny [Rachel Crosby], me, and Bill, called 'Angel,' and I had lyrics to it, but I, I, I felt it didn't need lyrics.  I'm gonna say it with my harmonica.  So, I'm saying it--which I learned in 'Seven Guitars' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I, I play this song 'Angel' and at the end of it, I start climbing, dee-dee-dee-dee, I take a break, dee, real high and I just hold it and I just start wobbling it, wah-wah-wah-wah-wah, and the lights start coming down.  When I said dee-dee-dee-dee, Buttons says, oh, god, and I hit that note, dee, and the--you could see the people stand up and the lights start coming down.  This is in L.A.  Halle is sponsoring this.  And they went nut.
Story_ID: 629964
Speaker 1: So, we come back the next night, people standing outside and you can't get in.  They're on the floor.  I mean, they're all over.  They're on--damn near on the stage.  I swear to god.  And we left to go to the car and people from 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] and HBO were at this restaurant, outdoor restaurant.  They said, "Hey, hey, we need to talk to you."  And that's, that's how I got on.  The first person was Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].  Oprah said, "I want to do this show."  And I met with her people and they said, "Oprah is not gonna be at the meeting when you come."  All of a sudden I see this Cocker Spaniel come in while I'm having a meeting with her people.  Here comes Oprah.  "Oh, tell me a little bit about Nanny [Rachel Crosby].  Tell me a little bit about Nanny."  I tell her a little bit about Nanny.  I show her a couple pictures.  She leaves.  They make me an offer to do the show.  I asked my manager [Vincent Cirrincione] who they with and they said ABC and I didn't want it on network TV 'cause they would censor it.  So, we start shopping at the other places and ended up HBO gave me my voice.  They said, "You can have a voice.  We won't interfere, you know.  We want you to tell your story."  But, Hollywood does start encroaching and then I had to get to the point where, not my mama.  Other things, yeah, but I'm gonna say it the way she said it.  And they said, "Well, okay then."  And, and so I said it the way she said it except one line.  One line didn't get into the movie 'cause Epatha [S. Epatha Merkerson] didn't wanna say that line.  And when Epatha came in for that audition, she was so incredible as you can see in the film, stunning, stunning.
Speaker 2: Well, it was called a breakout for her.
Speaker 1: It was a breakout.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I hope she knows that.  I hope everybody know that.  You know, some time--you know, took a long time before she thank Nanny, though.  She was three awards deep, you know, and I kept saying don't worry about me, thank Nanny.  Don't worry about your divorce lawyer, don't worry about Dick Wolf, thank Nanny 'cause now people wanna know how to spell your name.  They wanna know how to spell it.  I says 'cause not only did you pay homage to her in the greatest--nobody could've done--you know, people could've did it differently.  She was so stunningly incredible.  I said but, Nanny, she filled your cells up.  She lived the life for you to play this role.  She don't live that life, you don't get this role, I don't get this moment.  I remember being at Sundance [Sundance Film Festival] and them screening it.  There was a special screening.  It wasn't in competition.  And I was worried 'cause they put it in this big, big theater.  I said, oh, man, ain't nobody gonna be there.  When they picked me up from my apartment and took me and we got there, I saw the line outside.  I said, when they gonna let the people in?  The movie is supposed to start in ten minutes.  They said, they in.  It's--you can't get in.  That's who can't get in.  And I'm like, what?  So me, Epatha, and George [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] said, whoa.  We went in and at the end of the movie, they start screaming our name, George Wolfe, Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson], Ruben, we want--we want--so, me and George went to the stage.  They just randomly grabbed two mics and me and George went and we had to talk back impromptu.  We said, whoa.  This is gonna really--and that, that, that was 'Lackawanna Blues.'  You know, so when I--Epatha got what I was saying and then she thanked Nanny, but it was--I had to keep saying, thank Nanny.  'Cause so much was happening in her world and she didn't like purposely like overlook Nanny, but it was like so many people she wanted to thank, and--but it was my movie and about Nanny.  It's Nanny's life.  That's who made it possible.  I wasn't wanting to make no movie.  We were having a dinner, sitting at this dinner, and everybody from HBO and all these people stood up and gave a big toast to George and Epatha.  And Epatha stood up and George stood up and, thank you guys so much, but, but nobody thanked Nanny, nobody thanked me.  And I sat there and my wife [Jeannie Brittan] looked at me and she kind of pat me on the leg like, it's okay, and I was like--so George looked at me and said--he stood back up, he said, "And Ruben.  It's 'cause of Ruben," and I stood up and said, "It's 'cause of Nanny."  And we raised that glass and said this is to Nanny.  And everybody got it then.  It's, it's, it's, it's, it's a deep little story, but, but and it ain't deep.  It's simple in a--in a lot of ways, but you gotta know what the source is, you know, and so--you know, even when I won my Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].  At first, you know, Nanny, God, Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], August [August Wilson].  After that, I don't remember what else I said.  But, but that's the way it, it go because, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, people get caught up in those lists.
Speaker 1: I just knew I had to say those four people, but--and, and I don't know if it was in that order, but--
Story_ID: 629965
Speaker 1: How did the people of Lackawanna [New York] respond?
Speaker 2: Well, Lackawanna is a small town.  You know, they--I mean, you know, they went--the majority of the people went absolutely ballistic.  They went crazy.  They just--they were so proud.  They still so proud.  They're so--you know, a lot of people said, "You know, that's me.  You might've changed the name.  That's me.  You owe me money."  You know, and other people was like, "You know, tell our story, son.  You, you put Lackawanna on the map," you know, other than steel and the Lackawanna Six, you know, terrorist cell.  You made--you--and then people from all over the country, all over the country were saying that's my mama, that's my grandmother, that's--you know, that's our community.  That's me in, in East St. Louis [Illinois], that's me in Gary, Indiana, that's me in Chicago [Illinois], that's me in Cleveland [Ohio], that's me in Erie [Pennsylvania], you know, that's me, in, in, in, in Oakland [California].  That was our community.  That, that was--that's us, that's us in Detroit [Michigan].  I remember running into [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson in the men's room and he coming out, I'm going in.  He said, "Oh, 'Lackawanna Blues.'  That was my grandmamma's house in Detroit.  That's (laughter) (unclear)."  He, he said, "Man, that's my grandmamma."  He said, "I could never forget you."  I saw Magic Johnson get--got up on a plane, saw me walk past him, and got up, said, "No, no, no, no, 'Lackawanna Blues' can't walk past me.  It's 'Lackawanna Blues.'"  It's like--because he said, "That's my mama's house in Lansing [Michigan], that's So and So," Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], all them people, all of them, you know.  I remember President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] when I met him, the first time I met President Obama--I, I gotta jump to this for a second (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Please tell.
Speaker 2: --'cause we're talking about Lackawanna.  We doing a fundraiser for him when he was running and I told Mama Overton [Mattie Overton]--Nanny [Rachel Crosby] was dead, I said, "Mama, I'm going to raise money for President Obama."  She said, "You tell President Obama that I said," he wasn't president then, "that, now, tell, tell Mr. Obama, God got him and he's gonna be fine.  He's gonna be our president and I'm gonna live to see this."  So when I went to take the picture with him, I said, "You know, my godmother told me to tell you God got you, you're gonna be fine, and you're gonna be our president."  He said, "You know, tell her I said thank you."  The next time I saw President Obama, he was the president, and when I walked up to him, I said, "I don't know if you remember me, Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson]," he said, "How is your godmother doing?  She was right."  I swear--I swear to you.  How he remembered that, years later.  Why would that even be important to him?  That's why you say people get caught up in the moment.  He wasn't so caught up he didn't remember this small town boy that some country woman from Bessemer, Alabama, said, he good.  So, that's the kind of man he is.  So, when people talk that kind of stuff about him, they don't know.  He said that to me and I bet you some--thousand other stories or ten thousand, a hundred thousand, just like mine, you know.  But that's mine and Nanny's and Mama Overton's.  So, so people--you can get caught up, don't get too caught up.
Story_ID: 629966
Speaker 1: How did the work of August Wilson affect your creation of 'Lackawanna Blues'?
Speaker 2: August said something to me--August and I spent hundreds and hundreds of hours talking, thousands of hours talking, really.  "Don't be afraid to let your character sp- speak, and don't be afraid to tell the truth."  He says, "White people don't want you speaking."  You know, that's why black folks, you know, get loud and, and party so hard and talk so loud.  This is my house, Gus, and all that stuff because we come to arenas where we can speak, rooming houses, pool rooms, tobacco shops.  You know, we come to places, bars where we can actually speak and people take pride in their gift of gab and their wit, their banter, and he says, "So don't run away from that.  Let them talk.  Somebody say that monologue is too long, hell with them.  You the pen, you the penman.  You're sitting in the same--you're sitting in the seat of royalty as a writer.  You're sitting in the same seat Aristotle sat in, Socrates sat in, Eugene O'Neill sat in, and Tennessee Williams sat in.  You're a writer.  Don't let anybody stifle that.  You're sitting in the same chair and you have the same responsibility to your culture and your people and your stories."  And once he said that, he let me talk.  He let me, let my characters talk.  That's too long.  That's too long.  Black people don't ever tell me my, my stories are too long.  White people always tell me my stories too long.  Now, they'll go see a three hour white play and it's fine.  You see a two hour and twenty minute August Wilson play, they talk too long.  They talk too long.  That's too long.  They'll go see 'Nicholas Nickleby' ['The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby,' David Edgar], take them two, three--they gotta go, go to dinner and come back, go, go to nap and come back to see it.  And that's fine.  But you let August--you let a black play run over two hours, but I'm not gonna--that ain't the rules I go by, you know.  You just--you tell your story, be honest and be truthful.  There's too many people that's human enough to want to hear that and need to hear that.  And the--and, and theaters just have to quit tea- feeding people what they want to eat and feed them what they need to eat 'cause they need nutrition in a whole lot of different ways, emotionally, educationally, and historically.
Story_ID: 629967
Speaker 1: You said a couple times that you questioned whether the audience would come for 'Lackawanna' ['Lackawanna Blues,' Ruben Santiago-Hudson], like, when--for Halle's [Halle Berry] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the movie.
Speaker 1: --and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that just part of the creative experience?
Speaker 2: That's cr- creative an- anxiety.  Plus, you know, I have not--I hadn't seen that.  I hadn't seen this kind of work.  I hadn't, you know, and you--I didn't realize how many people really, really related and loved these people and knew these people as intimately as I knew them from their own experiences, from their own experiences.  They had ownership as well as me, so they were investing as well as I was investing, and I didn't realize that.  It took me a little while.  Listen, I toured that play all over the country with Bill [Bill Sims, Jr.].  I was in Seattle, Washington, and, and a lady was in a wheelchair and she had a granddaughter pushing her, and we were doing the talkback and the lady something and I said, "Ma'am, I, I didn't--I didn't hear you, repeat that."  I said, "I got married at Nanny's rooming house.  Me and Luther [ph.] got married there."  She said, "You remember Luther?"  And she named--I forgot his last name.  I was like--I came off the stage, I went down there and hugged her in the wheelchair.  I said, "Ma'am, I don't," she says, "You was a little boy."  She says, "You were about seven years old.  Me and--I got married in Nanny's rooming house."  I was like, damn.  The woman who, who--the white woman with the two kids that come in and the, the guy's hitting her, she--we in contact pretty regularly.  And when somebody asked the guy that had beat her, was beating her, her husband, did Nanny talk to him that way, she said, "Baby, if you touch your--that girl again, me and you gonna dance."  She, she--they asked him--he was in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], he's a singer, they asked him, "Did Nanny talk to him that way?"  He, he said, "Yeah, and some."  So, the, the people who have come out who are in that story, and then all over this country, people would approach me, "I knew Nanny.  I came--when I came to Nanny, I came to Nanny from, from Lexington, Kentucky, Nanny took me in.  I stayed at Nanny's house.  Nanny fed me."  I mean, Bill was looking at me like.  Even like right now that Bill and I are doing 'Jitney' [August Wilson] on Broadway, first thing I said when I said Bill, you know, you--we going--we going to Broadway with 'Jitney,' Bill said, "Nanny's still feeding us."  Bill (laughter) said, "Nanny's still feeding us."  But, he witnessed all these people around the country.  I didn't expect them to be telling me what Nanny did for them.  You in Seattle, you, you, you in Oakland, California, you're, you're, you're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], what you know about Nanny?  "You know, oh, I knew Miss Rachel [Rachel Crosby], I knew Miss Rachel.  Miss Rachel took care of me, you know, my, my Uncle So and So."  I was like, wow, you know.  That's the power.
Story_ID: 629968
Speaker 1: As you're describing this, I'm remembering your experience when you saw 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' [August Wilson] and you describe seeing characters who you knew and this is what you created.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it's like you take a little argument like he says,  "Now, Reverend Gates, was going to visit his, his, his, his sister and So and So and So and So and the train stopped in Sigsbee," and, and, and, "Let me see, you can stop that story right there 'cause that train don't stop in Sigsbee."  He said, "The train stop at Sigsbee."  He, he said, "No, the train do not.  It make these four stops."  He said, "I don't know what train you was on, but this train stopped in Sigsbee.  And Reverend Gates," (laughter), you know, same arguments in Nanny's [Rachel Crosby] house, you know.  "The Nile River is longer than the--than, than, than--than the, the Mississippi River."  "No, it ain't.  Hell, it is."  "Yeah, it is longer.  I tell you this uncle did run from Egypt all the way to--." "No, the Mississippi River run through Colorado and go all the way through--." "No, Doc, tell me which one is the longest?"  "Lake Pontchartrain is bigger than Lake Superior."  "How you know?"  And same arguments, and different things, but simplicity, the simplicity of what they were trying to prove sent this young boy into a complex world of finding out knowledge.  Oh, I had to come back and say, "No, this river is longer than that and Lake Pontchartrain ain't as big as Lake Superior and, and I got it right here--right here."  Just--
Speaker 1: In the encyclopedias.
Speaker 2: --a little simple world that I was in opened my mind up into a huge vast world of knowledge through these people that needed information.  So--and then also, I gathered my characters from them.
Story_ID: 629969
Speaker 1: You now are working with August Wilson's body of work, some of it anyhow.  When did--when did you begin working as a director of his work rather than acting?
Speaker 2: I was doing 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: And that was?
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [2005], '6 [2006]?  When was 'Gem'?
Speaker 1: I think it might've been '03 [2003].  Let's see.
Speaker 2: Three [2003], probably '03 [2003].  And the--we were having some difficulties in trying to navigate a certain technical aspect of the show.  I mean, it was going on.  We went to rehearsal and I was sitting--I like to sit and watch, learn, how, how they solve certain problems, and August kept going out smoking and I was sitting in the back, and finally, he came and leaned over the thing.  He said, "Man, how you gonna fix this?"  I said, "Oh, I can fix it two or three ways, which way you wanna know?"  He said, "The first way," and I told him how to fix it.  And he said, "Well, go tell them that's how they should fix," I said, "I don't wanna tell nobody how to fix nothing," I said, "but when I direct it, that's how I'm gonna direct it."  He said, "When you gonna direct it?"  I said, "When I get on the list."  He said, "You on the top of the list."  Three months later, we were closed, and I got a call to direct it 'cause August recommended me.  He said I was on top of the list, right?  And that's how I started directing his work.
Speaker 1: And the--was 'Gem of the Ocean' the first that you directed?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how did you change?
Speaker 2: A lot.  A lot.  All my music was organic, no synthesizer, nothing that wasn't invented at that time.  That's the first thing I changed.  The second thing I changed, though I loved who composed it, the woman who composed it is sensational, terrific, brilliant, but I just thought in 1906, I want all the sound to come from the people, so I used African drums, I used African beads, I used a stick, I used chant, I used hitting, you know, all African sounds, and I made the City of Bones a African ritual.  Part of some of the stuff that was done more harsh, I made more of an invitation, come on with me, we're gonna go, and I let Black Mary [Mary Wilks] conduct it until she couldn't conduct it anymore, so different changes like this.  Not that what we did didn't work 'cause I loved our production on Broadway.  I loved--I--it worked beautifully for me, but each director always has--should have something to add or should have some perspective that could be a, a different, different outlook or, or take on it, and so--and then also when we got to the City of Bones, I did this really interesting thing where I used all the wainscoting around.  It was actually, the lights could come through it and the pillar that was in the middle, lights could come through it, and from the floor, lights could come up, so when we went to the City of Bone and when these lights came up, you thought he was in a--in a--by himself in the world.  You thought he was in--floating in the universe, so it was different.  Even the whipping, you know, taking another, another step.  Instead of throwing him against a wall, ripping his shirt and whipping him there, I threw him to the floor, staked him, kicked his legs open, tied him around two stakes, tied his hands around two stakes, and right on the floor in front of you, whipped him, staked him.  I didn't just whoop him against a wall.  So--because they were staked slaves, which is even more of an insult, put a--put your butt naked on the--on the floor in front of--in the dirt in front of these people and whip your ass.  And so I just took, took it another level.  And you, you know, it's--Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenny Leon] laid the great ground work for me.  He laid the good foundation and then I could take it and run, so I took it and ran with it.
Story_ID: 629970
Speaker 1: August Wilson's body of work that, that--well, the ten plays include 'How I Learned What I Learned' [August Wilson].  No?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Not the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's not part of--
Speaker 2: --ten plays.
Speaker 1: That's not part of it.
Speaker 2: That's not what we--what I call American Century Cycle which we so happily named.  It's not a part of American Century Cycle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how does it fit in?
Speaker 2: He wrote it for himself to do, do his--the one man show that he wanted to do, so it, it--the ten plays are like one per decade for the 20th century that is not one of those ten and that mission that he was--he was--sought to accomplish and, and succeeded in accomplishing.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about the ten first because you were working on--how many of those are you working on today?
Speaker 2: I'm working on two of them, but--right now, but in three different capacities.  I'm working two of them directing as plays and one I've written as a movie for HBO.  I'm in the process of continuing to write that.
Speaker 1: Do you wanna to share what they are?
Speaker 2: No, not until they release it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I have to let them distribute the, the PR [public relations] on it.
Speaker 1: But the--is it 'Ma Rainey' ['Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' August Wilson] that's happening next?
Speaker 2: 'Ma Rainey' is doing--I'm doing next, which is the first play I saw, so it's like coming full circle.  So, I'm very, very excited about that particular project.  It's, it's a great cast.
Speaker 1: And you are directing.
Speaker 2: I'm directing that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where will that be performed?
Speaker 2: The Two River Theater in Red Bank, New Jersey.  It's, it's a--it's a beautiful theater in Red Bank, New Jersey, and the artistic director is John Dias who was working with me on 'Lackawanna Blues' [Ruben Santiago-Hudson] way back when.  He's tak- he's taken over a theater and has kind of given me carte blanche there.  And, and so, you know, I asked him could I do 'Ma Rainey' 'cause I, I wasn't getting any opportunity to direct in New York [New York].  I specifically had been told that I can't direct August in New York, that the person who owned the rights to it did not want me directing it in New York.  Other than my friend, Jim Houghton [James Houghton], who just recently passed, you know, he would get it for me if I wanted him to do--if I wanted to do off-Broadway, he would--'cause Jim was--can get pretty much what he wanted.  Jim was just the best that ev- ever lived, you know.  But, other than that, I couldn't direct in New York.
Speaker 1: So, it's politics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of politics in everything, you know.  But, I was in the way, basically.  I was the director that gets probably the most attention directing August.  So, if you wanted to control what you were putting up and didn't want any distractions, you don't want me around.  And I be like, okay, you can go on Broadway and do So and So, and I'll be off-Broadway doing something else.  You wanna go--you wanna come for me?  Come for me.  You know, I'm gonna put my production up, you put your production up, let's go.  And they'd be like, no, no, no, no, no, no.  You can't direct anything in the area, so it was--okay.  So, I called my boy, John, that's a little out of the area.  That's an hour and--John, "Could we do--could you sneak the--get the rights to 'Ma Rainey'?  Can we do that?"  He--I said, "I really need to do August Wilson.  I miss him so."  And either I'm gonna never do him again or I'm gonna keep steadfast, you know, honoring my friend, honoring a mentor of mine by doing his work wherever, if I gotta do it at the church basement.  So, he says, "I got the rights.  I just got the rights."  I said, "It's on."  And then eventually, the mind blowing news that 'Jitney' [August Wilson] was also gonna come my way kind of like, not real, not true, can't happen.  They said, "Oh, yeah, we got it and we want you," and I was like (gestures).
Story_ID: 629971
Speaker 1: And for 'Jitney' [August Wilson], you'd been wanting to bring 'Jitney' to Broadway for--
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: --ten years.  This was at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eleven years now.  Since Aug- before August [August Wilson] died.  Two weeks before he died, that was my promise to him, that I would do 'How I Learned' ['How I Learned What I Learned,' August Wilson], which he asked me to do.  He didn't ask me to do 'Jitney.'  I said, "I'll do 'How I Learned' but I also want to complete the ten plays and put 'Jitney' on Broadway."  It's never been on Broadway, it's the only one.  And I wanted black writer to be the only writer in the history of Broadway to write ten plays and they all ten came to Broadway, all ten, batting a thousand, no misses.  He says, "You do that.  You the man to do it.  You do it.  I know you will," and that started my quest into it.  And I just run into road block after road block after road block, stop, stop, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: What, what kinds of road blocks?
Speaker 2: First of all, nobody wanted to put up the money.  Nobody wanted to help me with the money.  Second of all, nobody would give me a theater.  Third of all, I couldn't get the rights, so I just had to just say, you know, okay.  Y'all got it.  Let me go do it and--you know, somewhere.  Let me go do little plays other places.  And I always tell the story that August was up in heaven and he looked over and saw a little loud Puerto Rican in the corner laughing and talking to everybody and he, he said, that's Ruben's father [Ruben Santiago].  And he said, "Let, let my son do this play," so everything opened up.  I finally did get the money and they still wouldn't give me the rights.  The money came.  I got a legitimate Broadway producer, great people with money, wanted to do it.  They said, "I wanna see you.  It's only fair to our artistic community and audiences that you direct the next August Wilson."  I said, "Okay, well thank you."  You know, "So we're gonna make sure it happens.  We have the money, let's get the rights," and they were like, "No.  Who's directing?"  "Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson]."  "No."
Speaker 1: Who owns the rights?
Speaker 2: The estate runs the rights, but they have a producer who has been courting them in a big, big way who does not want to see me at this point directing, but I figure, I'm gonna just go do what I do and, you know, if we meet, we meet, if we don't meet, we don't meet.  But, I'm--I don't wanna--I don't really want to be places that they don't want me and I don't wanna--I give too much of my heart and soul to some to get hurt and misused and mishandled and I'm not gonna bend over and let you kick me in the ass.  I'm not gonna do it, and then they know that.  And if you're not gonna be hired and they gonna tell you what to do, then you're, you're, you're not--you know, you've heard that in this interview, you know.  It was things that are, that are detrimental to, to, to the integrity of, of the people that have raised me and who I am.  You know, I'm not gonna do it.  If you--I'm not gonna hurt them.  I owe--I owe Nanny [Rachel Crosby] and I owe Ma Overton [Mattie Overton], I owe all the people the best that I have, so if I'm gonna do something for you, I'm gonna give you the best.  I'm not gonna let you--if I know it ain't right, I'm not doing it.  If you--you know (laughter) you tell me, you know, we're gonna do it this way and we're gonna have rock music in, in 'Jitney' and I'm like, that ain't right.  That ain't what--that ain't right.  I love rock music, but it ain't in 'Jitney.'  Closest we'll get to rock will be, you know, Jimi Hendrix, and he more blues than rock.  So--and I just start straightening it out and they be like, oh, shit, here you go, here you go.  We want rock because we wanna put Keith Richards in it.  We got Keith Richards.  He says he wanna be in it, he giving us a million dollars, he gonna put rock in it, and I'm like, not with me directing it.  I'll tell you what, though, if Keith Richards wants to play on the track with my guy who is composing, I'm down.  I want it.  I want him bad, but not to compose this play.  Well, then, take your ass somewhere else then, 'cause it's our play.  Okay.  It's that kind of stuff that--it ain't right, you know, and it was not right.  Can it--can it--is it possible?  Yeah.  You can do whatever you wanna do.  I mean, I've seen August Wilson plays from certain eras and the music is from this era and I'm sitting there like this 'cause I'm a purist.  That music wouldn't be in this play, but it's cool because it's So and So.  It would (laughter) be like, okay.  It's another selling point.  We got enough--we got some selling points.
Story_ID: 629972
Speaker 1: It's that I guess stubbornness and, and just purity of honoring our culture which is not told.  Let's do it right.  You know, somebody said to me the other day, "You know, it's a new way of doing August [August Wilson] now.  Let's do it in a new way."  I said, you know, there's a problem because his plays have not all been seen by most people done the right way, the way he wrote them, so why we gonna start putting them in three--a, a, a time warp and, and, and, and do them--doing them with all white cast and doing esoteric--do them right.  Let me see what these people's house look like.  Why do a 'Joe Turner' on Broadway and ain't no house?  Ain't no house.  That's what they, they--1911, the, the black man got his own house.  He ain't even barely removed from slavery.  He got his own house, not just the forty acres and the mule that he didn't get, but he got a house.  That mean--what is at stake here?  Automatically, if I see a play and it's 'Joe Turner's Come and Gone' [August Wilson], it ain't no house and he keep saying, "You leaving my house.  Come Tuesday, you leaving.  This all I got.  You leaving it."  Do--and do, do, do 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson], Aunt Es [Ester Tyler] ain't got no house.  1839 Wiley Avenue don't exist?  How you gonna do 'Gem of the Ocean' with just no walls, just the red door?  Everybody (laughter) talking about 1839 Wiley Avenue the whole play.  Well, how you gonna do 'Gem of the Ocean' and go to Aunt Es' house and the door ain't red?  In the three August Wilson plays, at least they talking about the door is red.  You're gonna do it with a blue door 'cause you wanna do it differently.  No, do it right.  Do it right.  If you're gonna do it the first time, the door need to be red.  He's saying in 'Two Trains' ['Two Trains Running,' August Wilson] go down there and knock on the red door.  He ain't say knock on the blue door.  That door been red since Aunt Ester been there.  You know, so these--but these--they want this new-fangled way of doing it and I ain't gonna newfangle it.  I'm gonna do it right.  This ain't Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] been done for four hundred years and you need to put it in the Caribbean island and you need to put it in, in--on Mars.  No.  You know, because it's been done a thousand times the way he wrote it.  So, August has not been done.  It has not even been seen in its real forms, not all the plays by all the masses of the people.  That's just reality.
Story_ID: 629973
Speaker 1: And so in this case, you now have the rights.  It--no?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I got hired.  I got hired by some incredible people who want my voice at the table in the room and respect that voice, and are trying to learn what I'm teaching, what I know about this.  I don't know it all.  I don't know most of it, but I know what I know, and what I know is for real.  And I, I ain't read nobody else's book.  I ain't read no--so called August Wil- Wil- August Wilson's scholar's book about who August is.  I ain't read every one of them books.  I started reading one the other day and--'cause I'm just doing research, and I said--picked up, it say, oh, August--a August Wilson learning guide.  That's interesting.  I never heard of this book.  I'm in the used book store and I'm looking.  He had--Sylvester was Ma Rainey's boy toy.  I'm like, that's her nephew.  That is her--August Wilson scholar?  Where the hell you get this information?  Or August really had a tumultuous relationship with his mother.  He loved Daisy Wilson.  He and I both sat and cried.  He cried about his mama, I cried about my mama for twenty minutes.  We couldn't even eat our salmon patties and grits in Boston [Massachusetts], sitting there just crying in them.  I'm saying, I can't eat the grits.  I done cried all in the grits.  But, you know, so I know, know more than any mother and their son, but to, to start writing that in books, a tumultuous relationship with his mother?  What are you talking about?  So (laughter), so, so, the things I know about the rhythms of my people's language, why I need certain tones in the room, why I need certain characters that certain people don't understand, I had a character actor walk in who I love for this one role and the--and the--and the people, they were sitting there like, what he saying?  What is he doing?  Why is he acting like that?  You know, because he's a real genuine colored man.  He's a northern colored man.  He was a southern colored man, picked cotton and everything, moved up north, and the only thing changed was the location.  He stayed colored.  So, when he walk in a room and like, "Hey how's everybody in here?"  It's, "Hey, how's everybody in here?  Fine, how you doing?  She had my breakfast on the table.  I reached over there, I took one dollar.  I went on in there, went to bed, got up in the morning, had my breakfast on the table."  I know that man.  That man lived in Nanny's [Rachel Crosby] rooming house.  So, people that don't know him saying, no, what is that?  And I say, that's, that's the cat.  That's, that's the dude (laughter).  That's the dude that when we went to the barbershop, you waited for the door to open and hope he walked in, prayed he walked in.  And he would walk in and, and you're a little kid and your eyes going--you know.  I was telling my wife [Jeannie Brittan] the other day about these two number men--numbers men that always used to keep me straight in Lackawanna [New York], Chinese and (unclear).  And, you know, when I thought I could hustle and shoot dice, they take all my money and loan it back to me, you know.  But they told me straight, straight up, "Doc, you need to go to college.  You ain't no hustler.  You ain't good at this.  You gonna get took, you know, so you need to go to college and--where somebody can't take that from you 'cause I can take your money, I can't take what you learn in college."  You know, guys used to drop stuff like that on me and like, you can't take that from me, right?  You can't win my knowledge from me.  Aw, man.  And so I started piling it up, you know what I mean?  But, those street dudes, I need to see them in my plays 'cause they dropping knowledge.  They ain't August Wilson scholars.  They're August Wilson real characters, you know.  And, anyway, I got excited when we talk about August, but it's what I try to teach when I'm teaching it.
Story_ID: 629974
Speaker 1: So, just for perspective, to put a play on Broadway, to raise the money, how much money do you have to raise?
Speaker 2: Three and half million dollars.
Speaker 1: In order to bring it to Broadway?
Speaker 2: For a straight play, about three and a half mil, somewhere in that vicinity.
Speaker 1: And typically, who are the types of folks who are putting in this money?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, putting on a drama on Broadway is a losing proposition.  You, you--I think 82 percent of the plays lose their money.  Musicals, woo, buddy.  'Hamilton' ['Hamilton: An American Musical,' Lin-Manuel Miranda], 'Wicked' ['Wicked: The Untold Story of the Witches of Oz,' Winnie Holzman], 'Lion King' ['The Lion King,' Irene Mecchi and Roger Allers]?  Oh, buddy, two million a week, a million and a half, a million eight on a five hundred dollar, four hundred dollar a nut--a week nut?  That's profit, profits many, you know, what I'm saying?  Doing a drama, so who would invest in, in something that might not win?  Somebody who's trying to build a relationship.  So, I tried to build in on relationship.  Hang with me on this.  Hang with me on this.  And when I'm--we walking the Hollywood Wall of Fame--Walk of Fame [Hollywood Walk of Fame], when I'm making movies and making big money and we shaking hands here on August's play and we shaking hands when the movie hits.  And, and if, if I ever get something big, it's me and you.  And people, you know, I--if you're talking about trying to get 30 percent on your money, no, not here, not on a drama.  So, it's, it's--you gotta find out who--if you're selling something, you gotta find out who needs it, who it's important to.  So, I went around to the people I thought it was important to, and finally found somebody who--it was important and we had a relationship.  It was important that that play was in her theater.  It was important that she had a relationship with August Wilson, and so Manhattan Theatre Club [New York, New York] jumped on it.  Took her a year and a half to answer me, but they answered me.  And other thing is this.  Broadway is owned by like four or five people, all the theaters.  They decide who their tenants are gonna be.  If they don't want your ass as a tenant, your ass ain't gonna be no tenant.
Speaker 1: No matter how much money you have?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I had the money.  People still mad at me who gave me the money that they're not down with me doing it Manhattan Theatre Club.  They said, "We had the money for you and now you gone to Manhattan Theatre Club?"  I said, "I tried to pull you in.  I'm trying to pull you in now.  I can't make them take your money.  I didn't abandon you.  I told you straight up, 'Listen, I got a deal to do the play ['Jitney,' August Wilson], let's see if I can get you down with me.'  You know, I, I got some people gonna do the play," and they still mad.  Yeah, but I went and raised this money.  Yeah, man, but, but, what?  So, I shouldn't do the play?  What you telling me?  Tell me what you--
Speaker 1: And this is because they won't take the money that you raised.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  You take the money--if I come in and give you all the money, what, what, what does that make me?  Your boss and everything.  I'm your boss.  I tell you who's gonna sit next to me on the left, who gonna sit next to me the right, and who gonna sit where you sitting.  And I don't mean I'm gonna eliminate you and all your--all the--you and all the folks that precious to you, that mean I'm gonna bring in some of mine and I'm also gonna tell you how to hit my core audience.  I'm also gonna tell you what I want the poster to look like.  I'm also gonna tell you what I want the tickets to be priced at.  I'm also gonna tell you how we're gonna run it, who's gonna be in it, when, why, and how.  Want--do they want me to have that power?  You know, 'cause I'm, I'm gonna bring some.  I'm gonna bring some folk with me.  And that's giving up too much power.  So, we found a nice medium, nice place.  I do have a lot of say.  I don't have all the say, which is fine with me.  I don't need all the say.  That's too much responsibility.  But I have enough of it that makes me--make me know that I'm rooted in this and what I see, what I present on that stage will be a representation of what I truly feel is the most authentic, purely culturally sensitive and appropriate production that I possibly can put there.
Story_ID: 629975
Speaker 1: Who are the actors?
Speaker 2: Stephen McKinley Henderson, [HistoryMaker] Anthony Chisholm, John Douglas Thompson, Andre Holland, Brandon Dirden [Brandon J. Dirden], Ray Anthony Thomas [Raymond Anthony Thomas], Harvy Blanks, and I'm--and tomorrow, I go into aud- auditions to cast the, the final piece, Rena, the girl.  I had to make sure Andre was clear before I matched the lovers up.  So, he cleared his schedule and so he's in and, and it's a very exciting company, you know.  My company over at Two River [Two River Theater, Red Bank, New Jersey] for 'Ma Rainey' ['Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,' August Wilson] is equally exciting, you know, with Arnetia [Arnetia Walker] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we go there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --let's, let's stick with 'Jitney' [August Wilson] for a second.  So, we were talking about the original production where Paul Butler played Becker, very powerfully, you know, folks remember.  As the director of the play now, how do you cast when he's gone and he embodied that role so fully?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, August [August Wilson] is bigger than, than any one of our--I'll put myself in the group, Delroy Lindo's Loomis [Herald Loomis], [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones' Troy Maxson.  We can go on and on with, with people who did roles that literally set the bar in the standard of that role, interpreted that role that is the penultimate interpretation.  I, I, I try to say my Canewell is in that as well.  You know, if it is or not, I don't know.  But, what you have to do is know that the play is bigger than any particular role and that how we embodied that role and how we set our footprints in the soft cement and it hardened and it's there.  We have to put new foot--footprints and people have to outgrow our footprint and bring other interpretations of it.  I can never get Paul Butler out of my mind as Becker, but I could see a different Becker, a new Becker that's just as vital, just as vibrant in its own way, in its own interpretation.  Paul's will live forever in my mind.  Delroy Lindo's will live.  Roc Dutton's [Charles S. Dutton] will live.  But, I did 'The Piano Lesson' [August Wilson] and Brandon Dirden stepped into Boy Willie and people now all talking about Brandon Dirden.  And if somebody is gonna come in later and do another Boy Willie, then they're gonna talk about him.  I've directed people doing Canewell and first thing I tell them is what I did, I did for that generation.  If there's anything in it that--useful to you, take it and run, but right now, I need to know you--your Canewell.  You gotta do better and more than I did.  You gotta find a corner in there that I didn't paint and paint it.  All--the whole--the canvas gotta be painted.  I painted as much as I could and I think I did--I did a lot of painting, but there's some corners in there I didn't get to.  I'm gonna help you get to them corners, you know, if I can as a director and--or give you the opportunity to find those corners.  And more than anything, the spirit of people like Paul and [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne and those that are passed on, they sustain us.  They give us--the first day of rehearsal, the, the 16th of August, I'm gonna get in the circle and I'm gonna call--I'm gonna call names out of angels around us that these younger people that I hired--I hired a couple, two, three young people in this play.  You know, I'm talking, talking--I'm talking about 'Ma Rainey's Black Bottom' when I start that.  We gonna call out names.  I'm gonna let them call out what they know and I'm gonna start calling.  And when we finish calling them, we're totally surrounded.  We're insulated.  Nothing can harm us because they there.  August is there and Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards] is there and Big Paul Butler is there and Roscoe Lee Browne is there, you know.  Robert Judd and Joe Seneca are there.  Theresa Merritt is there, you know.  And that is what the mystical, mysticism, wonderful ethereal aspect of doing--unearthing the truth of, of, of our people.  It's bigger than us.  What we have going on, the blood we got in this soil, the songs that we s--that we have sung and need to be sung again, oh, don't get me preaching, you know.  You'll have to pass the hat.  You know, it's, it's real and all I ask for when I walk on stage in 'How I Learned,' I, I took five minutes on my own before I walked on and I called them all out, as many as I could remember.  Some time they be different.
Speaker 1: And 'How I Learned' is the play that August Wilson wrote--
Speaker 2: For himself, the one man show, 'How I Learned What I Learned.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I call them all out and just say, y'all got me.  Take me on out here and use me like you want to now, you know.  Just, just make sure I'm honest, make sure I'm truthful, and make sure I'm paying homage to you.  So, I'd go out there and that's how I'd start.  So--did you see it?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Well, when I started, I would walk out into the audience with my back to the audience and just look at the stage and I would look around and I would see them all there.  I see all of them.  If I didn't see them in person, I see their names in my mind.  Then I walk on stage and turn around and look at the audience, and I felt like I was taking all that and throwing it out there, but not with any edge, just, just--I was totally neutral and--which is odd for them if you know me to see me just nothing, and I just seeing if these--if these spirits could work.  It's deep.  You know, it's kind of deep to me.  It's something I really, really take, take a lot of pride in.  I just said, let me see if they can work and I'll look at them--you--and I'll be looking at people and then I smile a little bit and you'll see them like, oh, and then I start talking, easy, and we'll take them right down that path and they gone.  The train leave that station and it'll be like, oh, we on the (unclear), you know, and be gone.
Story_ID: 629976
Speaker 1: As you describe really it's kind of like being in the moment, finding what the moment is for the actor, for where the play lives, I'm curious if, if the--there was ever the conflict?  I mean, you won the highest awards for your role.  Could it feel it should be done exactly like this 'cause this is what won that high award?  That's not what you just described.  You described something much more transcendent than that.  But is there ever that inner feeling, well, this won so it should be done like this?
Speaker 2: No.  It--it's just not fair.  It's not fair and it's not honest.  It's gotta be more to it than, than what I've done.  Do I think I did my job?  Heck, yeah, you know.  The worst thing is to do, do, do it wrong.  And when I say wrong, it's just trying to embellish it, add things to it that it does not need because all you need is there.  Your sustenance in the role is there, no embellishment, find depth.  You know, I always tell my actors, get deeper.  Don't change.  Find more.  And so, so, of course, there are things that are said a certain way and they should be said a certain way.  That is where I try to get the actor on the path, make sure I get him in that path that's gonna lead him to the most successful, clear, most profound and truthful interpretation of what is needed in the play from that character.  You see, see what I'm saying?  It ain't about--it's--the director is taking care of a play and you gotta find out everything in that play works to the event and in that process, I'm trying to also enable the actor, empower the actor, make the actor better.  I'm teaching, too.  Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards] did that a lot.  I'm teaching.  I'm trying to make you a better actor.  I don't care how old you are.  You're gonna have more things than, than I.  Actors come to me that are twenty years older than me saying I want to work with you 'cause I need to go to another level 'cause they know I'm teaching.  I'm teaching and I'm learning, which is even as much as teaching.  I'm learning from that actor, which is empowering me to be able to push them a different, a, a, little further, to be able to empower them and giving them something else.  Oh, I got that.  I see that.  We're gonna take that and run with it, but we're gonna take this with us too.
Story_ID: 629977
Speaker 1: Do you ever fear--feel fear when you are in the creative process?
Speaker 2: Anxiety.  I don't (pause)--no, I wouldn't say fear.  Some time--if I have any fear, it's for other, other, you know, that they don't get damaged, other people can damage.  You can say what you wanna say about me in, in review.  You say something about my people, I get really upset.  And my wife [Jeannie Brittan] gets--she said, you know, but, but they didn't say nothing bad about you.  I said, they--that's my family.  They say something bad about me, you know, it--them, that's like saying something bad about me.  If you--you know, somebody tried to dog out August [August Wilson] one time and praise me and I was like, no, I'm not happy about that.  I'm not--I'm not accepting that.  I don't need your praise.  I don't want your praise if you're gonna dog him out.  I'm here because of him.  I'm here because of him and this play.  So, I'm not gonna--that is not acceptable to me.  I don't want it.  I'd rather you not--just keep that in your mouth.  They be like, well, there's Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson], here go Ruben.  But, Gregory used to say things to me like--Gregory Hines used to say to me, you know--you know, "I want to see Ruben in all his Ruben ways."  He used to always say, "Ruben ways."  You know, I want--I want to--I, "Come on down here, man, let's have lunch, man, and bring Ruben and all his Ruben ways."  I need it, you know.  And it's just--it's a honesty.  People mistake--Nanny [Rachel Crosby] said something to me once.  She said, "I'm not gonna be happy if you're arrogant about anything, but I'll be equally as upset if you're not confident in what you do, that you believe you can do it.  And--'cause you can do it.  You can do anything you wanna do."  And she said, "But, don't--it's not arrogance, it's confidence and how you gonna get con- more confidence is by preparing."  This is old what I call mother wit.  She said, "The harder you work, the more confident you should be 'cause you're absolutely prepared for whatever task is.  If it's gonna climb that mountain, if you've been working on climbing that mountain and you got the right stuff on and you been preparing for it, then you gonna climb that mountain."  So--she said, "But don't 'cause you climbed the mountain get up there, start jumping up and down and doing back flips.  I climbed the mountain.  You can't climb the mountain.  No, I climbed the mountain, come on, you can too.  Come on, give me your hand."  You know, that's what mama and them wanted for me and that's what I--what I--what I, I live by, you know.  I mean, if I can do it, you know, I wanna make sure somebody else can do it.  I, I don't--I'm not looking for exclusivity in anything I do, you know.  I want it to, to be an example, if anything, you know.
Story_ID: 629978
Speaker 1: And this is a competitive business.  You know, and people know me, too.  And I'm not--I ain't no saint.  If you come at me the wrong way, you gonna feel me.  You know, if, if--like somebody said to me one time, you know, yeah, "You jumping out on stage, you come out there, they give you a standing ovation, they wait until you come out.  It, it ain't like you no better than nobody else.  You really ain't that good."  I had an actor tell me that, you know.  He was my understudy.  I said, "You think you can do what I do?"  He said, "Anybody can do it.  If you're a good actor, can do what you do."  I said, "All right, all right.  I don't feel too good, so you wanna do tonight show?  You wanna jump your ass out there?"  I didn't get to the--tonight show.  They're gonna try to put, put in rehearsal for him, you know, quick put in rehearsal, he couldn't even get through it.  And he was, "Oh, man, it's harder than I thought."  You know, don't, don't come from me that way 'cause you can get out there and you'll fall on your face.  You'll see, you know, what I do looks easy.  Guy said to me in the gym yesterday, "Man, you in a tough business.  I'd hate to do your job.  I can't see myself doing your job."  I said, "Well, what do you do for a living?"  He said, "Well, I was an internist."  I said I--the only thing I could do with that 'cause I like to help people get well.  And I said, "I think I do that in my acting.  I help you get well 'cause there're some sick ass people out there, and me giving you the clarity of who I am, getting you more well, healing you.  Even if you black, it makes you proud to be black and if you white, say, 'Damn, I didn't know he was just like me.'  So, okay, I'm healing you."  So--but, don't, don't tell me--what's tough about my job is the assholes that I have to deal with, people that's blocking me, stopping me or trying to tell me who I am, you know.  I had a director tell me one time, you know, "You came here to do this."  And I looked at him like--cocked my head like a puppy.  And he said, "Why you looking at me that way?"  I said, "That's not why I came in.  That's not why my character walked in."  "What do you mean?"  The--I said, "That's not why I walked in."  I'm not walking in the room if I don't know why I walked in.  I'm just not walking in searching for what I'm looking for.  I know why I knocked on that door as a--as an actor.  I know why I opened it and I know why I walked in that room.  Don't ever have to tell me why I walked in the room.  "Well, maybe I shouldn't tell you anything."  "No, I need you.  I need you to tell me a lot.  Tell me something I can use.  Please, please don't abandon me.  Please help me, but don't give me things I can't use like why I came in the room."  He was like--all the actors were like, "Okay."  And he never--and then he start--then later on, he said, "Oh, I see, I see, I see.  Your intentions are so clear."  They will reveal themselves.  Everything reveals itself in time.  Sometimes you walk in a room and you know exactly what you walked in the room--you walked in there to get your slippers.  Sometime you walk in to get your slippers and forget why you in the room and be like, ah.  So, it's when it reveals itself, but watch it reveal itself.  Don't tell me why I walked in the room.  You know, it's stupid.  And, you know, sometime actor tell me, "Why am I coming in here?"  I said--and I'll tell--I'll never tell an actor what to do.  I said, "You need to tell me and it need to be clear why you came in here.  Somewhere in this scene," or if an actor will make a decision, I say, "I need to know when you made that decision.  I need to know when you made that decision.  I need to see that happening here so I can follow it and invest.  You just made a turn and I don't know where that turn came from."  "Well, the writer wrote it."  "Well, why?"  "Well, I don't know why he wrote it, but I--."  "But you better find out why you gonna make that turn."  Instead--I could tell them why they making the turn.  You know, would you tell me why.  I said, "I ain't gonna tell you why.  That ain't no fun."  I said, "You want me to tell you why Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson] thinks?  That's boring.  I wanna see why, why you think that's exciting."  And they be like, "Okay, okay, okay."  You know, but that's the kind of director I like to be.
Story_ID: 629979
Speaker 1: Tell me about your directing 'Piano Lesson' ['The Piano Lesson,' August Wilson].
Speaker 2: That brings a immediate smile on my face because the first thing I think of is Jim Houghton [James Houghton] who ran the Signature Theatre [New York, New York].  Jim was like a brother to me.  Jim--you know, I've had some--God has put angels around me, you know.  Jim was one of them.  Jim, Gregory Hines, August [August Wilson], Lloyd [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], and more, Loften [Loften Mitchell], Percy [Percival Borde], Don Boros.  What--Jim says, "Brother, come on down.  I want you to see this theater.  We're getting ready to lay the cement for where the seats are gonna be," the Diamond theater [Irene Diamond Stage] at the Signature, the new $70 million complex.  He had been walking me through the entire process from the models to the 3-D models.  Anyway, they laying cement, they actually got a building, and we walking over wood planks to get to the Diamond.  I look in, I see where they've laid the platform for the stage and I see them laying cement for the risers for the seats.  Ain't no seats, it's just cement, just ground.  And I'm looking at this Diamond and we hanging on the side.  There's a little side area when you walk in the door 'cause all this you can't go on.  And we're looking at the stage like on this angle and I'm looking, I'm like, wow.  I'm looking, oh, this is a beautiful theater.  I said, "How many seats, Jim?"  He says like 299, 300, 350, 320--299, somewhere around, okay.  "We need to do 'Piano Lesson' here."  Jim said, "Hold, hold on, slow down, wait a--wait a--wait a minute."  I said, "Jim, we gotta do 'Piano Lesson' in here."  He said, "Wait, wait--can I get the seats in?"  He said, "Slow--you know, we'll, we'll just--we'll talk about.  We got a lot of work to do.  We'll talk."  A few days later, he called me, he says, "When, when, when, when--when you wanna do 'Piano Lesson'?  When should we do it?"  I said, "Whenever you want.  I'll carve out the time.  We gotta do it.  I'll, I'll cancel the TV show, I'll, I'll not show up."  I said, "We gotta do 'Piano Lesson.'"  He said, "Okay, I'm gonna put it in next season on this date.  You know who you want?"  I said, "No, but I know I got an idea who--some of the people I want."  So--
Speaker 1: What year is this now?
Speaker 2: Thirteen [2013]?  Two thousand thir- twenty thirteen [2013]?  Was 2013, 2012?  Twenty twelve [2012].  So, Jim Houghton probably was the most expensive production he ever put up.  And we debated the whole way for everything because it was a very expensive.  The carving on the piano, the, the, the set, the--you know, it was just bigger than he had ever budgeted, and so we made a lot of adjustments, still way over budget, way over budget.  Vinnie Bagwell did the sculpture on the piano.  That's a--that's a--her, her sculptures are twelve thousand [dollars] minimum and I'm asking her to do two sculptures on the piano?  You know, I'm asking her to do twenty-five dollars' worth of sculpturing just for the piano?  We ain't started the production, twenty-five grand?  And so Vinnie worked us out a deal.  We worked out a deal.  I told Jim I'll give my pay up for the sculpture, just give me the sculpture when it's over with, which he ended up giving me as a gift and gave me my pay.
Speaker 1: Nice.
Speaker 2: But--so, we went to do it.  And Brandon Dirden [Brandon J. Dirden] and Jason Dirden who were like family to me, and they my main horses of my actors.  I have them--one of them in everything.  You know, I love them, love them rascals.  And, and Ros Ruff [Roslyn Ruff] who had always been my leading actress for most of the things I have directed.  I must've directed her in six or eight plays.
Story_ID: 629980
Speaker 1: So, we went to work on it and kind of took the, the city by storm, got the most glorious reviews you could get, won Lortels [Lucille Lortel Award] and Obies [Off-Broadway Theater Award] and AUDELCOs [AUDELCO Recognition Awards for Excellence in Black Theatre] and everything you can name, and launched a real good career for all those people in it, and also made Jim [James Houghton] very proud.  But, I asked Jim, I said, you know, "I got the Dirden brothers.  They're brothers.  Do you think the audience gonna mind that they're brothers?  When they see them, they're supposed to be best friends."  Jim said, "Nobody's gonna know.  Nobody's gonna know."  They, they--and nobody knew.  And they were just spectacular as Boy Willie and Lymon.  You know, there's a--there's a scene, I was talking to Brandon [Brandon J. Dirden]--we--me and Brandon talk, you know, quite regularly and Jason [Jason Dirden], too.  And I said, "Brandon, you know you killed me when you went to pick up the piano with Jason and then you say--try to pick it up, you know--, 'What you think?'"  He said, "It's heavy."  And that line just killed me the way Jason--it's heavy.  Tell him, what you think, it's heavy.  You know, it's like August [August Wilson] writes--that's how we talk, you know.  And it's a simple thing but it's deep.  You know, you wanna know what I think and you wanna know how you--you know, well it's a little heavy and maybe we should--no, this ain't how another culture would describe it, simply as two country black dudes, try to lift it up, what you think?  It's heavy.  You know (laughter), it would be like--and that old, old, old, old thing--or, or when Chuck Cooper is, is playing the piano and at the end of it when he gripped the piano and he's trying to move him and he can't move him and he said--and, and, and, and Chuck say--and he says, "Come on, Wining Boy, I got to move this piano."  And Chuck says, "You ain't gonna move this piano."  (Laughter) It's just--it's just--you know, it's--you see somebody get just so drunk and you look at--leave me alone.  I wrote this song for Cleotha.  Cleotha.  What other play is a Cleotha in?  You know, that's some real country, northern colored people stuff.  But, I loved that experience totally.  I don't think a week passes that somebody didn't mention it to me still.  I was mystified that I didn't get one phone call or one lie told to me about moving it to Broadway.  Noth- nothing was even mentioned about going to Broadway with tho- those reviews.  It was one, one of the few plays I've done in the last thirty years that nobody even just told you a lie that they might move it to Broadway if somebody likes it, maybe a Broadway producer is gonna be here.  Not one phone call, nothing.  The most glorious of all the plays I've ever directed, the most accolades I've ever received, you know.  And prior to that, I had won an Obie.  So, it's like nothing, no one interested?  Commercial success, sold out, packed, can't get in in the three hundred some seat theater.  What--what's that?  I don't know, move on.  But--
Speaker 2: Where is the theater [Signature Theatre, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: 42nd [Street], near the corner of 11th [Street].  But, better believe if I--if I can hit the lick on 'Jitney' [August Wilson], maybe somebody wanna hear about 'Piano Lesson' if they wanna say, well, what you wanna do next?  I mean, you, you ever thought about 'Piano Lesson' with my--with that cast I had?  'Cause I know they'd jump at it, they'd jump at it.
Story_ID: 629981
Speaker 1: Are you writing also now?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking about writing a new play, actually a satire.  But, my latest play is called 'Your Blues Ain't Sweet Like Mine' [Ruben Santiago-Hudson].  It's had its world premiere two years ago and then it's been shut out.  It's--another was shut out.  It's like people don't wanna hear the truth.  It's a race play.  It's a play about race and, and it's a play about love and how the two smashing together and one eliminates the other, you know, like the story of my life, you know.  And it's such a harsh play about the realities of, of, of, of subconscious racism.  People come together who are supposed to be friends and say things how the subconsciously feel and not even realize how racist it is.  I hear that all the time.  Yesterday, I was talking to--I talk to the doormen across the street because they Boricuas.  They're like me.  They're where, where I'm from, you know, from, from the rooming house.  And we talk and the, and the rich white people that notice me from TV and film wonder why I don't talk to them and just say good morning.  So, there's one white guy, comes over and he starts talking to me about Emily Dickinson and how I--you know, I should read some of her stuff.  I said, "What makes you think I haven't read it?"  I said, "Let me tell you something, Mr. White Man," I said, "I got more degrees than you, more education than you, more culture than you, and more sophisticated than you."  And they were like--the doorman was like--I said, "I've read Emily Dickinson."  At least getting one of my master's degrees, I had to read some Emily Dickinson.  And he was like, "Yeah, yeah, I shouldn't have assumed that."  Yeah, but you assumed it and you didn't even realize that was racist.  You assumed I hadn't.  You should read that.  Or being in a sushi bar the other day with two of my cast members and, and we're eating sushi and the white man next to me says, "I'm embarrassed."  "What's, what's the problem there?  What happened?"  "Three black men eating with, with chopsticks and I can't even eat with them."  "So, what that mean?  It's 'cause three black men did it, you supposed to do it and do it better, right?  You wanna know how we learned how to eat with chopsticks coming from the hood 'cause there ain't no Japanese sushi places in the hood.  'Cause we've been all over the world and you need to learn how to eat with chopsticks, sir.  You need to--I can teach you, too.  Want, want me teach you (laughter)?"  The owner comes over, "Oh my god, oh my god, did he say that?  When he leaves--don't, don't worry about paying anything.  Everything is free."  "Oh, so I need to bring a racist with me every time I come in here and get my meal free?"  You know, and then my white friends are saying when I tell them that story, "Oh, maybe he was just trying to be affable and, and, and buddy up and be friendly."  Find something else to say friendly.  Say, what about them Knicks [New York Knicks]?  Saying that, cool, Alex Rodriguez has not walked away, now he gonna help coach, and let's get friendly.  You wanna get friendly?  Say I'm voting for Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  Don't, don't sit and tell me that you shocked and embarrassed 'cause you can't eat with chopsticks and a black man can.  And he used them terms, three black men eating with chopsticks and I can't.  So, that play, 'Your Blues Ain't Sweet Like Mine' is that play, the, the brother that's had enough of that, that's me in the room, Zeke, comments the way I commented to that guy yesterday continually and people in the audience get offended.  I can't believe he said that.  And the white guy said, "Man, you need to talk to your brothers.  Y'all killing each other more than--every time a black man get shot, another black man shooting him," and my character says, "Oh the police."  And that goes on and on and people get offended.  And he said, you know--and, and it just--it just gets--you know, when they--[President] Abraham Lincoln, yeah, he didn't--it wasn't about him freeing the slaves.  Listen to his speeches.  And, and, you know, it's, it's, it's a history play but it's a race play and it's--and then eventually comes to be about love.  And they just say well, you know, love is gonna win, you know.  Without that, we, we done.
Speaker 1: So, where did you open it?
Speaker 2: Two River [Two River Theater, Red Bank, New Jersey], the place that let me do what I wanna do.  Now, it's gonna be at--a college just picked it up, first--Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  And next year, we bringing it into New York [New York] to Brooklyn, finally.  Got me a producer that says this is the play I want to--I want to be the centerpiece of my theater this year.  They saw it, they fell in love with it, they wanna put the money up, they wanna do it.  So, I'm gonna do a little work on it at Penn State when they do it in April, May, and then I'm gonna bring it into New York next year, next fall.  So, you're gonna--you'll be able to see 'Your Blues Ain't Sweet Like Mine' and you watch, never seen a play like this.  It's, it's a very honest piece.
Story_ID: 629982
Speaker 1: What propels you?
Speaker 2: I, I wanna--more than anything, I wanna make sure that my people are done right, and that's, that's the honest truth.  We've been done wrong so much.  I want us done right and I can do that a little bit by the depictions and stories I tell.  If I tell the stories and tell them right and the r- the most right thing about telling them is filling--to fill, to fill the, the characters with integrity.  Those people that raise me up as poor as they were, as illiterate as most of them were, as, as, as the--like, you know, like the, the, the, the bottom of the earth to a lot of people.  They lock their doors and won't look at.  They were the world to me, and who's ever done them right in telling their stories?  Nanny [Rachel Crosby] did them right in the house and people that they loved did them right, but the world.  I'm talking about the world.  The world is listening to me now.  The world wanna know what I think.  They don't always like what I think, but people keep sticking microphones in my mouth.  I'm here.  So why take an opportunity and squander it?  I have an opportunity to tell the truth about what I feel and not to please anybody in particular, but somebody thought this should be documented.  And it's--you ain't gotta go far to hear, hear me say something, you gotta read a review--I mean, read an interview of mine, read a--and I'm not sitting here fighting and combating.  I'm trying to do my part.  And, and I get up in the morning wanting to find a way to right a little bit of the wrong and I found out I had power through my art.  I ain't--I ain't got nothing.  You take away my acting, you take away my--the recognition that I have gained through my art, and I'm just--in they--in, in most people's estimation that don't know me, another nigga walking down the street.  I've been in places and that's how they look at me and then somebody say, "Oh, are you Captain Montgomery [Roy Montgomery]?"  I said, "Yeah, I'm [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson.  I did play Captain Montgomery."  "My god, I can't believe y'all.  Can--you mind if my family--and take a picture."  "I don't mind.  Where you wanna take it, you know?"  I be on a train every week.  I had people come down--I said, don't--just--you know, what stop you getting off on?  I'm getting off on 50th Street [New York, New York].  I'll jump off with you and take a picture with you.  I jump off and take a picture.  I don't want all the pictures going on, on the train.  I'm on a train every day.  You tell me you don't know why I ride a train.  I'm on a train--that's what I can afford and that's with, with four kids and stuff right now and, and it's like--and it gets me there quick.  But the thing is, Gregory [Gregory Hines] taught me how to make it through the world in the status that I've gained if I've gained any status, and how to be gracious, how to be appreciated, and also how to maintain my decorum and my space.  Some time I gotta ask for my space.  Some time people get in the space a little more or do things or say things to try to chump, chump me, and I have to tell them, listen, but I say it to them quietly, don't be fooled by what you see on TV.  Now, we can talk and we can be peaceful, but I ain't gonna be humiliated, so chill with that and let's talk.  What you wanna know?  But some time people just holler at you.  But, I wanna--I wanna--I wanna straighten it out a little bit.  And I can't do that much, but, you know, did my piece, you know.
Story_ID: 629983
Speaker 1: In a TED talk that you did, you talked about integrity and the importance of, is it straying your course?
Speaker 2: Stray the course, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Can, can you speak about integrity?
Speaker 2: It's the one thing that, you know, other than education, it's the one thing nobody can take from you.  And they--people are gonna always comp- they're gonna compromise it.  And I teach this to young actors, particularly women, particularly women and people of color, people wanna--the first thing they wanna challenge, they wanna test, they wanna find out about you.  Once they know you got talent, then you can make them money, 'cause it's gonna be about can you make their stupid stuff better or can you make their great stuff greater or can you make them money?  But the next thing, the next test is what you're willing to do and what you're willing not to do.  They wanna compromise your integrity.  Are you willing to do something that's gonna damage, possibly damage who you are and who you represent?  And so I have--people have to tell me some time, you don't represent everybody.  You know, you always standing up there and you don't--you just take care of yourself.  And I said, no, I am.  Every time I come out there, I'm representing.  So, I gotta--I gotta be on it, so you gotta have integrity.  Once you give that up, what's left?  What's left?  And I have been compromised.  They have came at me and I just--I just said--I mean, I had a huge compromise come at me the other day and they tried to tell me they will give me this big deal if I drop this little deal I had already made.  And I said, "I can't drop the little deal.  We gotta make them both work.  I, I promised some people, some--I gave my word, I'm gonna be there."  So, you're gonna lose the big deal then?  I'm gonna have to lose the big deal, but I don't think that's fair.  I think we should work this out.  But if you are in the power to take that big deal from me because I won't relinquish what I've already committed to, then that's your right.  But, my right is to make a decision.  What I'd like is to do both.  If I can't, I have to do what I've already committed to.  And they--and they said to me, "Why would you--this changes your life.  Why would you do that?"  I said, "Because principle and integrity."  I have to be a man of my word and if I can't do that, I have to find out a way that then gracefully say, "We'll catch you on the rebound, but we still gonna do this."  But I just can't say, nah, nah, better deal, can't do that, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So, what happened?
Speaker 2: Got both.  They needed me to make money (laughter).  The big deal is a money maker and it's a reason they asked--wanted me.  I make it better.  And it's been a--it's been a--it's been a--I'm working with it.  You know, I'm, I'm doing a lot of rewrites, making the, the writer give me some rewrites, telling them things that they're not happy to hear about who we are as a people.  When other people try to tell our stories, you gotta be careful.  And I say if you're gonna tell our story, it's gotta be told like this.  That ain't real.  That black man ain't gonna let that black man do that to him without some resistance, some rebuttal.  Somewhere, he has to stand his ground 'cause I know that black man.  I know him, I know him, and I know him, and that ain't gonna happen, not like that.  But in your world, it can happen, but not in--not in my world and I'm talking about the real world, so no.  So, you wanna rewrite that (laughter)?
Story_ID: 629984
Speaker 1: When you talk to young people or when you think of--what, what advice would you want to offer to any young actor who's trying to pave a way as you have?
Speaker 2: Be clear about what, what, what you want and be clear--and make a clear path toward that goal.  And some time it ain't the path that you like or the path that's less stony or smooth, it's gonna be a rough path.  But, know that there is a path.  Any goal that you have, you gotta be clear and, and, and, and, and tactical how'd you--how you approach it and where you expect to be and how you expect to get there.  And, you know, we talk about integrity.  Don't compromise your integrity.  Know what you want.  Know what you wanna do and find the people that you wanna surround yourself, who you wanna surround yourself with to, to reach there.  Because when you reach that place, you're gonna have to look to your left and to your right, and what you don't wanna be is by yourself.  No matter what you achieve, what is it alone?  So, find out who you wanna surround yourself with and you don't need a whole bunch, but there are people that's gonna be in your corner and you need to be with, with them and you need to support them the way they support you.  And y'all go at it--at it together and don't compromise, you know.  You can bend, don't, don't break.  Stay on it 'cause it's a long--it's a long haul.  Both my kids are, are actors, you know, and they won't have it as rough as me, but I'm not--I don't give them anything and they don't want anything, me to give them anything.  They want to prove it, do their own thing.  My daughter won't even--you won't even know that's my daughter unless you see me at one of her performances and I hug her.  And, and they be like, y'all know each other?  That's, that's my daughter.  Ah, she--you know--my son [Trey Santiago-Hudson], you kind of know is--you know, he, he likes the fact that he's my son.  My daughter loves the fact she's my daughter, but he, he doesn't mind saying, you know, I'm from this line of greatness in the arts, you know, and I got a lot to prove, so he works hard to, to, to prove it.  And, you know, it don't mean he, he expects nothing, but he wants you to know what his expectations are.  You know, my dad did this so and so and I'm--I can't let him down, you know.  That's my dad so that's why I'm--but my daughter, she--you, you never know.  And she works harder probably than he does, but you don't know Lily [Lily Santiago-Hudson].  I mean, she's in Spain now and, and the people start talking about your lineage and you gotta tell them in Spanish who you are and she said, "You know, my father is an actor.  His name is [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson and--," and--I'm huge in Spain.  'Castle' is big in Spain.  I mean, you--I could--she said Rube--pop, you couldn't even walk down the street in Spain.  She said, "I mentioned your name and people were coming out of the other room," you know my buddy, Ruben, Ruben Santiago.  You know, oh, no way (unclear).  She said, "They were going crazy," so she almost like, oh, man, why did I tell them?  You know, so that--that's what I would in--inform the kids for.  Know your path.  Surround yourself with good people.  Work hard.  Everybody talking about work hard and you can get--you can work your ass off and don't get nothing.  My father [Ruben Santiago] worked twenty-eight years on the railroad.  The most he ever made was thirty-four thousand dollars a year, you know.  They--he tried to get his full pension, they laid him off three months so he couldn't get his full pension 'cause you had to not be laid off more than three months, you know (laughter), so it was like--so, what do you--you know, he worked hard, but he did--he got a good life.  He got, got loved.  He got loved.  He got kids that, that honor him.  You know, so, so it ain't just work.
Story_ID: 629985
Speaker 1: When you think about your legacy, what, what do you hope your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I, I wanna make sure that, that I--you know, like Mama [Mattie Overton] always wanted me to be fair, you know, be a fair guy, and, and, and not a--you know, I--you know, honest, fair, that I, I made a difference in my community and that I was a fine artist, that I, I took it very, very seriously.  I always reached for the highest rung, accepted no substitutes other than excellence, but that I did my share and that I worked--I worked and not just for me, that I worked for the community.  I worked for the people.  And it's, it's a hard place to be in because everybody knows that about me, so everybody wants me to do something for them exclusively, and I say, I can't.  I can't go up to Harlem [New York, New York] and be on six different boards.  The board I chose to be on is the Signature Theatre [New York, New York] with Jim Houghton [James Houghton], so I don't have to have given myself to one theater or another in Harlem, but I help all of them, all of them that I can come, speak, drop, help fundraise, be awarded, bring--people come in, write letters, speak to the council, the arts coun- whatever because I need them.  They have sustained me.  I'm from them.  But I don't pick and choose one and that's my--I'm over here at the Signature and in that place at the Signature, I've opened doors for many, many.  We got how many black writers on there?  We got Brandon [Brandon J. Dirden], we got Regina Taylor, we have (unclear), we have [HistoryMaker] Suzan-Lori Parks, we have--you know, we got several--we got black writers and we do three full productions of their work, full out, two hundred thousand dollar, hundred and fifty thousand dollar productions, and who do they bring?  Other people that look like them.  So, we open up the doors and train the next level of the people that's gonna have the next black theaters.  So, so when people come from me, I say, no.  The Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], I did a whole season of the--who else done a whole season in Negro Ensemble Company?  I did that.  Jim let me do that.  That's Jim's money, the August Wilson season.  That's Jim, you know.  And that's when people came for me, why don't you do it in Harlem?  I said, can you put these productions up at this level?  If you can, I'm on my way.  If you cannot, then let me do them here and bring you down here, give you the wherewithal, the next time we do them here, and so they chill out (laughter).
Story_ID: 629986
Speaker 1: When you think back on your career and on, on your life, do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: You know, people always say they have no regrets.  Yeah, yeah, I have certain regrets.  You know, I mean, I can't say specifically what they are, you know.  But, there are things I've done I wish I hadn't done, I could take that back.  Of course, they all add to the fabric of who I am.  And people like to use that excuse of why they don't have regrets.  There are things I wish I hadn't said and done.  There's times, you know, but, it all has led up to this, this moment, my feet are sitting on the ground and my ass is in this seat with you.  So, it, it, it meant something about who I am and it was all a proving ground.  But are there certain things I wish I hadn't done?  Yeah.  And could I still be who I am without?  Probably, yeah.  You know, so, yeah, you always have regrets.
Story_ID: 629987
Speaker 1: When you think of the trajectory of black actors today, 2016 moving forward, do you think that, that it's getting easier, better, different than it was when you started your career?
Speaker 2: More opportunity.  But, we still all gonna work for somebody, and that's the problem.  We gotta work for us.  We need to develop a trust where we start investing and we're starting to head that way.  It has to be important to us that our stories are told by us.  It's very important.  Not that somebody else is trying to hurt you.  Some other people trying to hurt you, some people are trying to hurt you.  Most people ain't trying to hurt you, but they just don't know what's important to you if they tell your story.  It's like me doing another culture's story.  I don't know what's the most important.  I don't know the little sim- simple things that are important to black folks, like the way in 'Piano Lesson' ['The Piano Lesson,' August Wilson] that Berniece did Maretha's--straightened her hair.  How she did it was very important to her and me and every black woman that came in that audience.  It wasn't important to nobody else, but they saw and learned about a culture.  They learned that the hair grease went on the back of their hand.  They learned that a towel went on the shoulder and a towel went on the corner of the table.  They learned that that hot comb was on that stove and you gonna wave it around and tap, tap, tap it.  They learned that.  That hand is on the hip and that thing.  That's just our culture.  You could see that picture.  You could pai- people painted that picture.  Horace Pippin probably painted that bad boy.  So, so, you know, it's the way we pray before we eat, the way we do things differently, that we don't want white people rubbing our kids' heads.  They don't know that they did--they don't know that that was offensive to you until you say, hey, hey, could you, you, you know, clip him on the shoulder, give him one on the chin, give him a noogie, but don't, don't--because that's--that, that goes culturally into a thing when they rubbed our heads when we were slaves, put the foot on your back to get the rheumatism out.  You know, if you don't know our history, you don't know that.  So, if you direct one of our plays and you don't know what's important to us, it's up to the actors to let you know it's important, like I'm telling this writer now, explaining this writer, showing him what's important to me as a black man.  Certain things, I'm not gonna let happen to me in the presence--there's certain--you gotta be willing to die.  And certain things--you gotta find out what you willing to die about.  You can't be willing to die 'cause somebody took your parking space, you know.  Get you another parking space.  But, you got to be willing to die about certain things that are that important to you, family, mother, love, kids, you know, and, and to some standard, your integrity.  So, that's what I expect out of characters and actors that, that, that, that work with me.  I need to know their place in the play where not that you ready to die like this, but that it means that much to you, that you invested that much in it, it's that important to you, and when you find that area, then you really got a good character, you really--you're grounded, particularly in an August Wilson play.  Now, there's--see, we, we don't do plays about somebody in love with an earthworm or, or this guy was making a ball of yarn and he want to see how big it can get until it took over his whole room.  That ain't our plays 'cause we need to speak.  We need to tell our stories, not just do something that's an interesting time at the theater.  That was a nice two hours.  What, what happened?  Oh, he made a ball of yarn, it got so big, it ate up the whole room, wow.  You ever seen a black play like that?  No.  It's about issues deal--and, and not all about white people's issues.  It's our issues, how we manage, navigate, succeed, thrive in a culture that persistently and consistently wants to keep the foot on you.  So, how we navigate it behind closed doors and we can show other people that and go, wow.  How we mourn, how we court, what's important to us, that's gotta be real or the play ain't there.  We don't write random plays, I fell in love with my German Shepherd's sister.  That ain't our plays.  I ain't seen it.  I ain't read it and I ain't seen it and I read a thousand plays.
Story_ID: 629988
Speaker 1: You talked about movies earlier and, you know, when you speak about plays, there's full on passion--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --talking about films, there's more contraction.
Speaker 2: You're too observant.
Speaker 1: And, and I'm--and I'm thinking about I would be remiss if I didn't bring up the awards that some have won for movies, in particular Denzel [Denzel Washington] and Halle [Halle Berry].  You know, a lot of people were--had a lot of mixed emotions about those two films being the film--the roles that they had being the roles that we're selected for these awards.  But, I'm, I'm thinking about this in the context of your saying we need to own our own stuff.  What is your perspective about the awards process as it relates to African American actors getting these awards?
Speaker 2: You gotta--you gotta look at who's voting for awards, who you--who you--who you looking for affirmation, confirmation from, validation from, you know?  First of all, I gotta get over the fact that when I walked--when I walked into your day, I was totally something different that you didn't know.  I gotta first make you listen to me, accept me, hear me, see me before I can get you to vote for me, something that you can accept from me.  If I give you something you didn't expect from me and I'm trying to make--tell you this is who I really am, then you might not be so easy to, to go, go for it.  You know what I mean?  It's, it's like we talked about earlier, we talked about black authority and black anger and then I said humanity.  That's the hard one for, for the voters and people to accept because they're not used to it.  They have not had me at their house laughing and, and, and joking and crying and, and, and sharing the best of me.  They have bought time with me in a performance since for the most part, found their way, gave up their whole day to spend two hours in the theater with me, which I appreciate.  But, have they ever cried with me?  No.  And it ain't exclusively just black people that have cried with me.  I cried with Jim Houghton [James Houghton], I cried for Jim Houghton, and I'll cry some more this week, and he is not a black man, and no--I don't think anybody in this business has ever been that close to me as Jim, you know.  He's as close as anybody has ever been to me and as fair as anybody has ever been to me, and he's created more opportunities for me than anybody, you know.  And, and he said--somebody texted me yesterday and said, when they went to see him when he was dying, they said to him, who else do you need to see?  And he said, "Ruben [HistoryMaker Ruben Santiago-Hudson]."  He said, "He has the biggest heart," Jim said.  You know, I don't wanna start crying about Jim, but I'm not here to, to pontificate about I'm choosing people 'cause of race.  I'm choosing 'cause of goodness, honesty, integrity, and if, if we on the same page--but I will call you out if you--if you--if I know--if you peek out.  If you--if I see that think peek out, I just call it out, that ain't cool like the Em- Emily Dickinson thing, like the chopstick thing.  I tell you that ain't cool.  I, I don't--you know, either that or I can pull the shade down or and ignore it.  Like people say, let's ignore that.  Why?  Why does a sixty year old man with four kids have to take anybody's shit?  I'm not gonna thrust that on you.  I'm not gonna impose my thing on you.  I, I don't have to accept you imposing it on me.  And when I say that's not cool, I hope you hear it.
Story_ID: 629989
Speaker 1: It's like people talking about 'Jitney' [August Wilson] now.  Yeah, well, the Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], the Tonys, the Tonys.  I said, you know, I--'Jitney' is going up against every other revival that's gonna be dynamite show with bigger stars than I have and 80 percent of those people voting don't look like me.  That ain't saying I might not be heard--my name, 'Jitney's' name doesn't get called, but look what I gotta get over first.  They say, well, you won the Tony.  I said, I am the exception to the rule.  I'm not the rule.  Something bigger than me and you is over what's happening in my life.  And that's just--I don't wanna be corny or nothing, but I'm protected by something I don't even know and I got a job to do.  I gotta tell the truth about it, you know.  If I don't--if I--am I supposed to hush?  And they've told me hush.  Hush why?  Why am I being protected if I'm--if I'm gonna hush, you know.  I got--I gotta--I gotta say it.  I gotta--you know, long as I, I lear- learn the diplomacy to saying things, to understand when, what is the arena, what's the platform to say it.  Who do you say it to and how do you say it?  But don't not say it.  If a guy comes at me and he wants to get that kind of--and some time I could, I could, I could question you into finding out your own stupidity.  I can ask you questions and finally be like, oh, man, that was stupid.  I shouldn't have said it.  You think that's--I'm not saying it's stupid, but think about that.  That is racism, subconscious.  Because we did a--we dealt with three hundred years or two hundred fifty years, three hundred years of slavery.  Then, we did like fifty years of having our own thing in Reconstruction and then fifty years of, of, of, of segregation and Jim Crow, and, and we--what are we about sixty years of what we been doing now?  We got to keep doing things different all the time (laughter).  Now, it's like, oh, we supposed to be--everything cool that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] came out and you can say what you want to me now, to him and everybody else.
Story_ID: 629990
Speaker 1: You were speaking about Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Yeah, when President Obama was elected, I have never seen such overt racism, that they can say anything they want not only to (laughter) me, to him, to him and about him.  And so it just opened up a whole different realm of possibilities of, of presentations of racism, that, you know, quit being politically correct, let's say what we want to you.  No, it's certain standards and there's a certain line that you can't cross.  And like I said, one of my old mentors said to me, get that line a little closer to you 'cause right now, the line is across the street.  People crossing your line and you're ready to fight and they cross the street.  Let them get a little closer and then let them--give them warning, say, no, no, no, you--don't go there.  But you ready to what?  Bip (laughter).  So, right now all, all bets are off and people can say and do what they want, and, and I'm just thinking, I will not be insulting--I can humiliate you, I can put you down in, in a way that may, may not make you feel good if you say something stupid, like I called a man Mr. White Man, Mr. White Man, you know--and I said something to, to somebody, I know his name, but since he wanna throw these little--but, you know, I, I can say something to--if I--I, I have a quick wit, you know.  I'm, I'm, I'm a black man from a quick witted environment, so I'll drop something on you if you--if you--if you come, come for me.  And somebody said something, everybody was waiting around for their paycheck, these workers, they was waiting for this white foreman to come.  They were working in this building and I had kind of befriended them, and, and they need water, I get them water.  You, you, you--, "Anybody got some water, man?"  I live right here, you know.  They all--first, they assumed I was the super, you know.  And I said, "No," and they said, "You're not the super, bro?"  I said, "No, I'm not the super."  "But what, what--you live over here?"  "Yeah, I own three apartments in this building."  "Three?"  "Yeah, I own three.  Yeah, well, y'all need water or something?  I can get y'all some cold water.  I got some cold water in the crib, y'all want some?"  "Yeah, man, that would be good."  So, we got to be friends.  So, one day they was all waiting around for the--for the--for the--for the white foreman to come.  He comes there and I then look over and he tell them to do something else, right?  So, they wait.  And I say, "What y'all--?" He said, "Man, we're waiting this dude, he better come on, man.  He late."  I said, "Well somebody gotta weigh the cotton," (laughter).  So they said, "Why you saying that?"  Man, I said, "Y'all waiting--he weighing y'all cotton, y'all picking it, but he weighing it."  I said, "Why don't y'all have your own construction company, brother?  It's like six of y'all and you're all skilled.  You a tile guy, you a painter and plasterer, you do wood work, you do floors.  Why y'all waiting for him to, to--why y'all letting him weigh the cotton and tell you what it's worth?"  "Man, I never thought about it that way."  But, it's what's bred into them, go get a job, work for somebody, work for somebody, you know, and, and, and, there you go, you know.  Anyway, that's just a sidebar.
Story_ID: 629991
Speaker 1: I was thinking about your, your early childhood, well your young years when, when anger had--was more front and center, and I, I spoke to John Amos a while ago and he--
Speaker 2: Love him.  You know, I directed John in 'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson].
Speaker 1: See?  Yeah, he's a really interesting guy who--he described his departure, his, his losing his job as a result of being a hothead on set, in particular, he said, because he did not--the, the character that he was playing would never do some of the things, having a wife that they were wanting him to do, and when he stood up to say, no way, then shortly thereafter, his character was gone.  And I'm just thinking of as you've described your career, he, he said he was hotheaded in his way of talking about it, not that it wasn't right for him to speak up.  You went from fighting to diplomacy but still saying to the person about the chopsticks or--what is the lesson in, in your experience about kind of negotiating when you stand up for yourself, how you stand up for yourself in your career?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna stand up for myself.  It's just how.  You know, it's never--it's never passive and--but it's always effective.  I gotta find out what's most effective with this person.  Do I speak to the mask that they're showing me 'cause I know who they really are underneath the mask?  Usually, that's most effective, or do I take the mask off?  If I choose to take their mask off and speak to just who I know they are, that's always harmful.  So, I use tact and that's--that gets you killed, too, because if they're smart enough to say, he really knows who I am--some people aren't and they pick up on--they don't pick up on you speaking to the mask.  By, by--for example, if I notice that we've been doing a show, a television show for three years and there's not been one black director, I think the union rules say, you know, thirteen episodes, twenty-two episodes, you gotta have a black director or a director--a minority director, and ain't nobody raising no hell 'cause don't nobody wanna lose that BMW or that Range Rover, so the black folks shut up.  So if I'll say--if I want to say, "Yo, man, ain't no black--," you know, "ain't no black directors," that's one way of doing it, or I, I been wanting to talk to you about this.  You know, it's just--it's kind of like, I'm a little sensitive to it.  It's kind of like--it stays on me.  "What, what is it, Ruben?  What is it?"  "You know, we're in our third year and I--I knew--I'm bringing this up 'cause I knew if you were aware of this, I just know what kind of person you are, that you would--you would've done something about it 'cause I know--I know how fair you are about this, but--what, what, what?  You know, we ain't had no black directors and I know if you really paid attention to it, your ass would've been there."  "Wait a minute, we didn't--no, not in three years.  We didn't--what about the Rodriguez girl?"  "Oh, no, she's a Jewish girl married to a Puerto Rican guy."  "I ought to look into that.  Yeah, we--that ain't--that's not cool.  That's not fair, Rube.  That's, that's, that's not right, you know."  And then what you end up doing is looking at the script and you gone (laughter).  It be like (laughter)--we can handle this, you know, get him out of here.  He got to go.  He's got to go because he's aware of something--you think they don't know?  That they keep calling Tommy and Joe and Freddy?  They wanna be surrounded by naturally what they're comfortable with.  All of a sudden, they bring [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson to direct an episode.  They don't know what Ruben's gonna be--if Ruben's gonna follow their rule book.  Ruben might wanna do something different.  I wanna shoot this shot.  No, that ain't how we shoot this shot on the show.  We shoot this shot.  Yeah, or, or, or why don't we make the judge--you know, judge is always black, that's authority figure, why don't we make the husband black or the wife black or Latino or Asian?  That'd be cool.  Or what if one of the kids was black, was adopted son, or wasn't even adopted.  We don't even explain why he's black.  That's his son.  That's his son, you know.  I'm changing up shit.  No.  So, you speak to the mask where I can pull the mask off and say, man, I need to be going to the union 'cause y'all ain't got a black director in here.  Whoa, whoa, don't go to the union.  Sometime that's more effective.  You gotta find out who you're talking to, you know.
Story_ID: 629992
Speaker 1: It's just, you gotta figure out tactfully how to do it and if somebody step hard at me, usually I step hard back.  But now, my diplomacy is if you step hard to me, I do like this and I stay there a long time.  You'll walk away and still be going--I'll still be standing like.  Okay, okay, all right, okay, okay, all right, that's, that's wrong.  I shouldn't have said it.  I shouldn't have done it.  They be like--they hate that worse.  They hate that worse.  They'd rather for me to step hard.  Then they got a reason to smoke me, just that look.  And some time it's a little smile.  Some time I ask you, "Are you all right?"  Like if somebody is--if I'm doing business with somebody and they come at me a certain way, like, like, like a police officer I had to ask, you know, the other day, you know, they way they were talking to me.  And, and I said, "Are you okay?  You all right?"  "What are you asking me am I all right for?"  "Just the way you're presenting yourself to me.  I'm talking to you in a very civil tone, it seem--I think I'm coming off intel- intelligently, intellectually, why am I--why am I facing such a--such kind of, you know, venom from you?"  "All right, all right.  He's right, Tommy, he's right, Tommy.  Okay, listen, sir, we," (laughter)--all right, thank you.  "You know, well I didn't know--." "What you're doing is your job and you're doing it very well and I appreciate it, I really do, but I just don't appreciate when you--when you speak to me that way.  I'm a grown man, I don't speak to my kids that way."  They be like, damn, that guy is smart, shit.  He didn't give me a reason to kill him (laughter), you know what I'm saying?  No.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I tell my wife [Jeannie Brittan], I said, "Baby, listen, something happen to me, sue.  I know how to get home.  I know I'm trying to get home and I got good lawyers and I got a lot of life insurance.  Something happen to me, sue them 'cause trust me, I didn't go off on them.  I'm a go--the, the worst they get, the calmer I get 'cause I know I'm gonna call on my lawyer.  Call him," you know (laughter) what I'm saying?  "So, sue them."  She be like, "I don't wanna hear that.  I don't wanna hear you're not coming home."  I said, "Baby, I ain't got no control of what's out there, I really don't.  I can control me and know that if that situation comes up, I'm trying to get home."  I said, "I'm only willing to die for y'all.  I ain't willing to die over no--," you know, "'cause you talk nasty to me.  If you tell me shut up, don't say another word, I'll blow your brains out, then he'll hate that," (laughter), you know what I'm saying?  So it's like how do you be effective with a--with, with a person and that--that's a good note for directors that might watch this.  A director should always find out what's the best way to be effective with your actors.  Find out what they need first instead of telling them what you need, you know.  That's the first lesson I taught these kids when I went up to (unclear) last week.  Find out what your actors need.
Story_ID: 629993
Speaker 1: For young black men wanting to get into this industry, how did--what advice do you have for them to keep their integrity and still many of the roles are these stereotypical figures.
Speaker 2: Find out how you can control a good part of your career.  A good part is 20 percent.  And the reason why is because then, the things that you're going to do are the things that are most important to you.  So, in other words, you're gonna have to do work for somebody else for 80 percent of the time or 50 percent of the time 'cause they pay you more than you pay you usually 'cause they need you to do something that do their bidding.  So, find out where you just taking time off to do what you wanna do.  That's what gives you a dip in your step.  That's what put your chin up.  That's what makes you, you--gives you confidence, worth.  It makes relevancy 'cause you're doing a good amount of what you wanna do.  You go out and do a TV series.  You do twenty-two episodes.  You good for a year or two.  They say, no--or this summer, we want you to do a movie in a week.  We're gonna give you almost as much as we gave you for the twenty-two episodes.  Okay.  Or your buddy who said we're gonna do an independent film.  We're gonna tell a story about my mama, Nanny [Rachel Crosby], you know, this little, little--just, just empower these, these people.  And then you ain't making nothing off that.  That's gonna cost you twenty Gs [twenty thousand dollars] a piece, but that person just offered you another three hundred grand.  Your thing is gone now.  That's what you think, not me.  You know, when I was doing 'Michael Hayes,' twenty-three episodes.  They asked me to do movie of the week for the summer, I said, no, I'm going to do Shakespeare in the Park.  I needed to do what I wanted to do.  I went and did Shakespeare in the Park, played the king for six hundred dollars a week (laughter).  You know what I'm saying?  But, I felt so good.  I walk in the restaurant, the king.  You know, I'm jogging in Central Park [New York, New York], long live the king.  You know, that's the guy that's--the black guy that's playing the king.  Yeah, it's a black guy, you know.  Black folks, said, man--garbage man jumped off a truck, was taking my kids to school, 82nd [Street] and, and Columbus [Avenue], he jumped off the truck to get the city garbage, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson."  I said, "Yes, sir, how you doing, brother?"  He said, "Good."  I said, "They got you working hard."  "Man, I'm always working hard."  He said, "Man, I loved you in Shakespeare in the Park.  That's the first time I saw a black king."  I'm like, "Thanks bro, thanks man."  "You see you looking at me like you ain't expect me to be at Shakespeare in the Park."  I said, "Man, it just shocked me.  I thought you was gonna say you saw me in 'Shaft.'"  He (laughter) said, "No, man.  I--me and my wife came to the park, man.  That's cold, man."  I said, "I appreciate, brother.  Have a great day."  That's why you--you know, it's, it's like--see, people don't know us, black folks.  They don't--they don't really know us.  I was walking up Columbus Avenue the other day and this woman tripped and fell.  The first person there, me, standing there.  And she trying to get up.  I said, "Ma'am, don't get up."  Then people started crowding.  I said, "Just take your time, make sure you feel all right, make sure your bones is correct."  And then she looked around, she was looking and, and the people started crowding around and she look and I was just talking to her in a real calm voice.  I looked to the right, there's this African brother who was selling stuff there and he--me and him, and everybody kind of like dissolved and I just stayed there with her, older white woman.  And I said, "You, you feel better?"  And she said, "Yeah."  I said, "Take my hand and come," and she kind of looked at me and you could just--seen her light up, and she took my arm.  And it was a moment probably she had never done that in her life.  I mean, really.  I could just see it, I could feel it, and but the way she was looking at me like, like I, I, I was--I was--she didn't expect me to be the most helpful person there.  And I lifted her up and everybody dissolved and I stood there with her.  And she--I said, "You okay?"  She said, "Yeah."  I said, "I'm gonna wait until you feel better before you can walk."  And she says, "I can walk, I just gotta get a cab."  I said, "Hold on," jumped out, I grabbed her cab, I said, "You fine?"  I opened the door and she got in, go--this is the just the first time I ever said this to anybody.  I didn't go home, tell my wife [Jeannie Brittan].  I didn't tell my kids.  I didn't tell my neighbor.  I didn't tell the doorman across the street.  I'm telling you 'cause that's who I am.  That's who Mama raised.  That's what she'd expect of me and that's what I would expect somebody to do for my mother [Alean Hudson].  I don't care what, what color they are, what race they are, kids and old people.  I'm not gonna have noth- I'm not gonna see anything done to them wrong ever.  I don't care who's they are.  They're ours.  Them old people belong to us, them kids belong--you know what I mean.  So, that's what we raised as.  That--that's--you know, I know that's a sidebar, but.
Story_ID: 629994
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to share that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: There was something I, I was--thought about, but I talk so much, I talked past it (laughter).  No, not really, I guess, you know.  I--I'm excited.  I'll tell you this much.  I'm excited to see the new--newer black platforms on television for our work.  You know it always was, you know, a couple places and it was mainly built on shake your butt videos and rap and, and--not that I have anything against that.  I got--I got my fair share of rap on my iPod.  Certain things I don't want on it.  But, certain things I'm just--you know, I'm rocking with it just like everybody else.  But, I love seeing where these networks are starting to go to, you know, whether it's Aspire or TV One, OWN [Oprah Winfrey Network], BET [Black Entertainment Television], even BET and all--I just signed a deal with BET, very proud of what--and people look at me, BET, you going--you know, NBC wants you, right?  I said, yeah, but I like to be a part of the resurgence or the--or the--or the climb, the ascension of--they had hired a new head of--new president.  I always admired [HistoryMaker] Debra Lee but, Zola Mashariki came in from Twentieth Century Fox [Fox Searchlight Pictures].  She wanted to--she wanted to take everything up to another level, brought in Felicia Henderson [Felicia D. Henderson] to write this show, Rob Hardy to direct.  You know, and I met with them.  I read the script and I was like, you know, this is where I wanna be.  I told my agent, I wanna be with them.  If they get anywhere in the vicinity pay wise.  They ain't gotta top the, the big ones, but if they get anywhere in the vicinity, I'm going with them.  I wanna be with them.  I wanna be a part of this.  If they actually--and they seem very content to move forward, very content at what they--what they're saying they're gonna do, very strong behind it.  And, and I took that deal.  And we shot that show 'The Yard' [sic. 'The Quad'], myself and Anika Noni Rose and [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy, and wonderful cast, and it's like I'm excited to see that everybody wants to raise the integrity of telling our stories.  What Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] doing now on OWN, what--Ava [Ava DuVernay] doing her thing.  And I just wanna--I just--I just--I'm just a little--I'm a little worried 'cause women in general, and black women particularly, have been so far behind everybody that everybody is focusing so much on just only black women, only black women, only just hire--only hire black women, directors, writers, and--only--don't leave us out.  Don't sep- start separating us even more.  I think that should be your primary focus if that's your primary focus, but don't let the brothers slide 'cause who fighting for us then?  We got to fight together and, and women, the black women got to get--you know, they got the long way to catch up and we got to help that.  And, and when I wrote 'Lackawanna Blues,' I knew that that was gonna do a little bit of that work 'cause when does a black woman get a role like that?  But, I don't--I--I'm never like real happy when I hear only black women.  And I'm like, don't, don't split us again 'cause if I started a net- a, a, a, a, a, a production company and said I ain't hiring nothing but black men, how that sound?  And I know we a little bit ahead, but--and I--and I--and I absolutely know that there needs to be companies where the primary focus is hiring black women.  That must be the primary focus, not to the exclusion of anybody else that need a little help 'cause I still need--sister, I need your hand and I'm gonna give you mine, you know.  And, and so make sure we don't get more divided.  Don't let that mentality come and divide more, divide more.  We must collectively come together and fight for each other.
Story_ID: 629995
Speaker 1: Do you ever look to incorporate your Hispanic heritage into your work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they don't see me.  They don't--they don't see that in me because I got the--my--the way I talk is, is northern colored.  You know, my--they say my walk is northern colored, but if you saw my father, I walk just like my father.  Any picture I take, if you look at it, I stand just like him.  I lean to the right and I have my hand like this.  It's like I'm very Boricua and, and I love that culture, love that.  I mean, all yesterday, I was out on, on the deck grilli- grilling and me and my son was out there and we listened to everything from salsa to classical to, to, to African to--I listen to everything and I love everything, but when--but he sees me jump when the--when the Puerto Rican music comes on.  Pow, you know, he sees me, his dad and he starts laughing 'cause it's so in me, you know.  Hollywood does not see Puerto Ricans my color.  They don't see me as Puerto Rican.  Anything that's color--even if you look at me, if you look at my face and you really look at my structure, I look a lot like my father.  I got some Hudson in me.  Some of this is Hudson, but I look a lot like Ruben [Ruben Santiago].  And, and many of my principles and kindness and, and--has come from him.  And a lot of my street savvy and fight in me is from, from Alean [Alean Hudson], you know.  And, and Alean was good people, too, but--particularly them last twelve years of her life.  And we never discussed--you know, she got killed in a drive by shooting taking crack [crack cocaine] addicted girls off the street of the--of the--of the Hill District of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and got shot while they were shooting somebody else, which was tragic for me.
Speaker 1: And this is after she--
Speaker 2: Twelve years--
Speaker 1: --completely turned.
Speaker 2: --she had been clean and--clean and taking people off the street, being a matron and, you know, girls said, you know, "Alean, I hate myself.  I ain't got enough hair."  She said, "We gonna get you some hair."  "I hate my teeth."  "We gonna get them teeth fixed."  "I, I hate my clothes."  "We gonna get you some new clothes.  We're gonna go to the Goody [Goody's Family Clothing, Inc.] and get you some new clothes," (laughter), you know.  So, so that was her thing, making girls feel good about themselves.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she died?
Speaker 2: She died 2000--she died 2001, 2001 or something like that, so she was in her sixties, maybe sixty--maybe--I don't--I don't--I don't know, she was twenty years older than me.  I was doing 'Lackawanna Blues' in San Francisco [California] at the time when she died, when I got the news.  But--anyway, I, I got--I got sidetracked, you know.  But, I'm very Puerto Rican, you know.  I just don't--and if you write it, you hear me do it.  I speak--I can speak the hell out of it.  I just can't make sentences.  Now, I understand it 'cause my father talked to me in Spanish, like he was always trying to teach me Spanish and I was like, "Dad, I gotta go to basketball game, dad, I gotta go to football game." He be like, "No, you're, you're listening, listening (unclear)," and he would just tell me something and I would say, "Okay, I know that word."  So, I know all these words, so if you start talking to me in Spanish, I know what you're saying for the most part, pretty much the most, most part, but I don't speak it.  And so like my daughter and I were in Central Park [New York, New York] and these Spanish tourists walked up to us and they looked at me so they must've realized, you know, either I'm Dominican or Puerto Rican or South American.  So, they come to me and the start talking to me and my daughter who speaks fluent Spanish--I don't speak it in my house, I don't speak it, but she just took a love to it 'cause her name was Santiago.  That's why she's in Seville [Spain].  So she can speak--she's staying with a Spanish, Spanish family.  They speak Spanish, they don't even speak English.  They don't even know how to speak--so Lily [Lily Santiago-Hudson] started telling them how to get to the Sheep's Meadow [Sheep Meadow].  And I hear what she's saying, I said, no, Lil, but if they go that way, I think it would be--she--Lily said, and then she said, no, then she started talking to me in Spanish and, and I was just talking to her in English.  I said, no, no, no, I think this is quicker 'cause they got that blocked off.  And then the Spanish people like, she's talking to him in Spanish, he answering in this black southern English (laughter), you know.  And we walked--I said, "We're a good team, Lil."  She said, "Dad, you gotta learn how to speak Spanish."  And so she's--her, her minor in college is Spanish.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: So--which is gonna help her a lot as an actress I think, too, 'cause she's got that--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --exotic look, you know.  She hates the word exotic, though.  And she's at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and some people--she was on a committee to give money to Arts--called Arts Alliance [Arts Alliance Illinois, Chicago, Illinois], give to other arts groups that need money to produce their plays, and one girl, black girl walked in said, "I wanna, I wanna do August Wilson play," and everybody was like--when she walked out and Lily thought it was fabulous.  And she walked out and everybody was, "What is August Wilson?"  And Lily was like, "What?  You don't know August Wilson?"  And she said they didn't even know that I was her father and my work.  And she went off on them, crying, called me crying--dad--I said, "Lil, just calm down, you're at Northwestern."  It's like, those people don't know us.  And even though Northwestern broke ground in a lot of stuff, they had the first African American studies department, I think, you know, in a major university.  So--but her--you know, you look at her, wouldn't think she'd be fighting, you know, for all this black stuff, you know, and she's like fierce with it, you know.
Speaker 1: She's your daughter.
Speaker 2: Any- anyway.  Yeah, she's fierce with it.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
