Story_ID: 111101
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Lynn Karen--what's your last name?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER): Preston
Speaker 1: Preston, right, Lynn Karen Preston and--sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is William L. Smith, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, L. for Lee, L-E-E; Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 1-3-29 [1929]. Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a federal executive in a senior executive service in the U.S. Department of Education.
Speaker 1: And you were the first black and the last--
Speaker 2: United States Commissioner of Education, that is correct.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September the 9th in the year 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my office here in Washington, D.C., in the United States Department of Education in the Mary E. Switzer Building.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 111102
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five 'People' magazine-ish type questions we always ask. And they're lightweight questions and they only deserve a short answer. So the first one is:  Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably steak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I vacillate between red and blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring and summer time.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  Of late it has been Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  We have a friend that has a home there and they invite us yearly.  And it is a wonderful time of the year because we normally go in August and it's very nice.  But I really enjoy Maine and New Hampshire and Vermont.  I--the New England States--maybe it's because I'm a Massachusetts boy, but I've always enjoyed the New England States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is not mine, but it is the one that I probably use more than anything else.  Never too small to give and never too big to receive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111103
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about your ancestors.  What you know about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family? We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mary, M-A-R-Y, A-L-L-E-N, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth would be August the 10th, 1898.  And I think she was born in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Actually very little.  She had a brother who lived in New York City [New York].  And for a time when I was very young, I went to visit them on two occasions.  I have never visited and do not know anyone else in my mother's family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that your mother told you that were passed down through the family about life in the 19th Century or you know, slavery, or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, never.  She only talked about the present.  And we were only together fourteen years because she died when I was fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you never met your grandparents then?
Speaker 2: Never met my grandparents.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did she ever discuss how it was that she came to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: No.  She, as a matter of fact, never discussed her husband, Mr. Smith, who died.
Speaker 1: He died before you were born?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He died before I was born because he was not my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she never--she never talked about the past in any way, shape, form or fashion.  She was a very focused woman who talked about what was existing at the present.  And I, you know, I never thought about it up until you just asked that question.  I never thought about the fact that there really isn't anything that I can recall that my mother would have said that reflected something about our history.
Story_ID: 111104
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Mary Allen Smith].  What kind of person was she?  What did she do and did she have a chance to go to school herself or--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I don't know.  As a matter of fact, it's going to be interesting because I don't know about my father either.  My mother was not a professional woman.  She, as a matter of fact, had been a cook.  She met my father as a domestic.  He was the butler, and I think the chauffeur, and she was the cook.  And they lived in a Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] home of the people that they worked for.  And it was out of that working relationship that they formed a union and had two children: my sister, who was two years older than I, and me.  My mother was a very disciplined person, and I always thought that the basis for her--both her philosophic base and her sense of justice, was a function of the people she worked for, because while we never talked about blackness or being a Negro or anything of that sort, she always talked about principles.  And I was, I'd like to say the recipient of, but I always say the victim of, the principles, because I always violated them.  And I was getting spanked by my mother every which way one could imagine.  My father brought home a razor strap, and he cut it in three parts.  And I always said of that razor strap, it could go left, right, and straight ahead.  And somehow or other, my mother, who had heart trouble, could use it in such a way that whichever way I went, she found me.  She had principles that she made very clear to both of us, my sister and me.  But I adhered very much to those things that she had laid out for me.  And the one thing that I had recalled more than anything else was that she said, "If you meet a young woman and you decide to have sex, be prepared to marry her."  And it was a principle for my mother, and it affected my life in many ways, because, I always thought of it in terms of my relationships.  The other thing was, that when my sister was born--they remained working until I was born.  And when I was born, my mother left the employment of that family and did not work again until I was in junior high school.  And it was during that period that I really reflect upon what she provided me on a day-to-day basis.  She really helped me understand consequence.  I'll never forget the one great story that I always tell is that she said to me, "It's going to rain, put on your rubbers--your galoshes."  And I said, "Yes, mother."  And as I was going to elementary school, there was a big billboard, and behind the billboard it was all grass.  And I said, "It's not going to rain."  So I took off my rubbers and I went on to the school expecting to pick them up on the way back.  And when school ended it was raining cats and dogs.  And a next door neighbor, who was--had driven up to pick up her son, and she said, "Billy," they called me Billy, "Billy, I'll take you home."  And I said, "Thank you," forgetting about those rubbers.  And I walked through the door and my mother looked down at my feet and she said, "Where are your overshoes?"  And I said, "Uh."  And with that she began to spank me all the way back to where they had been left.  Now, I could outrun her, but every now and then she'd catch up and I could feel that strap, "Bing" [ph.].  And so one of the things that I learned early in life was that there's a consequence for action.  And we have to make a judgment as to whether you want to deal with the consequence or not.  She was able to instill that in me and I carried it for the rest of my life.  It was an interesting relationship.  I loved her very much, but I hated the fact that she could catch me under the bed with the strap.  But I never did the same thing twice.  Never made the same error twice.  But the fact that there were so many, made it very easy for me to know that this was a lady that did not play.  If she said I'm going to spank you, I could look forward to it.
Story_ID: 111105
Speaker 1: Now what was your sister's name?  I'm sorry about that.
Speaker 2: Barbara.
Speaker 1: What was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Boston, October the 23rd, I think 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she is--
Speaker 2: She is deceased.
Speaker 1: And she is older than--she was older than you?
Speaker 2: She was older than I, yeah, by two years.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 111106
Speaker 1: Now did you--did you--how did you feel about corporal punishment?  I mean how do you feel about it going forward in life after experiencing it at that age?
Speaker 2: Oh, my sense of it was that it's part of growing up.  If you were dumb enough to do something that was gonna get you in trouble, then you had to understand there was gonna be a consequence.  And my mother [Mary Allen Smith] made it very clear as to what the consequences were.  So I never thought of it in that context whatsoever.  As a matter of fact, one of the things that happened to me when I became a principal was that, I was in a school that had "in loco parentis," which allowed the teacher to act as the parent, which meant that they could spank them.  And it was in the middle of all of that, that I learned that--and I was the principal, the assistant principal earlier, in charge of discipline and spanking of the boys.  And it wasn't until I became the principal that I realized that it was creating a problem.  And I had to find a way to help aid my teachers' change.  And so, that for me became a process that worked for me.  I've been a very lucky man.  And as a person, I have never disliked anything I've ever done, including the military service.  And I think, in all truth, it's because I had a set of parents that I respected and watched very carefully.
Story_ID: 111107
Speaker 1: My father, who we haven't mentioned, was never married to my mother, because he had been married, but was not divorced.  And he did everything to protect my mother so that she would not at any time have a problem.  And I came to both love him, and at one time question because he was so fair, whether he was my father.  And it wasn't until I'd come out of the service wearing a mustache and living at home when my wife said to me, "Why don't you shave?"  And so I shaved off my mustache and looked in the mirror and saw my father.  And that's when I realized, even though there were great differences between us, we were the same height, we were the same weight, but we looked quite different.  And he always--he was always a good man, such a good man that--and he was born in, I think in Florida in 1893.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now give us his full name again.
Speaker 1: Willie Lee Davis.  And he was a man that I, to this day, cannot tell you did or did not have an education, because he always talked about the normal school that he went to.  And I never knew what a normal school was.  I was never sure as to whether a normal school that I had learned was really a teaching college was where he went, or whether he was a student in a normal school.  But he had three attributes for me, were always unquestioned.  The first was he had a great love for crossword puzzles.  And I would sit and watch him with either a pipe, a cigar or package of cigarettes, a dictionary and eyeglasses and a crossword puzzle.  And he would either be listening to the Red Sox and in later life, watching the Red Sox on television.  And he would spend his time doing crossword puzzles.  He was--and he was very, very, very good.  So I never had a problem figuring out what to get him for Christmas.  I just got him a new book on crossword puzzles.  But I was never really sure.  And the one story that probably helped me grow up more than anything else is, after I finished college and I was going to school at the University of Massachusetts at Boston, I was writing my thesis on Puritan thoughts and its effect on education in seventeenth-century Massachusetts.  Because I was living in Massachusetts and I had access to the rare book library, and I was living high on the hog.  And my father would say to me, "Son, tell me what you're doing."  And I would always tell him what I was doing and the like.  But I always knew that he really didn't understand what I was talking about.  And he would come back and he'd say, "Well, what about such and such?"  And he'd always ask me a question that had relevancy to what I was doing.  And I could never figure out where did that question come from?  And so it would go on and on and on.  And I knew his friends.  And he had one white friend who was his barber, his cut buddy on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] who had a salon that--for ladies, but he cut his hair because they were cut buddies.  The rest were black guys.  And so one day I said to him, "Dad, tell me, where do you get these questions?"  And he said, "From Sam."  And I said, "From Sam?"  And he said, "Yeah."  And I said, "Oh."  And so it would go on and on.  Another occasion he'd ask some questions and he'd come back with two or three questions relevant to the answer that I gave him and I'd say to him, "Where'd you get this?" and he said, "Sam."  So one day, he asked a question that was really so very helpful to me in what I was doing.  And I said, "Pop, who is Sam?"  He said, "Oh, Sam Morison" [Samuel Eliot Morison] Well it turned out that Sam Morrison was a young man who lived on Beacon Hill.  And his family was the family that my father, during the depression, did their furnace.  Every night he stoked the furnace.  And this guy, the same age as he, was the son of the family who became an [Rear] admiral.  And he was a professor of history, of colonial history, at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And he would call my father and he'd say to my father, "Bill, I got a job that I gotta do.  Can you come over?" And the two of them would get the job done and then sit down and have a drink and talk about their kids.  And here I am going through all this studying.  I've got a bibliography with about fifteen or sixteen references to Samuel Eliot Morison and his rare books.  And my daddy and he were cut buddies.  And it for me was, I think, the most revealing piece of understanding with regard to my dad and the acceptance that people had in their relationship with him, regardless of what the level of education was.
Story_ID: 111108
Speaker 1: So for me, I never knew what the education of my family was.  And I only knew my grandmother, who I'd visited maybe ten times, who lived there but who I never knew my grandfather.  And my father's father was Caucasian, and I never knew anything about that part of the family except that somewhere I have a picture, I could never tell you where it is, of his sister.  I knew his brother who also passed.  But his sister, who was a very pretty young woman and it was a young picture of them.  But other than that, I cannot tell you anything about my past family.  My life was my dad and my mother and my sister.  And it was the richest experience for me because I knew so little at the time.  As a matter of fact, one of the things as we moved, my mother was never satisfied where we lived, and so we constantly moved in Boston [Massachusetts].  And one time we moved to the New York streets, which is--if you know anything about Boston, was Harrison Avenue and Albany Street and Washington Street, which at those times they called them the New York Streets because it was Syracuse and Rochester and Decatur, and they were all cities in New York State.  And so they called them the New York Streets.  And right now, I think the Herald Traveler is on Harrison Avenue at the far end.  And we went to school at the famous--today, famous elementary school called the [Josiah] Quincy [Elementary] School, which was in Chinatown.  And we lived in a community that was a ghetto, but it was not a ghetto of race, it was a ghetto of poverty.
Story_ID: 111109
Speaker 1: Give us some idea of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, it was hard to know you were black, because nobody ever mentioned it, and therefore, the sense of discrimination against you, if it existed, really never came.  The guys that I went to school with were Italian, Indian, Portuguese--there weren't that many blacks--Irish, and Syrian.  And when you went to [Josiah] Quincy [Elementary] School, it was in Chinatown [Boston, Massachusetts].  And therefore--and you walked to it and these were the Depression years.  And during the Depression, you went to one of the schools to get potatoes and the like. And I was very impressed with the Depression years.  I didn't know I was poor because everybody was the same.  I didn't know that there were distinctions made.  The first time I ever realized that I was black was junior year in high school when we were gonna go to the junior prom, and they discovered that there were a number of black students in a school that had like 1700 or 1800 kids, boys, all boys.  And the principal, when he found out this hotel was having a problem with--cancelled the prom there, and I always appreciated it, but never really understood the magnitude of the decision that he made.  And nobody else ever paid any attention to it because it was just that all of a sudden it, we will not have the junior prom at the such and such hotel; we're gonna have it at the so and so hotel.  And it was later that I discovered that our principal had made that call and the beauty of the school--I went to Boston Technical High School [Boston, Massachusetts]--the beauty of the school was that you had--it's all boys in the city of Boston during those years.  Every public school was either all girls or all boys.  There were no mixed high schools.  And therefore, Roxbury High School [Boston, Massachusetts] was Roxbury High School for Boys and Roxbury High School for Girls was the same building except that there were walls between the girls' side and the boys' side.
Speaker 1: Now, how long did the Boston School stay like that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They were like that when I graduated, and I graduated in 1946.
Speaker 1: So they'd traditionally always been--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They traditionally had always been either a single sex, which I really enjoyed because you had to wear a tie, you had to have a shirt, and you either had a sweater or jacket to go to high school.  So there was a dress code that was standard operating procedure that we took for granted.  That was the rule, and that's what we abided by.  The second was that it was during the war years and they had a schoolboy parade, which meant that all of us took military drill.  All of us took military drill, and every May there was a schoolboy parade, where in your khakis you marched down Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] with the bands and the like.  And so I had to make a decision as to whether I wanted to carry a rifle or do something else, and so I joined the band and played a snare drum in the band in the boy--and became a lieutenant when I graduated, as a matter of fact.  I thought I was big time, but the truth of the matter is, I didn't know I was a lieutenant until I graduated, and they handed me the certificate.  It was really a great experience.  So for me, my youth was a mixture of pleasures.
Story_ID: 111110
Speaker 1: When my mother [Mary Allen Smith] died, I was fourteen and I had been going to Morgan Memorial Church of All Nations, which was in the New York  school--streets area at the far end.  And my dad [Willie Lee Davis] said to me, "I work in the Navy Yard during the war.  I'm in the Navy Yard, and I go from midnight to eight in the morning," he said.  "And that's the time I should be supervising you, so I'm going to have a problem."  And I said, "Well, what are we going to do?"  And he said, "Let's go to Morgan Memorial and see if they would help us."  So we went to Morgan Memorial, and they had the Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn for Boys that had been funded by Charles Hayden who was out of New York.  And the director was a German-American named Emil Hartl, Ph.D, in the psychology of religion.  He was also ordained.  And he and an MD named William--can't think of his last name, were co-authors of a book on constitutional psychology.  And constitutional psychology, at the time, focused on the physique of an individual.  And they said, that based on what they had, they could, in fact, from the physique of a person, describe the behavior of that person.  Now today, the theory is defunct.  But in those days, Hartl and Sheldon, William Sheldon, were the big names in constitutional psychology.  And Dr. Hartl has to be for me, the second nicest man I ever knew.  And unlike my dad, this man never used profanity at any rate.  The strongest language I ever heard him use was darn.  And I knew he was angry, because that was--he had reached the impasse.  "Darn it, we're not gonna do that."  But he saw something in me, and the thing that he saw was, I guess, natural leadership ability, because he kept putting me into leadership roles.  First, I was babysitter for his three boys.  So during football season, I didn't have to do anything.  During basketball season, I didn't have to do anything.  But in between, I had to take care of the boys.  So we had a gym in the building and I would take them to the gym in the afternoon, and the nicest single thing that had happened to me was that we didn't have a kitchen.  So we had meal tickets that we could take to the restaurants, which was down the end of the street.  And they honored the meal tickets except that, because I babysat, I always had dinner with Dr. Hartl and his wife.  And so I watched a man who loved his wife, deal with his wife with gentle caresses and a hug and conversation.  And I said to myself--I mean--no--I didn't then, I do now, say--I did not realize how much of a model their relationship was for me in terms of how a man and a wife could live together.
Speaker 2: We have to change tape.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Before we do, if we could get the spelling of Dr. Hartl's full name.
Speaker 2: Emil, E-M-I-L; Hartl, H-A-R-T-L.  He was from Minnesota.  His wife was a nurse.  And he had three boys:  Billy, David and Bobby.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Great, thanks.
Speaker 2: Billy is--I don't know where he is, but he became very, very big in the banking world--international banking world.  Bobby got a doctorate in Special Ed from Buffalo [SUNY Buffalo State College?].  I remember that.  And David got a doctorate in--I don't know where, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], I think.
Story_ID: 109570
Speaker 1: You went to high school at Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn for Boys.
Speaker 2: No.  I lived at Charles Hayden Goodwill for Boys--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --You lived there, all right. Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I went to Boston Technical High School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, Boston Tech, all right. And you said you--we were saying off-camera you really didn't live with your father [Willie Lee Davis]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: My dad, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not during my high school years.  I lived with my dad when I finished college during my college years, but I was always away.  And then when I came back to go to graduate school, I lived with my dad-and--until I'd gotten my master's [degree], and then I went off to Cleveland [Ohio].  The story with my dad was that--as I said, everybody liked him, everybody liked him.  I don't--I cannot--I cannot think of anybody who didn't because he was really a nice man, and I loved him very much.  As a matter of fact, the only time I ever cried in my life was because of my father.  We had a townhouse, it wasn't a townhouse, it was a row house that he had bought.  And he had the first two floors, and the second and third floors were rented to relatives. And he had a basement and he had a living room, dining room in the basement.  And I said to him one day, I said, "Dad, this room could be really decorated."  And I gave him my--I was a college graduate now, and I gave him my opinions and he said to me, "Son, this is my house.  You keep all those ideas until you get your house."  And I went upstairs and I cried like a baby 'cause I so wanted to be of help to him.  And it was quite clear that my father had very simple principles.  "And you save all those good things for yours."  But right here, this is where I am.  And I respected it and I lived with it.  But he was really such a good man that--and the beauty of it is that it's a hundred years later and I still feel the same way about him.  I admired him.  I admired him so much.  And as I said, this--the one story that--that was probably most revealing for me was when I was a scholar.  And I knew I was a scholar.  And my father could ask better questions of me than I could answer, because he had a friend who asked the right questions.
Story_ID: 109571
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers in grade school that influenced you that you can--(unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes, one.  Well, there were two.  First black teacher I ever had was in junior high school and I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Abraham Lincoln Junior High School [Boston, Massachusetts].  And she was a science teacher.  And I learned years later she became a principal in the school system, and was a very effective principal.  I can't think of her name, but I was always impressed with the fact that she was the most serious teacher that I--I think I had.  And she was not a serious teacher with me as a student.  She was a serious teacher with every student.  The second was a man named Mr. Blodgett [ph.], who was my high school math teacher, who was a Native American.  And Mr. Blodgett had to be the baddest dude I'd ever, ever experienced in class.  You talk about a stickler.  I mean, Mr. Blodgett did not play.  And getting your work from Mr. Blodgett, for me, was really a sheer joy.  The guy that influenced my life the most was not a teacher.
Speaker 1: One second, please (pause).  The guy that influenced my life the most?
Speaker 2: Was a man called Charles J. Modeest [ph.].  At the time that I was at Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn, he was a student at Boston University School of Divinity [Boston, Massachusetts].  He was getting a master's degree, and he was working as a counselor because [Emil] Hartl, who had graduated from Boston University, had worked out a system with the School of Theology to have some of the student--graduate students, serve as counselors in the Inn.  And he was the only black counselor that I had ever run into, aside from a second guy who wasn't in the School of Theology.  And I was an athlete.  And I can't tell you how much of a scholar I was because I never--I never flunked a course, but I never really worked at it.  I mean, I just accepted the fact that I'd get a B or a C go on.  Although, I worked awfully hard in drafting one year because I had been there for so long and it worked out.  And he came to me and he said--they called me Young Blood in those days.  And they said to me, "Young Blood, what are you going to do when you graduate this year?"  And I said, "I'm going in the [U.S.] Army, because the war has just ended, and the GI Bill is still operable.  And I will be able to go to college, because I can't go to college unless I get a GI Bill."  And he said, "Don't do that."  Let me get you in college.  And I thought, here is this brother who dresses so immaculately, who's still a student in college and he's telling me he's gonna do something for me.  I didn't know him that well, but I couldn't figure out whether he thought I was dumb or not, because I thought he was slick, because anybody that wore clothes like he did had to be either slick or awfully wealthy.  Well it turned out that he was from Texas, and he had parents.  His dad had died but he had a mother who, interestingly enough--we'll come back into the story.  And, I went off to summer camp, I graduated from high school, went to summer camp to work, and then I came home.  And on September the 10th, I went down to the United States Army recruiting office in Boston, Massachusetts, and I said to the recruiting sergeant, "I'd like to enlist."  And he said to me, "Come back October the 1st because our quota for Negroes is filled.  On September the 10th.  Okay?  The reason I think about it is today, as you know, is close to September the 10th.  And so I went home kind of dejected, and on that Friday the 13th, I had a telegram and the telegram offered me an athletic-work scholarship at the Claflin College [now Claflin University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  I had never heard of it, so I took the telegram to Dr. Hartl.  And I said, "Dr. Hartl, what do you think this is?"  And so he reached up and pulled out the dictionary of colleges.  And it said, "Claflin College is a Methodist College, predominantly Negroid with 650 students."  That was on a Friday.  On a Sunday, my father [Willie Lee Smith] said to me on--when I went to him on Saturday morning to spend the weekend, he said, "You're going to the South for the very first time, keep your mouth shut, and don't be a smartass."  He said, "Because they lynch in the South."  And I said, "Yes, Daddy."  And that Sunday, I was on the football field.  And as I was going along, the coach said, "Go into the dean of men's office and get your room."  And I walked in, and there was Charles J. Modeest, the dean of men, who had told the coach about this kid up in Boston.  And sight unseen, they had offered me a scholarship.
Story_ID: 109572
Speaker 1: Well, I stayed at Claflin [College, now Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] for the year, and then I left because Charlie [Charles J. Modeest (ph.)] left. And he went to Texas, to Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas] where he had graduated.  And I received a Presidential Scholarship to go there because I couldn't play football, because I had already playing football the year before at Claflin.
Speaker 2: So you couldn't play for another school--(unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had to sit out a year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--but I could play basketball, so I played basketball.  But I didn't have any money, and I wanted to see the football games.  So I remembered that I'd been playing in the high school band.  And I volunteered to play the drum in the Wiley band so I could see the football games free and travel with the football team free.  And so in the course of it, started playing with a--the traps with a bunch of freshmen.  I was sophomore because I had been at Claflin the year before.  And we got our first job, and it was to play a breakfast dance for the homecoming.  And that night, I got a call from the bandmaster who I knew, but who I watched rehearse with the collegians every Tuesday and Thursday night.  There was never a night that I missed sitting in that auditorium, listening to that band, because, they had guys that had played with Lunsford [ph.] and the like.  And it was after the war and they had really topnotch musicians.  And I got a call, and the call was, "Put on your navy blue suit, a white shirt and a red tie and get down to the gym."  And so I put on the suit and ran down to the gym to discover that the drummer for the band had gotten drunk, and they didn't have a drummer for the pan-Atlantic dance.  And so he said, "You"--I'd never played with them, I had never done anything but sit in that audience listening, but I knew the musicians because I was playing in the band.  And I played that night, the first night of my life with the band.  And out of that, I became the drummer for the band.  And I gave up athletics and ended up with a music scholarship.  And it was the richest time of my life, because Charlie left there as he had left Claflin and he went to Lamar [University, Beaumont, Texas].
Story_ID: 109573
Speaker 1: And I stayed on [at Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] with a Presidential Scholarship.  Now the Presidential Scholarship was a very interesting one.  I was responsible for washing the porch, waxing the floors, and then buffing the floors because it was--there was hard wood everywhere.  That was my job.
Speaker 2: So the President's [Dr. E. C. McLeod] house.
Speaker 1: The President's home.
Speaker 2: Home. Okay.
Speaker 1: And that summer we had a strike.  The students went on strike and--during the winter--no, during the falls term, and many of them did not return for the winter term.  It was on the quarter system.  And that's when I became the drummer for the band because the drummer didn't come back.  And then I stayed on the following year as the drummer.  And during the summer, there was a guy named Mr. Scott--Dr. [Julius S.] Scott [Sr.], who I thought was writing a book with the President, Dr. McLeod.  And it turned out that that wasn't the case.  McLeod was leaving because of the strike and Dr. Scott was taking over.  And I'd see him every morning because I'd be in the President's kitchen eating breakfast.  And he called me in and he said to me, "You gotta go."  And I said, "Where?"  And he said, "Home."  This is the first day that they announced he was the President.  And I said, "Go home for what?"  And he said, "You don't deserve a Presidential Scholarship.  All you do is eat in the kitchen."  He said, "I don't see you worthy of a scholarship," therefore, I am taking it.  So I said to him, "Dr. Scott, I wanna finish in the worst kind of way, and I would like an opportunity to prove to you that I am a worthy student.  He said, "All right.  I'll tell you what.  My wife comes in November, I want that house ready for her when she walks in the door."  So I spent every available night after class doing something in each room at that house.  And one night I was sitting--I was in the kitchen on the floor, aluminum--a--I'm trying to think of the name of--
Speaker 2: Linoleum?
Speaker 1: Linoleum covering.  And where the stove had been, was grease.  The stove was gone but there was a grease outline and I was on my knees with a razor blade trying to bring up that grease and I heard somebody on the porch, and I got up to see who it was and there was nobody there.  And so that was the last item, I finished it, washed it, waxed it, and then buffed it.  Now I'm cool, because I know this house is ready, so I walked into his office and I said to him, "Dr. Scott, I want you to come and see this house."  And he said, "I don't have to."  He said, "I saw you last night on the porch."  He said, "You have a scholarship."  And they gave me the responsi--not the Presidential Scholarship.  I ended up in the infirmary, responsible for buffing, waxing and buffing, which is what I learned how to do at Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn for boys.  And I could run a buffer--I mean, I really--I was pretty good, I have to admit.  So his wife came the first day, and he [Dr. Julius S. Scott, Sr.] met me on the campus and he said, "This is Smith," he said, "and I made a mistake.  You could have had him, but now he's not only working in the infirmary, but he's also working in the girls' senior dorm and in the girls' freshman dorm waxing floors."  And he said, "I made a mistake in not keeping him."  And on Christmas Day he called me into his office and handed me a dollar bill and he said, "Merry Christmas."  And I was very moved by it, I was really very moved by it because he didn't have to, but he was kind enough to give me the shot and I was able to take advantage of it.  That has been for me kind of the way my life has always gone.
Story_ID: 109574
Speaker 1: I went home, went to graduate school, got my first Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn Fellowship to graduate school.  And--and then I was to be drafted, and my buddy and I decided that we wouldn't be drafted, we'd enlist in the [U.S.] Army.  The Korean War had just broken and so we enlisted in the Army.  And I was 0345 and he was 0346.  And I'd finished in three years and he was in his fourth year.  And we played bridge together.  It was my first really sophisticated experience, learning to play bridge, and for me it's been a way of life ever since then.  And during graduate school, I did not realize that while I was at BU, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], Charlie's [Charles J. Modeest (ph.)]--the second part of the story between my freshman year at Claflin, I went home for the summer after summer school and my father [Willie Lee Davis] said to me, "I met a lady I want you to meet"--because Charlie had said to me, "I gotta leave for domestic reasons."  It just so happened that he was dating the dean of women, but he had been married and we didn't know he'd been married.  And his wife was coming to visit him, so Charlie left.  And he said, "My mother will be here tomorrow to pack my clothes."  And Charlie left and she came and I met her and I helped her pack and she gave me sweaters and all kinds of things in the way of clothes.  He's 6'3", 6'2" and I'm 5'9" but he was tall and skinny and I was--I was me.  And I went home that summer and my father said to me, "I met a lady that I want you to meet and she lives across the street.  And we walked across the street and it was Charlie's mother.  It was the most ironic thing.  It was Charlie's mother, and she bought a house on St. Botolph Street and she converted it into a kitchenette.  And the student that she had living in her kitchenette the entire time that he went to BU School of Theology was [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And I never met him, even though I'd go visit her to help her out.  I never got to meet Martin Luther King, and there he was in graduate school the same time I was in graduate school and--except he was in theology and I was in liberal arts.  But we were born in the same year, in the same month.  And I reflected upon it when I made this speech of acceptance as the [U.S.] Commissioner [of Education], because it was in January, and they were having over in another building the Martin Luther King ceremony that I wanted to go to.  And so as I was speaking, I said--somebody sent me a copy of my speech and I hadn't kept it, and I said, "This is a very significant day, and I am being sworn in as the last United States Commissioner of Education on a day that--when we are celebrating Martin Luther King's Birthday."  I said, "And he and I were born in the same month of January, we were born in the same year, 1929.  We went to the same graduate school at the same time, and yet, I never met him, and he was my model."  And it was really very true; it was really very true.  I had always admired the manner in which he confronted the issues.  And for me it was an extremely effective period of time.
Story_ID: 109575
Speaker 1: Since then, I went into service, and my buddy who went in with me went to graduate--went to Officer's Candidate School [OCS] because he was in a different company than I, and he had his interview months before I did.  And by the time I was ready for my interview for the Officer's Candidate School, the Chinese had crossed the Yalu River and all of us went immediately--I was in a unit that, for the first time, was all black college graduates.  A six weeks training program.  And we had all college graduates with the exception of two guys, both from New York.  One was a seventeen-year-old kid and the other was a druggie, as a matter of fact.  But it was a group of young men who have stayed together in terms of relationships all these years since the Korean War.  One of the guys was from Toledo [Ohio], his name from Bob Franklin.  He was a lawyer, became a judge in Toledo.  Another was a guy named Harold Dixon who became a doctor in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was a special group of guys in that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Now this 1950?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1950.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was prior to Harry Truman desegregating the United States Armed Forces, which was another story.  When I went to Korea, Truman had said there will be no all-black, all-white outfits.  And I went to the 1st Calvary and most of the boys from the 1st Cav that--it was a MacArthur group that had come from Japan to the Korean War.  And a young man from Tennessee said to me, "You're in the wrong place."  And I said, "Why is that?"  And he said, "We don't have coloreds here."  And I said, "You do now."  And I integrated the 1st Calvary Division.  I did with six other black guys, all college grads.
Story_ID: 109576
Speaker 1: Now what did the [1st] Calvary Division consist of in those days when you--you weren't on horses, were you?
Speaker 2: No.  It was all infantry except as it is today.  The Calvary is still all infantry.
Speaker 1: Aren't they supported by helicopters and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody is supported by--mean it's-it--they were no different than--as a matter of fact, they weren't as exciting as the airborne where they jumped out of airplanes. They weren't as exciting as the Green Berets that had special kinds of training.  It was just a--it was a unit in the infantry and there were no horses by that time.  And they had mechanized warfare, but it was really quite an experience.  I enjoyed every minute that I was in the Korean War.  I enjoyed every minute that I was in the military.  As a matter of fact, it became the basis for my becoming a teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, wars are supposed to be hell so I don't--I mean, how did you manage to enjoy the Korean War?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Did your unit avoid getting involved in--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Combat?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Oh, no, I got wounded.  As a matter of fact, I received a metal for valor.  Three other guys and I took a position and all four of us received a silver star.  And they were gonna send me to Officer's Candidate School [OCS], except by that time, I was twenty-one and they have a policy that you can't go to a military academy after age twenty-one.  I mean you can't go.  So they were gonna give me a battlefield promotion, and by that time my buddy, Jimmy Hudson [ph.], who had come over, had died.  And I said, I don't plan to be an officer.  So I became the second earliest Master Sergeant in the United States Army.  The first was a seventeen-year-old kid who was a recruit like I was in the 1st Cav.  And his unit had to take a hill, and the platoon leader died.  And this seventeen-year-old kid took over the platoon to take that hill.  And they promoted him on the spot.  And in a matter of seven weeks of combat, he was a Master Sergeant.  And he left to become, he'd go to Officer's Training School and he became a pilot.  And he stayed in the service.  Kansas kid, I'll never forget he used to drive at ninety miles an hour.  Ninety miles an hour on the Missouri and we were stationed at [Fort] Leonard Wood.  But we were in combat together, and it was--it was--it was a very interesting time; he was quite a soldier.  But I was the second.  The end of my second year from being a recruit, I was a Master Sergeant.  And I got to be a Master Sergeant on a fluke.  I was a Sergeant First Class having been promoted in the battlefield.  After I got wounded, I rotated behind the lines to a battalion and I became the intelligence non-commissioned officer.  And in the course of it I got--we were lucky to be able to do some outstanding stuff and I got to be a Sergeant 1st class.  So I came back to the United States after the Commanding Officer said to me, "Stay two more months and I'll give you your Master Sergeant stripe."  And I said, "No, sir.  I'm going home."  I was in Japan then.  So I went home.
Story_ID: 109577
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Now did you serve in [U.S.] Army Intelligence--
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Now was that--that during--
Speaker 1: That was the beginning of it.  I stayed in it from that time on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, that's why I said I became a teacher from that.  I was stationed--they had abolished an all-black unit at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, and we ended up at [Camp] Atterbury, Indiana.  And I was in the headquarters--intelligence headquarters.  And intelligence is working on the enemy.  Two and three--you have four distinct positions.  You have a G1, G2, G3, G4.  G1 is personnel, G2 is intelligence, G3 is operations, attack, and G4 is supplies.  That's the way they function.  So I was in the G2 section, which was the intelligence unit.  And in garrison, you developed the training for all the recruits coming in so that they understood combat intelligence and the like.  And so they had a program--now I was the only black guy in the intelligence unit.  And I was a Sergeant first class, but only the officers could be instructors.  So we had all of these lieutenants and captains who were the instructors.  Now, as a sergeant first class, my job was to go with him to turn the charts as he spoke.  And we were on stage, he was on that side, I was on this side, and all the lights were on his side.  And so I could sit--I could stand at attention and look down at these 200 recruits and know exactly when they went to sleep every time 'cause I would see them.  It never failed, and I could see after they had a break, when they'd go back to sleep again and I'd know just what the topic was.  And one snowy day--yes.
Speaker 2: Maybe I should probably change the tape here and you can tell the snowy day story when we come back.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 109578
Speaker 1: And one snowy day, the--it--I mean it was snowing up a dirty [ph.].  And all of the officers lived off camp--off post.  The non-coms [non-commissioned officers] lived on post, and so when I reported in that morning, the Lieutenant Colonel, Steven P. Hewitt [ph.], I'll never forget him.  He had been a writer for the New York Times.  And he said to me, "We got a problem."  And I said, "What is it?" And he said, Captain so-and-so will not be able to get to the class today, he's snowbound; therefore, we've got 200 recruits that will be in theatre number so-and-so at 9:00 and we've got 200 that will be in theatre number such-and-such that will be in at 10:30.  He said, "Those are your two classes for the day.  Take the driver and have the driver flip the charts."  So as we were driving, the driver and I work out a system whereby he's comfortable at the way he is to turn the charts so either I slap or I had to cricket or something.  So we go through the class, and now for the first time I'm teaching it and I know when they're going to sleep.  And so I stopped right in the middle of it and I said, "You know, this reminds me."  And I tell a joke, and they laugh and everybody is wide awake and I continue.  And when I get to the second spot, I tell another joke.  The first one, as an example: little boy is in the backyard where his parents have been raising chickens and he'd been taking the manure, and he'd been piling it together.  And his father, who was an officer, turned to him and said, "What are you doing son?"  And he said, "I'm making a soldier, Daddy."  He said, "You are?"  He said, "Yes."  He said, "Is he an officer?"  He said, "No, Daddy.  I don't have that much chicken stuff."  Well, we didn't use stuff in those days, but it depicted the recruits' image of the officers.  And so when I got to the next one, I told another kind of quick joke, and we finished the class and the driver and I were driving to the next class.  Now the thing about the theatre is that all the lights are focused on stage, and you can't see out there, but I could because I was on the side and I could look down and see all of the 200 sitting in the first rows.  So we do the second one and I'd go back and he would apologize that I had to teach the class and I told him no big thing, I rather enjoyed it.  So about four weeks later he receives a citation for outstanding teaching.  And he looks at when it was and it was that snowy day and unbeknownst to any of us the Commanding General for the whole area had been visiting our posts and was in the back of the theatre with his staff.  And it turned out that not only was he in that theatre, he ended up going to the other theatre to see the other class.  And out of it he decided, that's gotta be the best teaching I've seen.  Now they're in a dilemma, they have all these officers who are teaching who have never received any citation, and now they have the citation that makes them excellent, and it's done by a non-com.  So he said to me, "Well, I'm not sure what we're gonna do, but what we'll do is this, we'll make you a master sergeant, and we'll give you a class.  And that's how I began to teach.
Story_ID: 109579
Speaker 1: And I discovered that I'm basically a ham, I know my subject area, I enjoy kids, and I enjoy teaching.  And so that's the way it all started and I--the thing I liked about my world history classes was that I could take my ruler--my yardstick, and lead the children's crusade across the top of my desk.  And it turned out that I really had a love for teaching and that I could relate to kids, and kids could relate to me.  And so, out of that came a very interesting thing.  One of the math teachers said to me one day--
Speaker 2: Now, let me--not to interrupt the story but-
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Let me get you in context now you're--after the [U.S.] Army you started teaching school.
Speaker 1: After the Army I went to graduate school.
Speaker 2: You went to graduate school, then after that you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Got a master's in education.
Speaker 2: And then after that you-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I began to teach.
Speaker 2: You began to teach.
Speaker 1: I started in Boston [Massachusetts] and then went from Boston to Cleveland [Ohio], but I did not get a teaching job in Cleveland even though I had a master's degree in education but I'd worked while getting my degree at a settlement house where I was the director of athletics.  And a graduate of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] was visiting, who was the director of a settlement house in Cleveland.  And he had offered me a job because the population of his settlement house was exactly the same as the population in the settlement house in Boston, which was Polish.  It was an all Polish--predominantly Polish community.  I had two black kids on all my teams.  Three black kids.  The rest of them were Polish kids.  And we were city champs in baseball, twelve-year-olds.  We were city champs in basketball, twelve-year-olds, but they were predominantly Polish.  Had one Irish kid, he was the tallest of the bunch.  So he said to me, "Why don't you come to--you're coming to Cleveland, your wife has a teaching assignment, you can be a social worker here" and I said, that's fair enough, so I went to take the job.  And it turned out that the City of Cleveland had positions with settlement houses where they paid for half of the person, and the settlement house paid for the other half.  And John Nagy was the director of recreation who did not want an African-American on the west side at that Polish center.  And so they were a little embarrassed because they had offered me the job and now I can't get the job because part of the salary has to come from the city and the city has said we don't want a black over here.  Because Cleveland was--was a river, and on the west side of the river was predominantly white, and on east side of the river it was almost all black.
Speaker 2: The Cuyahoga River.
Speaker 1: Cuyahoga River.  So he said to me, you have three places where you can go and get a job today, all you have to do is tell us which one you want.  And the first one was for the Cleveland Psychiatric Institute, which was on the west side.  And I went to visit and I saw the locked doors and I saw what they were doing I figured in about a month you couldn't tell whether I was a patient or whether I was a therapist because I could relate to these folks and this was not where I wanted to be, so I then interviewed the second place and then interviewed the first place--the third place and the third place I decided I'd take, which was very close to the high school, the Cleveland [East] Technical High School [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: What they call Cleveland East Tech.
Speaker 1: East Tech.  And East Tech was the home of Jesse Owens as a high school student, and Harrison Dillard as a high school student, both of whom had won the Olympics, one in hurdling and the other on in the dash and broad jump and the like.  And Jessie had gone to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and Harrison had gone to Baldwin Wallace [College, now Baldwin Wallace University] which was in Berea [Ohio] which was just across the town line.  And so I became a teacher there the following year but I worked in the settlement house and got to know every 'hood that was in that high school because they'd come to the settlement house.
Story_ID: 109580
Speaker 1: So the following year, when I became a teacher [at East Technical High School in Cleveland, Ohio], I knew who the problems were.  And it was a really interesting time because I had been in the service and I still had all of the military stuff.  I'll never forget I had a class of girls, they were smart as whips and they came to me after the end of the semester in world history and they said to me, "You have an unassigned period, the third period.  We are also in a study hall, the third period, we'd like to work for you and do your--your papers and the like for the homework" and I said, "That's fair enough."  And I would sit and listen to these girls talk about how they talk to their teachers.  And so I said to one of them one time, I said, "Wait a minute, help me out here, you're talking about Mr. So-and-so and Mr. Such-and-such?"  She said, "Yes, sir."  I said, "You talk to them like that?"  She said, "Yes, sir."  I said, "Well let me ask you, how is it that you never acted like that in my class?"  And she said, "Cause you look too mean."  And it was primarily because I still had the military responsibilities and I saw whatever it was that I was doing in the same light.  I discovered that the service did more to mature me than any single set of events that I ever experienced.  Both being wounded and going to Japan and having to work in Japan after the Korean--after my service in Korea, was quite a experience to me.  And so when I went back to graduate school on the GI Bill, it was a whole different way of looking at the world and everything for me was let's get it done 'cause I gotta move on.
Story_ID: 109581
Speaker 1: And the irony of all this is that I'm a teacher and the guidance counselor said to me, "You relate to these kids."  And I said, "Okay," and he said, "You should be a guidance counselor."
Speaker 2: Now this is in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 1: In Cleveland at East Tech [East Technical High School].  And he was a guidance counselor and he and I had started teaching together at the same time and he had moved on to be a guidance counselor.  So I said, "Okay."  So I go over to the John Carroll University [University Heights, Ohio] that has what I thought was the best guidance-counseling program, and I enrolled.  And the lady said to me, "How do you plan to pay for your tuition?"  And I said, "The GI Bill."  And she said, "You can't use the GI Bill."  And I said, "Why can't I?"  She said, "Because you've used it to get a master's; we don't have a doctorate program, therefore you cannot use it any further unless you are getting a doctorate."  She said "You're gonna have to go to Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio]."  So I get in the car and I drive over to Case Western Reserve.  Now when I lived at Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn for Boys, I was a boy scout, because Charles Hayden Goodwill Inn had a boy scouts troop.  And we had one guy who was an Eagle Scout.  I was a Star Scout and we had a couple others that were the like but we had one Eagle Scout and his father was the Vice-President of the Goodwill Industries, because the Goodwill Industries started at Morgan Memorial-Church of All Nations.  And I walked into the admissions office and there was only one fellow in the room.  And he turned to me and he said, "Bill" and I said, "John" and it was that young man who had been the Eagle Scout who was in charge of admissions at Case Western Reserve.  And he said to me, "What are you doing here?"  And I said, "I've got to enroll in a doctorate program."  He said "Sit down," so I sat down.  He said, "Fill out these papers." So I filled them out.  He said, "You are now a graduate student at Case Western Reserve."  That fast.  That quick, didn't take the Miller Analogies [Test], didn't take the Graduate Record Exam.  It was all over, I was enrolled in a doctoral program.
Story_ID: 109582
Speaker 1: And it was as a result of that that I just proceeded to take whatever the course work was, 'cause I had the [GI] Bill, I had lots of time on it, and so I began to become really studious.  It was for me a revelation.  And when you ask the question, what was your single greatest influence?  The single greatest influence for me at Case Western Reserve was a man named Richard Derr, D-E-R-R, who has retired and lives in Florida now who taught philosophy.  And I don't think I'd ever taken a set of courses from anyone that did more to help me look at life and what it was I was trying to do in education than Richard Derr.  And I think the thing that probably excited me more than any single thing was the fact that at the high school where I taught, there was a black guy who had freckles, who had taken five years to graduate from high school, from Akron, Ohio, his name was Charles Scruggs [ph.].  And Charles Scruggs got his bachelor's in two years.  He got a master's in six months.  He got a second master's in one year, and he was in the doctoral program.  And Dr. Derr would set up days when he would debate Charles Scruggs on an issue.  Now I was not in the class, I was in the afternoon class.  And Charles was in the evening class.  And any day that we had a class and they said Derr is debating Scruggs, it was standing room only in that classroom that night.  And Charles and I teaching together got to know each other very well and his wife, Jackie.  And he didn't handle statistics at all, and all I did was sit at his feet to listen to philosophy.  And he would listen to me in statistics because I recorded every single lecture that my professor in statistics would have, and go home that night and rewrite my notes from that lecture.  And then he and I and two other guys had a study group.  I was responsible for the statistics and he was responsible for the philosophy.  And it was a great combination and the reason that I mention it is because Charles and Jackie had a baby, and the baby had water on the brain.  I can't remember the term [hydrocephalus] and it created for both of them such a trauma that they eventually had to send the baby away and the baby died.  And it was so traumatized that they divorced and he left and went to New York and she stayed on and ended up being a teacher in my school [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And her husband and I were like this (crossed fingers).  And Charles remarried and had children, she remarried and had children and neither of them had a child that was defective but between the two of them, they had this child that really splattered their lives because they were two loving souls, but they just could not handle the trauma.  And I thought about that and I thought it's a funny world, there's no way to know what events will occur that will alter your life as this has done for them.  And I tried to stay in touch with Charles, he was--he's probably retired now at Geneseo, New York but he was one of the smartest young men that I think I had ever, ever worked with.  And it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 109583
Speaker 1: Did you get married in the [U.S.] Army or--yourself or did you get--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got married while I was in the service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have remarried since.  But I was married thirty-five years and then we divorced and then I remarried and I've been married fifteen years.  And as I've said so very often, the difference between my first wife [Mabel Smith] and my second wife [Audrey Smith] is that I did not know the kind of things that were happening to her until too late, but I never had to worry about knowing what it is my present wife is thinking because it's on the table.  And it's a very, very nice life, but I know that she is my greatest critic.  She's my best friend, but she is my greatest critic and I work very hard at trying to satisfy her because everything she really does is for my benefit even though I don't admit it, I recognize that there are times that it might be better not to let her know how influential she really is.
Story_ID: 109584
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Cleveland East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Tennessee] now you were gonna tell us a teaching story at one point--I stopped you to try and get us oriented, but you said there was a math professor that said something about your style of teaching.  Was that at Cleveland East Tech or was that someplace else?  You were--if I'm correct--
Speaker 2: Oh, Derr!  No, Richard Derr, he was the philosophy professor [at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio].  I really, I really studied very, very hard, and I really loved what I was doing with him and of course in a study group with Charles [Scruggs (ph.)] it made it that much greater.  Years later, Dr. Derr used me as a reference for his promotion to professor, as a student, and I'll never forget I wrote how much his style and how much his manner of teaching impacted on me and he became a tenured professor as a result of his students' response to him.  He again was a model for me, but he also did more to stimulate me to study.  Really study and understand philosophy, which is something that I had not really spent time doing prior to that.  I--again it was a blessing, you asked the question about--what was it about the war.  There was teamwork, there was camaraderie, there were all the things that, that goes into teambuilding.  Being a jock meant most of my life I was working with a team to do something whether it was football or basketball or baseball, I played baseball in college.  And so I discovered that the service provided an opportunity for teamwork and the stronger we became as a team, the more effective we became and so my wife [Audrey Smith], my present wife has always said that if I had a shortcoming it is that I have a drummer that nobody else can hear and I respond to it.  And I think that's probably very true, I do have my own drummer and I have my own set of principles and I try to live by them.  And I've been very lucky up-to-date and I hope to--where and whenever I go out, I can go out in style.
Story_ID: 109585
Speaker 1: Okay, now you received your Ph.D. from Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Case Western Reserve.
Speaker 1: And that was what year?
Speaker 2: 1970.
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay but in the interim you're--I mean in the meantime, while you're working on it, I guess your career is taking off in education, and you officially become a--the principal of a--of a junior high school in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Largest junior high school in the state of Ohio and had the reputation for being the worst.
Speaker 1: This is from '63 [1963] to '68 [1968], this is Patrick Henry--
Speaker 2: Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Junior High School, okay.  Well tell us about that experience, that had to be--
Speaker 2: No one ever asked me to become the principal, I was studying and I'd gone to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to use their research library and I came home one Thursday from Chicago and the phone rang.  And it was a classmate of mine, a woman who was taking statistics with me.  And she said, "Congratulations."  And I said, "For what?"  And she said, "What do you mean for what?"  And I said, "For what?"  She said, "You don't know about the School Board meeting today?  And I said, "No, what happened?"  And she said, "You have been named principal at Patrick Henry Junior High School.  And I almost fell out, and I said--it was 1965 and the Watts riot had just occurred.  And so I became principal, I'd been there two years as the assistant principal under a guy named Barrett Smith who was a stocky white man who was 6'2" weighed about 260 and had been the coach of the high school football team that I interviewed when I first went to Cleveland but I didn't get the job.  And he walked as a tackle would walk and it turned out that he was without doubt the smartest man I'd ever work with.  He could take a sentence and describe what it would take me a paragraph to write.  He was that good.  And we developed a tremendous relationship, but he saw things quite differently then I did, and my job as the assistant principal was to serve him, and so I did.  But when I--they named me Principal of that same school on his recommendation without my realizing it, I decided that I had to do something with these kids and I had to start with the riots and so I went to the social studies department and I said to the chairman, "I want to start school differently, I want to set the first two days aside to talk about the riots, to talk about what is happening in society, and I want you to put together a lesson plan for every one of my teachers."  Which he did--which they did and that's how we started school.
Story_ID: 109586
Speaker 1: And, one of the most interesting times was--I had a young man walked into my office a clinical psychologist, a doctoral student at Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], and he said to me, "I'm gonna spend this semester in a junior high school, I have two junior high schools he said, and I'm already at such-and-such junior high.  He said, "And they have taken their top twenty-five problem students and given them to me and I am to form clinical sessions with these twenty-five bad-behaving kids," he said, "and I'll be glad to do the same for you."  And I said, "No, no I have twenty-five brand new teachers who have no sense of where these kids are coming from.  And I want you to start a class that says why are the kids at Patrick Henry Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio] different than other kids at other junior high schools?" And so I announced--I went through the schedule and I put-- I had twenty-seven teachers, I put nine in each class, nine in the second period, nine in the fourth period and nine in the seventh period and that was their unassigned period.  We--you know, you get so many teaching positions, you get a lunch position, and then you get unassigned periods meaning this is when you are doing your lesson plans and the like.  So I announced to the faculty that these twenty-seven teachers would in fact be in sessions on a Wednesday for the seminar.  And at the end of the first day the union representative came in and she said, "We're filing an unfair labor practice against you."  And I said, "You are?"  And she said--in my first year now as a principal, she said, "Yes." And I said, "Why?"  And she said because you are forcing these young teachers to have to take a seminar as opposed to having the free time to prepare for their children.  And I said Ms. (unclear) you and I both know that many of the faculty members spend most of the time in the teachers' lounge smoking, and if they aren't smoking, they are playing cards.  It's their unassigned period, but they're supposed to be doing something for kids.  I said, "So as far as I'm concerned-Let me know this, how long is it gonna take you to formalize that?"  And she said, "Oh it will take maybe a month."  I said, "Fine, 'cause for the month, they're going to be in those seminars."  So they had the class and on that following Monday she came in and she said, "We're filing an unfair labor practice against you."  And I said, "You're doing what?"  And she said, "We're filing and unfair labor--I said you told me that last week.  She said, "Well this is a new one.  I said, "A new one?"  I said, "What is this one?"  She said, "You're denying the rest of the faculty the opportunity to be in that seminar.  Because the teachers that were in it wouldn't allow administrators or teachers with experience into their class.  It was theirs.  And I discovered another simple principle: you can have on the job training within assigned periods.  Or planning, you can have planning sessions where they teach each other.  And so out of that began for me, a whole teacher ed--in-service education system of strategy.  So that by the time I came to government, I was pretty well-convinced that the experiences I'd had at Patrick Henry far exceeded anything that anybody that was in government had, which was true at the time.  And so I just became the policy director and changed all of the things we were doing to reflect that kind of behavior with kids that were poor.  And for me it's been successful if you look at that closet--I mean that bookcase to your right, you will notice all of those books, most of them we reproduced out there in the field on educating kids.  And one of the things that I talked about was the fact that kids now see teaching as a performing art because they expect to be entertained.  And therefore teachers are going to have to realize that they're in a different profession than just teaching.
Story_ID: 109587
Speaker 1: It's about time to get to government.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  Now you were a principal at Patrick Henry [Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] to '68 [1968] and then you moved on to become Executive Director of the PACE Association--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Program for Action by Citizens in Education.  That was for a year and then from there I came to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay, how did that happen?  How did you get to Washington?  How did they do that?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you ready?
Speaker 2: Yes, we're rolling.  We're rolling.
Speaker 1: Oh.  When the Elementary and Secondary Act of 1965 was passed, Washington was very interested in the places that had Title I programs.  And there was a man who worked for the Commissioner of Ed [Education] named, Chuck Smith [ph.].  Dr. Chuck Smith from Indiana who went on-site visits.  And he came to my school and spent a couple of days there, and he never talked to me about it at all, and with that he left.  The following year I was asked to join the President's National Advisory Council on Title III.  And I did, only to discover that it was actually Smith who had recommended me the Washington people as a good candidate to work for the President's National Advisory Council.  Then he'd come back at the end of the following year.  And then he came back the end of the third year and at the end of the third year he said, "I've seen so much progress here I think you ought to be in Washington.  And here is a person that I think you ought to be talking with."  Well, it turned out that having talked to that fellow, his deputy came to Cleveland [Ohio] because his deputy was very concerned that I might be artificial.  And he was looking for an authentic educator because they were trying to focus on elementary-secondary education because historically, most of Washington was higher ed.  And so I went to a higher ed. unit called the Bureau of Educational of Personal Development, but I came as a school-based person and I was the first school-based person they had.  And it was a very interesting story because one of the guys who was a senior administrator, was a professional historian.  And his deputy was a professional geographer.  And we went to--they went to a meeting, and the geographer tells a story.  He said, "I said to the fellow Don," he said, "I thought that our associate commissioner had made a mistake in that he named you the division director when he should have named the guy who was your branch chief the division director, and you the branch chief."  And the fellow he was saying it to said, "I think you should know that if we aren't careful, Smith is going to be our boss."  And the following year, I became the associate commissioner, and I was their boss.  And I thought, this is a man--who's still here and he's eighty-five now--and here's a man who made a decision early on that he could see in me something that led him to believe that I would become in charge, and I did.  And that's been the story of my federal life.  If you look at that resume, you will see that I have been an assistant secretary in both a Republican and Democratic administration at least four times.  I have had--built that wall you see there are Presidential Rank Awards, which carry with them either $10,000 or $20,000.  Today, it would be twice as much.  But those are Presidential Rank Awards that I have received from President [Ronald] Reagan, from President [George H.W.] Bush and from President [Bill] Clinton.  Bush one, I have not gotten anything from Bush two [President George W. Bush] and I'm not sure I will, but I enjoy the government, and I have enjoyed all of the leadership opportunities that I have had an opportunity to use.  And it's just been a blessing and in many, many respects.
Story_ID: 109588
Speaker 1: If there is a strength, my strength would be that I have come to know some of the best minds in education in the United States.
Speaker 2: Who are some of those minds?
Speaker 1: Who are some of those people?  Oh well, it depends on where you want to start.  One of the most creative educators that I know is a Stanford University [Stanford, California] graduate named Dwight Allen.  He is a professor--he's a university professor at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia].  He's exceptionally talented.  There's a young man in Baltimore [Maryland] named Nick Hobar, H-O-B-A-R, [Nicholas Hobar] who has worked for the State Department of Education in both West Virginia, and in Maryland, and has started his own company who has one of the most creative minds I have had the opportunity to experience.  There are a couple in Arizona--he being Herb Sheetalm [ph.]; his wife, Beverly Kelton [ph.]--both of whom were outstanding educators, he at the University of Connecticut [Mansfield, Connecticut], she at the University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut].  I could go on and on and on with people who--Ron Terrell [ph.] is in Cleveland [Ohio].  Here in Washington [D.C.] there is a young man who worked for both the University of California system and the New York University system named Clyde Overlay whose wife is the Director of Research for the American Association of Teacher Education.  He has a special bent for Hispanics--although he's French.  That has been his area of concentration.
Story_ID: 109589
Speaker 1: I know you can probably go on with many more names, but in the interest of I guess, the time we have--what is your philosophy of education?
Speaker 2: I guess--from the experiences that I have had I would say my philosophy is a very simple one.  You've got to provide a vehicle for children, adults or children to learn.  You've got to make it conducive to their learning therefore you've got to find vehicles that help them develop a sense of desire to learn.  To me that's the most critical point of all.  How do you help people get the sense--as I did with Richard Derr that changed my life?  How do you find those kinds of teachers who are willing to spend time?  There's a young woman in--at Columbia University [New York City, New York], Karen von Jenson Kepala [ph.] is her name.  A Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate with a doctorate from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I used to watch her teach, she volunteered to come to my school, which was the toughest in the city, in the state at that time.  And she came from Harvard and was able to create for her class of kids: opportunities. And one of them was that she had a class of kids that had the highest absentee rating from junior--from elementary school.  They had the highest number of--attendance rates, lowest rates, low achievement, low reading, and the like.  She was able to motivate them to have something like fifty-eight days of perfect attendance.  And so one of the things we failed to realize is there is an affective side to the education of kids.  We get caught up in talking about accountability and the like and we don't take into account--what are the conditions that are indicators of change in the education of kids, because it doesn't happen overnight.  You've got a faculty that you've gotta do something with to help them understand the importance of what they did.  For me it was Frank Reesman, the culturally-deprived child, and it came at such a unique time because I was the guy in charge.  And so I was able by virtue of the learning to move to another level and to take my faculty with me.  And one of the things that I discovered was that if you don't change their behavior, there's no way to help them understand why it's important to change kids' behavior.  And so it's a process that you really have to look at.  It is not cut and dry, it is not such that you can just simply say, we will put in more money to do x or y.  If the conditions don't change, nothing changes.
Story_ID: 109590
Speaker 1: Okay.  At this juncture, what would you see as your legacy in the field of education and just in general?
Speaker 2: The reason I smiled is that if there is anything I am proud of aside from being able to influence the education of an awful lot of people in a span of time, it is that I have been in a position to help people at a time when they needed help the most.  And I am probably more proud of that than any other single thing.  My single case in point: I had a group of people working and I was in charge after having been the United States Commissioner of Education, I became the highest priced janitor in the history of the federal government.  And I had people who were GS 2's and 3's who saw themselves in a non-promotional opportunity, and I was able to develop classes for them.  And today that same group of people, and it must be twenty or twenty-five of them, now run this place [U.S. Department of Education] in terms of administration and leadership.  And when I look at them, and I realize I had a hand in changing their lives, both in terms of their learning, and two the opportunity for them to be promoted and I was able to put in those positions that allowed them to be able to move from one level to the other.  For me, that was one of the single most advantageous opportunities that was available to me.  We--we're gonna have a riff, and these people had been in the mail room as a case in point, and they were mail clerks but they were veterans, so they couldn't be fired.  And so they were gonna replace the secretaries that were in the different places because they were clerks also, but it was quite clear that these guys couldn't type, most of the men and a couple of the women, but they were all veterans.  So I arranged for a training program for all of them.  And for the seven months, they went to class everyday, everyday.  And today, they're responsible for most of the management services in this agency.  Those are the joys of being at the right place at the right time to make things happen for people.  I guess if you ask people about me, they would probably say, he's as soft as butter on a hot day, because you can con him into helping you do anything.  And that's probably very true, because my wife [Audrey Smith] says that I'm one of the--the drummer again--I'm one of those that starts everybody at 100 and they have to work themselves down.  She says she starts them at zero and they have to work their way up.  I don't want to waste that time, so I start with 100.  And I have firmly believed that you can read strengths and weaknesses.  And you gotta make a decision, you either are going to harp on the weaknesses and destroy them or to build on their strength to make them better.  And I'd prefer to take the latter route, and it has for me been extremely successful.  And I guess that's the story of my life, I have no--I don't want to retire but I'm going to have to retire at some point.  I enjoy coming to work because it's a discipline.  I remember when we were on furlough, and every day I slept until 10:00 and 11:00 and I said to myself, "My God if I were to retired this is exactly what I would do."
Speaker 1: And that's not what I want to do.  I still can create.  We just finished a project in the month of June through the month of July that brought together ten or twelve of the most outstanding people in the United States to put together something that dealt with the whole issue of No Child Left Behind at the high school level.  We haven't had it approved yet, but we produced some of the best documents that I have seen.  To me that's fun, that's the job, that's the opportunity.  And I think there are a number of opportunities--if somebody said to me would you ever recommend going to government, my answer would be absolutely correct, yes.  But there's one caveat, and the caveat is that once you've raised your arm and take the oath to be a civil servant, it means you serve everybody that becomes a president, everybody that's in charge, which means you've got to be able to deal with the political process.  As I said to you I went from The United States Commissioner in one administration, to the highest priced janitor in the next.  The highest grade I was the highest grade in civil servant in this agency and I was in charge of management services, administrative services, bathrooms, air conditioning.  And I stayed there for eight years, and each time there was a problem, they would take me out, have me solve the problem, and put me back into janitorial service.  And I've been blessed though, presidents and secretaries have recognized my contribution and therefore I find it most fulfilling to be a career civil servant.  I love it, I enjoy it, I am honored to be able to help people and we got a lot of folks here who want to serve.
Story_ID: 109591
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I guess if there is any worry that I have about the black community, it is that we have not found a way to make the black community really understand what community means.  We have so many isolates, we have so many aspects that have been developed that prevent the kind of cohesion that you find in other ethnic groups, whether it's based on religion or the like.  Because of the diversity that you find in the black community, whether it's Baptist or Episcopal or Catholic or Muslim or whatever, and within those elements, you may see some building, but as a whole, you don't see it, you don't feel it.  And I'm not sure whether we'll ever be in a position to see that occur.  That would be for me the real problem and having spent as I said, so much time in a poverty ghetto where everybody was poor, and nobody knew how really poor they were, because everybody was at least making it, its very hard to think of that as community and yet it was a community of people who respected each other who served whatever it was that occurred and I think of the number of guys that came out of that community that went to the service, that went to college, that did all the things that you would expect and I never asked the question before what it would have been like if it were a black community, because I never knew that a black person owned a home until I went South to college, because we always lived in apartments and rented.  And the thing about the South that I saw was that people in the South saw that if there were opportunities for them, it was within the black community, because segregation prevented them from moving out of it.  And they were able to spend an awful amount of time developing a spree among their students and their church members and the like.  That's something that's missing for us now as a black people.  It's missing.  And I'm not sure what it would entail to make that happen, but it would seem to me that that's got to be one of the overriding issues.  I remember during the '60s [1960s], when we were talking about civil rights, everybody always looked to the Jewish community because they said the kids go to church on Saturdays, there's a unifying force, there's a sense of protection.  I discovered when I was selling my house, the Asian community ties together, I mean, they have no problem with two families, three families, buying a house and working together to get accomplishments.  Those are things that I have never seen--I have a boss who's a Mormon who every now and then we get an opportunity to talk as we did yesterday about the Mormon church and what the elders are and what the process is and how they feel their commitments have developed.  And again, we have not found the unifying forces that moves the black community to a point of community in that context.  And I don't know whether it's a question of power, I don't know whether it's a question of resource, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's mostly cultural or political?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's obviously a combination of both.  The political side has to do with what the covenants were that prevented black people from ever being equal.  And I think you have to start there recognizing that politically the--we used to use the analogy that if you're in a track meet and you gotta wear shoes and they have spikes and you're on a cinder track, somebody's at a disadvantage.  And black people have a tendency to be disadvantaged.  I'm not really sure where that's gonna take us.  I'm not really sure how we're going to move around it but when you look at the number of people who are poor, and you recognize that the largest majority of people who are poor are black, then you gotta stop and ask the question, what does one do and how does one do it to raise the level of both achievement, aspiration, desire.  How do you do it?  And it's gotta be done, and I think it's a piece that we have not really begun to deal with, that we're gonna have to deal with, but I'm not sure what's the best way to do it, or how to do it.
Story_ID: 109592
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you have grandchildren, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I know you wanted to mention them and which implies you have children too.  How many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have--we have four: two boys, two girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have five grandchildren, two boys, three girls.  For an old man, I would have to say that the greatest single shock that I have experienced is to recognize the valued changes among the different age groups.  I would sit with my son as--my dad and I would sit and he would tell me about the old days and the like.  And I would say to my son when I was giving him one of my best shots, son do you know such and such?  And he would say, Dad, that's ancient history.  It was not something that was relevant to him.  And yet when I see him working with his son, and his daughter and what they attempt to go through to try to help them get grounded.  And we realize that the space between their understanding and the grandkids understanding keeps getting wider and wider.  And you asked a question about values.  What are the values and how do you impose them? And how do you help our young people understand consequences is I started by telling the spanking story.  It became easy to understand that there was a consequence for misbehavior.  Our young people have difficulty understanding that.  Both our young people who are our children, and our young people who are our grandchildren see consequences being quite different.  And the real problem is getting them to move to a point where whatever it is that they are dealing with is as real as it can be, and that the consequence for not dealing with it can in fact have a detrimental effect upon both themselves as well as those that they love and admire.  And so, the whole question of culture and value becomes to me that much more important.  The question of transmittal becomes the real issue.  And what's the level of appreciation?  I--I often think about myself and I say when did I get this drummer?  When did I start to respond to that drumbeat, which seems to be contrary to the drumbeats of others?  What led me there and how have I benefitted from it?  Especially as you begin to age, because one of the things I've discovered as we talked about swimming off the record.  If you haven't been swimming, it's kind of hard to raise those arms in the water, especially if it's salt water, and the waves are pushing you in and you're trying to get out.  It's a different world and we've got to recognize work needs to be done to make things happen.
Story_ID: 109593
Speaker 1: Okay. One last question, sir, this is like legacy but not quite the same thing.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a man who gave his all with integrity.  I think that integrity is more important than any other thing that a person could have, because it marks you amongst the folk as being either real or not real.  And if you do not have integrity, it is easily read.  So for me, I'd want to be remembered as a man who had integrity and attempted to do what he could do under all of the circumstances all of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 109594
Speaker 1: This was done as a result of my being the United States Commissioner of Education.  It was a--the story that was given to the, I was gonna say the Negro Journal of Teacher--Negro Journal--now, let me think of who this was.  It's, it's--now that you ask that, it was history that was written about me which includes my childhood by the--oh, my God.
Speaker 2: We can take a look in here.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You wanna take--
Speaker 1: Okay, the 1982 African American History Kit.  So it was done by the Association for the Study of African American Life and History.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Negro Life History, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Carter G. Woodson wrote it.
Speaker 1: Carter G. Woodson, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, sir, quick description for this one.
Speaker 2: I'm speaking at a conference here in the department.  It was a group of IEL, Institute for Educational Leadership, fellows who were visiting.  And I was asked to speak to them, and that's what I'm in the process of doing there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And this would also be in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yes, that would have been in, the '80s [1980s], yes, 'cause I'd been the commissioner.  So it was like '81 [1981], or eighty--'81 [1981].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm, receiving-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I'm receiving my first Presidential Rank Award as a distinguished executive and the 20,000 dollar check that went with it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: [Lauro] Cavazos.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Sorry, sir.  Start one more time.
Speaker 1: This is Secretary Cavazos.  He was the first Hispanic Secretary of Education, and I was his advisor on teacher education and we're at a teacher education conference.  And I am introducing him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And could you give us the spelling for his name and tell us about the year, as best you can?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure I can give you the spelling without looking it up.  But I will look it up and give it to you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Some of those are glued and some of 'em are not.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About what time was this?
Speaker 1: That would have been 1990.
Speaker 2: This is with President [Jimmy] Carter.  That's me behind him.  He had just become President, so I would say it would have been, when we were the Office of Education--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  June, 1980, it says.
Speaker 2: It says June 19--well, that tells you.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Excuse me for interrupting.
Speaker 2: That's okay.  But let me tell me, the other two, if you could do the--on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, sir.
Speaker 1: This is Lehigh University [Bethlehem, Pennsylvania].  I think it's 2001.  We are receiving our honorary doctorates.  The lady is the new dean of the Yale School of Divinity [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut].  [Thomas J.] Ridge is now, of course, the, the Homeland Security Secretary.  The gentleman, whose name I cannot remember, is a member of the board who has contributed to Lehigh University as Mr. [Lee] Iacocca did, who also is a graduate of Lehigh University.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and do you have a date for this?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it should be like 2001.  I don't know if--it should be 2001.  I'm almost positive.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
