Story_ID: 643551
Speaker 1: I just need you to state your name and spell it for us, including your middle name or initial or--a middle name. Okay.
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Marianne Camille Spraggins, M-A-R-I-A-N-N-E, C-A-M-I-L-L-E, S-P-R-A-G-G-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Or you can just give your--you don't have to give your--
Speaker 2: Scorpio (laughter).
Speaker 1: You said November 11th?
Speaker 2: November 2nd.
Speaker 1: Second, okay.  November 2nd, okay.  And can we have our location?
Speaker 2: We're in Manhattan [New York] in the Bryant Park area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 20th, 2013.
Speaker 1: October.
Speaker 2: What did I say?
Speaker 1: November.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Today's October 20th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Insurance.  This is an insurance company [The BondFactor Company, LLC] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't know what you want me to say?  Finance.
Speaker 1: Finance, okay.  Finance executive?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 643552
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five pe- People magazine-ish questions.  Short answers.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Shrimp.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Lime.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Dubai [United Arab Emirates].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Old farmers say, "Promise little, but do much."
Story_ID: 643553
Speaker 1: You know, we start by your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you first talk about your father and what you know--give his name and what you know of his family and growing up?
Speaker 2: Right. My father's name is, was Roy Travers Spraggins [Roy Spraggins].  He grew up in Virginia.  His family was originally from South Carolina, from a place called Red Point, which was near Union, South Carolina [Union County, South Carolina].  And he was a lawyer.  His father, Travers Spraggins grew up in Virginia, in Lynchburg, Virginia.  And he was also a lawyer.
Speaker 1: So you have a history of lawyers going back for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes. Now what did he tell you about his growing up?  Did he share any of that with you?  Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He actually grew up in Jersey City [New Jersey], and they went there from South Carolina.  And I think, you know, for the time, they lived a very, you know, very comfortable life.  It was, in our family the, you know, they, he was the first lawyer in town, the first doctor in town, and the first school principal in town.  They were, you know, in a very close knit community.  They were all involved in Lafayette Presbyterian Church [Claremont-Lafayette United Presbyterian Church] in Jersey City.  And I think my grandfather was one of the first people to have a car, Model T [Ford Model T].  So, you know, my father grew up you know, in a very protected, nice environment.
Story_ID: 643554
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Roy Spraggins]?
Speaker 2: The love of my life (laughter).  A very thoughtful person, even to this day.  You know, people will want to meet him because the way I talk about him they think he's still alive.  But I think about his lessons and just how prescient they were.  You know, for instance, growing up, he insisted that I take Spanish.  He said, "Because this is what the world is gonna be like.  And you have to speak it."  Of course, when I took it and I would get good grades, and then I went on the street and I didn't understand anything anybody was saying.  So I wasn't really interested in Spanish.  But you know, that's one thing that I remember.  He always talked about striving for more than you think you might ever achieve, because in trying to reach that height, you'd get much further than you would have had you not.  He was a great student of biography and because of that I read obituaries a lot.  I find them very, very interesting history.  He was, in my life, a force of nature.  And I'm sorry, he, he said that he, I was being raised like a millionaire's daughter, yet he wasn't one.  But that I would therefore take many things as commonplace and I would feel inconvenienced if I didn't have them and I would do what was necessary to have them. That worked (laughter).
Speaker 1: So were you a daddy's girl?
Speaker 2: Very much so (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 643555
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your mother.  What do you know about her?  Her name first.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Nan Spraggins [ph.] and she was a social worker.  She came from a very different--she was also from South Carolina from a very different background than my father [Roy Spraggins].  She grew up, you know, poor.  She had to, she tells this story.  She went to a private school called, I think, Lincoln Academy [Kings Mountain, North Carolina].  I'm not sure, I think it was in North Carolina.  But she had to kind of fool her father to let her leave and go to school.  But she did that, and then she, you know, very, very brilliant woman.  She was a straight A student, always.  She had to work her way through school.  I remember her telling a story.  When she was at, she wasn't at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She was in school in Atlanta, at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And she talked about a truck coming down the street and some grapefruits falling off, and how that had made the difference of her eating that day or not.
Story_ID: 643556
Speaker 1: So do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I think they met in Georgia.  And my father [Roy Spraggins] was at, in the [U.S.] Army.  And my mother [Nan Spraggins (ph.)] was working for, what do you call that volunteer thing that--
Speaker 1: Works (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  Travelers Aid [Travelers Aid International]?
Speaker 1: Oh.  Travelers Aid.
Speaker 2: I think.  It was something like that.  And it was in the course of that that they met.  I think it's Travelers Aid, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so was your--at that point, was your mother still from South Carolina, or South Carolina?  Was she still from there?  Or--
Speaker 2: You mean, was she still living there?
Speaker 1: Was she still living there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  She had moved on.  She, I don't think she ever went back.  And she was living in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 643557
Speaker 1: And so, but you are born here in New York [New York], right?
Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: In Harlem?  Okay, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Native, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, can you talk about, do you have other siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a sister who's deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you the, there were two girls?  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right. So, who was younger?  Who was older?
Speaker 2: I was the youngest.
Speaker 1: So you're the youngest of two girls?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Jean.
Speaker 1: Jean?
Speaker 2: J-E-A-N.
Speaker 1: Spraggins [Jean Spraggins], okay.
Story_ID: 643558
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: Say it again?
Speaker 1: Earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I don't know about my earliest memory, but there's a really vivid one which is that I was born in Harlem [New York, New York].  I grew up in Harlem, and you know, as a really young child, my parents [Nan Spraggins (ph.) and Roy Spraggins] lived in a brownstone on Convent Avenue in a townhouse, a brownstone, owned by somebody who is quite infamous.  Her name is Madame St. Clair [Stephanie St. Clair].  And Madame St. Clair was, you know, a documented, well known numbers racketeer.   And she was very close to Mayor La Guardia [Fiorello H. La Guardia] and they used to talk to--and I remember my parents telling me about, they used to talk every Sunday, Mayor LaGuardia and Madame. And Madame considered me her--she was Haitian.  Haitian or, she was either from Haiti or Martinique.  But she was a really colorful character with diamonds and furs and this was just an image that I had.  And she, you know, considered me her child.  And she wanted to send me to France, to school, and all these kind of things.  So I have this very glamorous image, and this, and she had a, she was very religious and she had a chapel in the basement of this brownstone.  So anyway, I have this very dramatic image of this woman in my childhood who was very mysterious and you know, a character.  That's something I remember.
Story_ID: 643559
Speaker 1: Can you describe, when you take yourself back to your childhood in Harlem [New York, New York], what sights, smells and sounds remind you of, of that, of your--?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a place on the corner of 125th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue called Tomford's [ph.].  And in Tomford's they made, I've never seen them again, these fabulous curly Q French fries and grape juice lemonade.  And they had waitresses who were in, you know, starched white uniforms and beautiful hankies and you know, it was like a soda fountain type place, right?  But I remember that was always a treat, and I remember a restaurant called Frank's [Frank's Restaurant, New York, New York] on 125th Street, which was an Italian restaurant.  We always thought it was, you know, probably mob related.  But fabulous food and it was kind of the gathering place of all the businesspeople in Harlem.  So if I went to find my father [Roy Spraggins], I would know I would just go over to Frank's.  And, you know, many occasions were celebrated at Frank's.  So that's something that I not only remember, but miss.
Speaker 1: So that's sights.  What about sound?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  Well, I think I grew up around music.  I remember my Uncle Walter [ph.] was a tremendous jazz fan.  And so, you know, that was music that was around, Ahmad Jamal, Quincy (Unclear).  I could kind of hear that in the background as I think about those times.
Speaker 1: Smells?
Speaker 2: Smells.  I don't know that anything stands out that I would recall about smells.  I mean, I just don't remember (laughter).
Story_ID: 643560
Speaker 1: So let's talk about family life.  What was family life like in the Spraggins household?
Speaker 2: I think, you know, it was a place where certainly education was a primary focus.  When I hear people talk about whether or not they were going to go to college, it was never a discussion.  Right? It was only, which one, right?  And when, right?  Education was the main focus.  Of course, civil rights was a major focus, and I, I remember being so disappointed that my father [Roy Spraggins] would not allow me to go to the March on Washington.  Because he was worried about, you know, some physical harm, and I never forgave him for it, you know.  "See how it was and I missed a moment in history.  It was your fault."  Right?  But you know politics was discussed around the dinner table, always.  We read the newspapers together, and we read everything.  We read, my father said you had to read, you couldn't just read The New York Times.  You had to read the Post [New York Post], and you read the Daily News [New York Daily News] because that's what most people in the city read and you have to know what most people are reading to know what most people are thinking.
Speaker 1: So was your mother [Nan Spraggins (ph.)] working inside the home?  Was she--did she work outside?
Speaker 2: My mother was a social worker.  She had a master's in social work and she worked with foster children and adoptees.  That, that was her career.
Speaker 1: So what was life, can you recount sometimes like, either times around the dinner table where you had those discussions or family celebrations or things like that.  Can you recount that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the family, we didn't have a large family.  But it was relatively close knit and as I said, they had all been some offshoots from Jersey City [New Jersey], and now most of us in New York [New York] one way or another.  And, you know, I had older cousins.  One I looked up to a lot, who was beautiful.  I had two cousins who were around the same age and my parents used to always hold them up as examples.  One had, you know, followed the exact path, going to college, going to graduate school, become an educator and going to become a principal and very involved.  And my other cousin who didn't go to college was very beautiful and vivacious and popular and my father would say, "Now, this cousin, you know, has her own home and a car, and a this and a that."  And I would go, "I don't care.  I wanna be like my other cousin." I won't say her name. (Laughter) That's something that stands out (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 643561
Speaker 1: So there was a lot of aspirational things going on in the, in the, in the home?
Speaker 2: A- absolutely.  Absolutely.  And then there was a lot of, I don't know how I could not mention this, but political involvement.  You know, from the time I can remember, I was on sound trucks.  My father [Roy Spraggins] was very involved in Harlem [New York, New York] politics with, you know, then the person kind of at the forefront was Lloyd Dickens [Lloyd E. Dickens], then Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], and you know, he was Charlie's first treasurer, and kind of consigliere, right?  And so I grew up steeped in politics and getting people out to vote, and understanding that as black people, that this was kind of our force of nature to move ahead in this society.
Speaker 1: Now, this was--there was something that was a Harlem political club, or was it, there was a main one or were there several of them?
Speaker 2: There were several, and he was part of the one, I think it was called New Era [New Era Democratic Club], if I don't, if I'm correct.  But this was the Percy Sutton, the Lloyd Dickens, the, that crowd, yes.
Speaker 1: And they, this was a group mainly of men.  Right?  I don't remember any women being in the club?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You know, they, it was peripheral.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  But they would, they would come together and they would really trying to deliberately garner a political power, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And so, do you remember any periphery discussions that you were sort of part of to, you know, just--
Speaker 2: I was in lots of discussions around, you know, politics then was about assuming we didn't have control of city hall, but access to it and getting black people placed in positions, in judgeships, in administrations.  And so I was around a lot for seeing peop- the jockeying and people being positioned for certain roles that, I think I would say that the discussion really wasn't about individuals so much as about the power of that position and getting it for black people.  So I think there was a lot of sense of responsibility.  So it wasn't about, you know, the individual and what it would mean for him or her so much about what it would mean for black people in terms of our political evolution.
Speaker 1: Right, and we're talking here about the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Right. The '60s [1960s], okay.  And, and what was happening in the '60s [1960s] in New York [New York] at this point in time?  We know what's happening on the national scene, you know, there's Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but you, I mean, but what is happening--
Speaker 2: Well, quite frankly, there wasn't that much happening here.  And so, for somebody like me, when I did become involved in politics, it was because I was so excited to see this exercise of power, virtually, mostly in the South.  And, and feel, and relating to it because here, you know, there was this veneer of integration, which that's really all it was.  But there wasn't the political action, well, I'm gonna take that back.  It wasn't in the system.  Here, this is in the time of the rise of Malcolm X and the Muslims [Nation of Islam].  So it was happening much more outside the system, but you know, as a young person it was something that I definitely related to.
Story_ID: 643562
Speaker 1: Now the street, I wanna also have you describe your block?  You know, on the street that you lived on, 'cause it's a famous, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.  I lived on Convent Avenue, I, you know, I was born on Convent Avenue and then later my parents, you know, owned on Convent Avenue.  And, you know, it was a lovely community.  This was where my friends were, you know.  Many black professionals lived on Convent Avenue and, you know, it was my world.  I didn't have any, my church was right, St. James Presbyterian Church [New York, New York] was right down the street.  You know, of course we moved around the city, but I was quite content in my own community and didn't have to leave it for a lot.
Speaker 1: So you're growing around, you're in a black world, essentially, growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very confident.  A lot of people around there, but it is primarily a black world.
Speaker 2: It's a black community, you know, there were black organizations, they had black social clubs and that's the world I grew up in.
Speaker 1: So, what are the social clubs?  What are some of the social clubs?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were, the one as a child, I was involved in was, we had a little club called the Capricorns [ph.], of my girlfriends that, you know, I think mostly we spent our times talking about who we were pursuing as boyfriends.  But we were a social club and Suzanne de Passe, and you know, Suzanne was in our club and Wendy Amos [ph.], and you know, our families were friends and these were the children of, and we were kind of friends and neighbors and--
Speaker 1: So were your parents involved at all in The Links [The Links, Incorporated] or the Boules or--
Speaker 2: My father [Roy Spraggins] was involved in, he was in a fraternity, the Sigmas [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]?
Speaker 1: The Sigmas?
Speaker 2: I think, Omega Sigmas [sic.]?  And not so much social, mostly political.
Speaker 1: Mostly, mainly--so really, your mother [Nan Spraggins (ph.)], the social worker, your father the lawyer.  Now, did you, were you very involved or knew much about your father's law practice then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause he took me places with him all the time.  So I knew the lawyers he worked with.  They were all involved in politics, so those things kind of merged.  So yes, I was totally immersed in it, and around it all of the time.
Speaker 1: So who were your, who were your father's, who were the people that he was close to?
Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned--
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Okay--
Speaker 2: Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], Lloyd Dickens [Lloyd E. Dickens], Judge Albert Eastman [ph.], who also lived on Convent Avenue.  The local black business world.
Story_ID: 643563
Speaker 1: You go for elementary school.  Where do you go?
Speaker 2: Right in the neighborhood.  It was then called P.S. 46 [P.S. 46, Arthur Tappan School, New York, New York], a public school.  And then, junior high school and what they call Inwood [J.H.S. 52, Inwood Junior High School] in Upper Manhattan [New York, New York] where we actually integrated.  A junior high school, and I remember being so nervous and you know, one of the parents took us to school on the first day.  And I'll never forget this woman, Helen Cremmens [ph.] was her name.  She approached me in the hallway and told me a joke on the first day and said that I know, let me get it straight now.  "Why did [President] Abraham Lincoln blow his nose?  To free all the boogers."  That was the first day of school (laughter).  And I remember my father [Roy Spraggins] being really irate and having to go up to that school because they told all the black girls that we should be nurses.  And my father, this is with the guidance counselors, and my father went up there and, you know, had to really make a scene.  And that school, that's what I really, that's the only thing I really remember about junior high school (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what kind of student were you?  'Cause I know your, you know, your, your focus, this, your parents were emphasizing--
Speaker 2: Right.  I was okay.  I wasn't an A student.  I was distracted (laughter).  Much more by social things, but I was okay if there was something that I really liked, I got really, really good grades.  I was very good in writing and in English and in, well the creative part of things.
Speaker 1: And then what were in high school, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to an all-girls high school in the Bronx [New York] called Walton High School.  I always went to public schools.  My Aunt Dobby [ph.] was a, an educator and a guidance counselor and she was given charge of which public schools I went to.  You know, to make sure that I got a good education.
Story_ID: 643564
Speaker 1: And so how are you developing as a person in high- you know, in high school [Walton High School, Bronx, New York]?  You said you were, you were a distracted.  Was boys had entered into the equation?
Speaker 2: No question about it, right (laughter).  And just, I'd just say life in general.  I think I just took school for granted.  I knew this is what I'd be doing and I knew that I had to have a good education.  And I knew that I'd go as far in school as, you know, I could.  So it wasn't something that I, it was just part of me.  It wasn't really something that I thought about.  (Laughter) But you know, I've always loved fashion.  So, and my best friend's name was Cheryl Thompson [ph.].  I was the tallest girl in the class and she was the shortest girl in the class.  And this is in this junior high school [J.H.S. 52, Inwood Junior High School, New York, New York] that we went to.  It was her mother who took us to school that first day of school.  And Cheryl and I got dressed up in high heeled shoes and clothes, this is in junior high school.  And my parents just, you know, now people see these, you know, kids with the piercings and the tattoos and the parents are going.  For me it was, here we were getting dressed up.  We put our school books, I had a black patent leather hat box, and that's how I went to school.  My books inside the hat box.
Speaker 1: You were trying to, you were Miss Fashionista.
Speaker 2: It started then (laughter).  I haven't thought about that in a really, really, really long time.
Speaker 1: It was so cute.  I bet they were like, oh wow.  You guys made quite a statement there that first day.
Speaker 2: I remember my Aunt Etta [ph.] who was a principal in Jersey City [New Jersey].  She and, I don't know, some relatives were going to take the Queen Elizabeth [Elizabeth II] to Europe, and we went to see them off.  And I had brought this outfit that had, I still remember it, it was a suit with a three quarter jacket and it was reversible.  And one side was grey tweed, and the other side was kind of a red and black plaid.  And this day, I had on the tweed side, and I had on grey suede high heeled shoes, and I had my hat box.  And we went there and my Aunt Etta was quite conservative.  And my father [Roy Spraggins] looked and she says, he said, my mother [Nan Spraggins (ph.)] was just looking at me like, "What can I do with her?"  Right?  And my father said, "Stand up."  And I stood up and my Aunt Etta just had this blank stare on her face, right?  Like, "What the hell have they done?" (Laughter) I remember this.
Speaker 1: Well, you were raised really like a little princess.
Speaker 2: Kind of.
Speaker 1: In some respects.
Speaker 2: My father used to, I would go, my father, I'd go, my mother could not stand, handle it, stand that at all.  My cousin Sonia [ph.] used to take me shopping.  She worked at Lord and Taylor's [Lord and Taylor], and I remember her--
Speaker 1: Which was one of the top stores at the time.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And I remember her, we were shopping for Easter, and I remember her looking at me 'cause I picked up a, some hat, 'cause she said, "Don't even look at it."  You know, it was for somebody thirty years old, right?  But I liked to shop with my father because all I needed to do was find him a seat.  And, you know, he would let you go shopping and say it was a holiday, don't put on anything, put on everything new that day.  So I liked to shop with my father (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's why you're a father's girl?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He doted on you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And vice versa.
Speaker 1: So how did you differ from your sister [Jean Spraggins]?
Speaker 2: First of all, my sister, you know, and eventually was a homemaker.  And we were, kind of opposites.  She was quiet, she was very sensitive, she danced.  So she had, we had different interests.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so what was the age difference between--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Just two years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 643565
Speaker 1: Who else is influencing you in, you know, the junior high [J.H.S. 52, Inwood Junior High School, New York, New York], high school period [at Walton High School, Bronx, New York]?  And are you involved in activities in, you know, in school?  Are there clubs or things that you're involved with?
Speaker 2: Really, no.  Not in school.  Again, I grew up in politics, so when I wasn't with my friends, I was, or my family, I really was on sound trucks, and handing out fliers and really being around politics all of my life.  I remember a woman, Thomasina Norford [Thomasina Johnson Norford], who was a journalist, and people like Thomasina, people like [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham who were, you know, totally engaged in politics and the community.  And these were people I was around, looked up to, and even though I'm talking about the fashion and all that, which is definitely part of it, I was very serious, you know?  And I considered myself a rebel of sorts.  I knew we had really, really, really a long way to go as a race.  And without dwelling on it, I just considered that part of the fabric of our life to be part of that.
Story_ID: 643566
Speaker 1: When it comes time for college, what is the decision then?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  By--some, a number of my friends were going to Howard, you know, this was it, right?  My grandfather, by the way, went to Howard.  And they had early acceptance, as you know.  And unbeknownst, my father [Roy Spraggins] was dead set against it.  And unbeknownst to me, this is the biggest fight we ever had.  I had gotten early acceptance and he had never let me know.  I was just, apoplectic.  "How dare you?  This is my life.  (Makes sound), mean, and (makes sound)."  Anyway, you know, I went off.  He didn't even, you know, bat an eye.  He was like, "I'll wait until you're done."  And his philosophy was that it's a white world, and college is one, might be the only time you're actually in a living circumstance with white people.  And this is a world you have to function in.  You have to know, you have to be comfortable in, and you're not going to a black college [HBCU].  That was the way he looked at it, and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Well that was a smart decision really-
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in some respects because you had grown up in a black world to date.  So you go off, you got accepted--so where did you apply to, though?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Like the--
Speaker 2: I don't even remember where I applied to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went--
Speaker 2: I, I thought I was going to Howard.  You have to have that clear (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. So you went to BU and--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --and what are your feelings once you get there?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, needless to say, it was an adjustment.  It was a big adjustment, but it was fine.
Speaker 1: So who was black in your class?  The class you come in, 'cause you come in in 19--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) the dates.
Speaker 2: I know, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You started in nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Seven [1967].
Speaker 1: --seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: No, you graduate in 1967?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you start then in nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Three [1963].
Speaker 1: --three [1963] right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 643567
Speaker 1: Who's there with you?
Speaker 2: Oh well, my roommate's name, was from, was my first room- my roommate was, my fr- was she my roommate the whole time?  No.  My roommate was black from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I really don't remember, but I think you could request at that time, but that was the case.  So we lived in a small dorm, about which I was happy in a, which was a brownstone along a row of brownstones.  So, you know, it was a nice circumstance, and, and it was an all girls dorm, and I think we were the only, we were the only black students in our dorm.  And, you know, first it was the big university experience, which was different.  And, you know, there were all cultures.  A number of Jewish students.  It was a melting pot, and you know, wasn't exceptionally different from what I imagined it would be.  But it was, well, one thing that was different is that particularly for the Jewish girls, it was clear that they were there with a mission to get a husband.  Right?  And we really were there to get an education.  So that was different.  I really loved jazz, as I said, it was kind of in my upbringing, and so there was a lot of jazz around Boston [Massachusetts] and so that was something interesting.  I didn't like Boston at all, I thought it was really, really, really racist.  I had many bad experiences and so at one point, I actually was gonna transfer back to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and I went through all the motions to do that, and my father [Roy Spraggins], you know, pulled all kind of strings to make it happen, and then I decided to stay where I was.  So I did stay there and graduate, and you know, it was, it was fine.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the racist experiences?  'Cause I had some pretty ones there, you know, some years later in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].  I was--
Speaker 2: I remember, you know, walking on a street near the campus [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], on my street, and this white guy, young, actually had a whip.  And he was, when I came by, snapping it on the ground and saying, "Nigger."  And you know, this is right at, you know, my personality is that one of us was gonna be dead.  You know?  And so, but there were just things.  There were slights all the time.  It was a very uncomfortable place to be, and you know, to this day, I don't have fond feelings about it.  And I, even a few years ago I got in a cab and the cab driver looked at me in this rage and told me I had to--, "Get out of the cab."  You know, I was, which I did. (Laughter) Right? So, anyway, it, it didn't leave warm--me warm and fuzzy.
Story_ID: 643568
Speaker 1: So how did you find Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] as a student?  And what was your major?
Speaker 2: English lit [English literature] and it was fine and you know, as I said, I was, you know, not a rebel, but you know I would consider myself politically left.  And I had a professor named Howard Zinn who was, you know, highly renowned and you know, had a few, had a, some lit professors who were magnificent who I idolized.  So school was good and fun.
Speaker 1: And what about the social life around school?  'Cause how large was the, you know, 'cause there were a lot of colleges there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  I was gonna say, it was much broader.  It wasn't just a school, it was all the schools and the black students from all the schools kind of gravitated toward each other, so it was good.
Story_ID: 643569
Speaker 1: What are you thinking, now what are you doing during summers at that point?  Are you--?
Speaker 2: I'm back in New York [New York], I'm working in different places, working in the law firms, working in--working.  One summer though, I didn't work.  My father [Roy Spraggins], to my annoyance, insisted that I go to secretarial school for the summer and learn how to take steno [stenography] and type.  He said, "Because I will know that you can be anywhere in the world, and in twenty-four hours be able to feed yourself despite whatever degrees you may get."  So that's one summer I really remember, 'cause I didn't want to do it.  And I did.
Speaker 1: That's right. But you said, so your father was, I mean, he is ever advising, and really sort of guiding your career for literally the whole time?
Speaker 2: Totally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: He wanted me to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: So when--
Speaker 2: And follow in his footsteps.
Speaker 1: So when did he start talking to you?  Was it from a young, young person that he talked to you about being a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he lived it and I was there, so I think he thought it was something that I would come to--I remember when I changed my major.  It was first government, to English.  He was so sad (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what are you going to do with that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You need to have a--
Speaker 2: And he goes, "All these law books I've, you know, gathered and maintained.  All this is for you."  You know, that kind of thing we went through it, right?  And it was after he died that I became a lawyer, by the way.
Speaker 1: So when did he pass away?
Speaker 2: Oh, long ago.  I'm gonna say it was in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, what was--
Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s].  Maybe, early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: 'Cause you worked, I just want--
Speaker 2: And, and he passed away in the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: The mid--okay.  Because you were hired as a law clerk at Covington, Howard-- is it Hagood and Holland [Covington, Howard, Hagood and Holland, New York, New York]? (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh boy, you really have (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 643570
Speaker 1: So you go to law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] right after you graduate?  Is that, do you do that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Or you, okay.  So, explain to me.  So you graduate in, you, oh no.  'Cause you graduate in 1967 from BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]?  And then, what happens after that?
Speaker 2: I went, I moved to California.
Speaker 1: So, I don't have that in our notes, so--
Speaker 2: What can I tell you, right?
Speaker 1: So you move there, where in California?
Speaker 2: To Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what spawned that move?
Speaker 2: I got married.
Speaker 1: Oh, now, who was your husband?
Speaker 2: Do we have to talk about that?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you get married--
Speaker 2: I married a musician and I moved to California.
Speaker 1: Oh, you married a musician.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: A jazz musician?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  And so he's working as a musician, and what are you doing?
Speaker 2: I worked for the airlines.
Speaker 1: For which airlines?
Speaker 2: Well, then, Western Airlines.
Speaker 1: And see, well that, I mean, we're talking about the airlines when it was still like, prestigious to work for the airlines and you know, you had to have a certain style and grace, you know, all of that.  So, you did that for how long?
Speaker 2: Maybe two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.  And did your marriage, how long did it last?
Speaker 2: Maybe five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Four years, five years.
Speaker 1: So what, what happens then after you leave the, the airlines?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  I'm just, you know, in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're living, you're not, you may be working odd jobs, or you're there.  Now, how did you, how did the L.A. experience sort of change you?  'Cause that was totally, totally, totally different.
Speaker 2: I was a fish out of water.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, I was married.  It didn't matter, you know, so much.  But when I say it didn't matter so much, I was, my priorities were, you know, my domestic life.  But I didn't like Los Angeles at all.  First of all, I'm a native New Yorker.  So need I say more, right?  So, I didn't drive.  So I had to be, I didn't.  I grew up here [New York, New York], there's no need to drive, right?  So you know I had to be taken everywhere.  That was horrific, right?  And just, the whole place.  It was not a city to me, and I didn't relate to it at all.
Story_ID: 643571
Speaker 1: And so, then you leave [Los Angeles, California].  You get, I assume, divorced, or you leave?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you go to law school though.
Speaker 2: Uh-uh. I come back here.
Speaker 1: To New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: I come back to New York and I, no.  I come back to New York and I go to work for NBC.  And I go through some kind of, like a management training program.  And I work in TV production.  And I worked with, in news with Edwin Newman who used to do a wonderful show called 'Speaking Freely.'  You know, an interview show.  And I worked on a show called 'Positively Black.'
Speaker 1: That was a well known show.
Speaker 2: And I did that.  And then--
Speaker 1: The host of the show, of 'Positively Black' was?
Speaker 2: There were several.  One was the former mayor [Carl Stokes] of Cleveland [Ohio], Eugene Callender.  There were a number of them, but I did that.
Speaker 1: So what were you learning about yourself at this point?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna just say I'm exploring.  All that I learned from college [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] was being adventurous and just seeing what life was like outside the world I knew.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Did you like the TV production--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked it a lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear) okay.
Story_ID: 643572
Speaker 1: So can you describe then, your decision at the point that you decide you're going to law school and applying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  My father [Roy Spraggins] died suddenly.
Speaker 1: And he died in what year?
Speaker 2: Maybe 1974, '75 [1975].  And I, you know, it was devastating for me.
Speaker 1: Now, he died of what?
Speaker 2: Heart attack.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everything changed after that.  That was just, you know, my whole world came tumbling down, and it was then that I decided to go to law school.
Speaker 1: You wanted to honor him?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: So were you, at this point, when he passes away, what happens to his law practice?  Was he a sole practitioner?
Speaker 2: He was, but he had gone on to various appointments.  So when he died, he was, he was in the law department at the Surrogate's Court of New York [Surrogate's Court of New York County] when he died.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the day of his service?  Can you describe it?
Speaker 2: Only vaguely.  It was at Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York].  You know, I was in a state, so really, I can't describe it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But it was just because it was so sudden.  How old was he then?  At that point he was relatively young, right?
Speaker 2: He was, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 643573
Speaker 1: So you decide you're going to law school.  Now what law schools are you applying to?  'Cause you--
Speaker 2: Only one.  He went to New York law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], and I applied there and they gave me a scholarship and I went to New York law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, how do you find that experience?  Or can you describe your first year?  'Cause law school, it's, it's hard.
Speaker 2: Unbelievable, right?  Scary right?  I was very dedicated.  I was scared to death, you know.  I never failed at anything, and so, you know, this law school thing was, you know, really scary, and really hard.  And so, you know, I was very, probably the most I've ever been, disciplined, organized, focused.  I became very close to the dean, Don Shapiro [E. Donald Shapiro], and he was a mentor to me through the whole process.  And I really wasn't even thinking about practicing law.  My [paternal] grandfather [Travers Spraggins] had been a lawyer, my father [Roy Spraggins] was a lawyer, and now I had to be a lawyer, period.  What I would do with it really wasn't on my mind in any way, shape, or form.  But I was on a mission.
Speaker 1: So where were you working, is this when you worked summers at Covington, Howard [Covington, Howard, Hagood and Holland, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you did that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what were you--so their practice was litigation, corporate commercial.  They were more on the business side of things?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it was a black law firm, it was a very successful one.  And, you know, I went there through friends of my father [Roy Spraggins], so forth.  And people like Don Covington [ph.] and Bob Roan [ph.], who was, you know, a real fixture there in New York [New York] politics, Republican.  And you know, it was a very nurturing environment, and fun, and, but that's what I did while I was in school.
Story_ID: 643574
Speaker 1: So how was the decision made that you would then go get your LL.M.?  Because, were you thinking that you were gonna teach?  'Cause usually people don't go get their LL.M.'s, and I was sort of surprised.  I had--
Speaker 2: My dean [E. Donald Shapiro] encouraged me to do it.  As I said, he was a mentor and he wanted me to come back [to New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and teach.  And, and he encouraged me to do that.  I don't think I would have had the thought on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so did you go straight to getting your LL.M.?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Oh, my gosh.  I can't even believe that.  You were driven.  'Cause I mean--
Speaker 2: I told you I was.
Speaker 1: So how did you find that program there then?
Speaker 2: Great.  I was in international law, so it opened up a whole other world to me.  And there was Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all that that connoted.  So it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: And then when you--so did you take the bar exam?  'Cause New York bar is one of the renowned hardest bars, did you take the bar exam before you got your LL.M., or did you take it afterwards?
Speaker 2: I took it before.  I graduated and I, that summer, studied and took the bar.  So I was there at Harvard while I was waiting for the results.  And of course, you know, in those days, you found out by seeing your name in the newspaper, hopefully seeing your name in the newspaper.  And so I remembered other people, you know, rumors come out.  You have no idea when the results are coming out, so you hear rumors that, "Oh, they think it's this week," or whatever.  And somebody stationed in Albany [New York] where it hits the newspaper first, and of course it's coming from the court of appeals [New York State Court of Appeals].  And you know, somebody's stationed, they start calling people, and you know, they saw your name or they didn't see, all that drama goes on, you know.  Because they just have a big list by district and you look for your name.  And I said, when I studied for the bar, and you know, the statistics weren't great for African Americans, and the bar, and I said, "You know one thing?  In the whole State of New York, there's got to be at least one black person who passes the bar.  And it will be me.  Let me make it perfectly clear." So I remember, I was on a bus in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and I thought it was that day.  Somebody had called me and whatever, and so I got the times and the only thing I wasn't sure of was whether it had come out in that edition that I had.  But at any rate, I was on the bus, and I opened it, and I think it was first department, yeah, it was first department.  And I looked down and there it was.
Speaker 1: And you, did you scream out, or you just smile (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just, I just smiled and I was quiet, and I said, "Thank you" (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  Yeah, it's quite an accomplishment to pass the bar.  I mean it's, I don't know, for everything you go through in law school. So--
Story_ID: 643575
Speaker 1: You liked law, then?  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  It was a natural for me (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, what courses did you gravitate to?  That you sort of remember?
Speaker 2: The business law, the constitutional law, if I, if I practiced law, I'm sure I would have been a litigator.  If I actually practiced.
Speaker 1: But you then come back to New York law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] and start as associate professor.  But then, how long do you do that?  You do that for a couple of years, and then how do you make the change?
Speaker 2: Make the transition?  Well--
Speaker 1: Because, it just is like, you're on a track, and the next thing you know, you're at some, you know, at Salomon Brothers.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's a thread.  When I was in law school, I took a seminar type course from somebody named Nicholas Deak, D-E-A-K [Nicholas L. Deak].  And there was something, a big foreign exchange operation called Deak-Perera in New York [New York].  And as it turned out, he was the Deak.  And the course was international business transactions.  And we used to go down to Wall Street, to Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], to different banks and interview people and, and we had to do a paper for the course, rather than an exam.  And I chose to do one on Swiss banks.  Whereupon I learned that there was always something different about this Nicholas Deak. I think he was Hungarian.  He was very suave, and there was something mysterious about him, and he always arrived with his driver and a different antique car, and I was just fascinated.  Who is this, right?  And I was always late for his class, and I would come in about ten minutes late, 'cause I was working [at Covington, Howard, Hagood and Holland, New York, New York].  And, and he would, and it was small, you know, maybe fifteen of us.  And it was at, like ten o'clock in the morning, and he would stop what he was doing, and he would say, "Good afternoon, Miss Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins]."  And I said, I came in like Loretta (Unclear) [ph.], "Oh, good afternoon." (Laughter) But anyway, I came to learn that he owned a Swiss bank.  Well, that just knocked me out, right?  Because I think the thread through it all for me is power.  And, you know, I understood political power from this Harlem [New York, New York] vantage point of getting people in jobs and knowing city hall and getting people in judgeships.  But I always knew there was something more.  And when I took that course, and we went down into those bowels of Wall Street, I didn't know what they did, but there was a different energy, and just a, kind of like a veil being lifted for me.  I didn't know what it was, but I knew it was really important and it was kind of a magnet.  So when I realized that he owned a Swiss bank, that just took me to a whole other level and I just became very engaged in wanting to know more and about this whole world.  Right?  And so that is how my interest started, and then the more I was around it, which wasn't a lot, I really realized that this was the real seat of power.  So going to Wall Street, I mean, naturally I wanted to make money, but that wasn't the driving force.  It was the power that it represented, and knowing that this is a table that we did not sit at.  And that we had to.  So that's how I ended up going to Wall Street.
Story_ID: 643576
Speaker 1: And you know, what, what is interesting also about this time period is that, you know, you have Black Enterprise, you know, that has started.  Blacks are moving into the corporate ranks, and you had mentioned earlier a Russell Goings [Russell L. Goings, Jr.], you know.  And I'm wondering at what point your, you know, your meeting him or learning of him and I--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  When I got this bug, I'm going to Wall Street, I don't even know what that meant, right?  But I just decided, that's what I was gonna do.  And I said, you know, "Okay now, who do I know on Wall Street?"  Of course, I had very few choices, right?  I don't know how I met Russell Goings, but somebody introduced me to him.  And he was just so fascinating, and he had started the first [sic.] black brokerage firm [First Harlem Securities Corporation], the first hall of securities based right on 125th Street [New York, New York].  And he told me a story that I'll, so you know, I had already started.  And this Wall Street world was so mysterious, and brutal, and unwelcoming, and fast paced.  And I always called myself Alice in Wonderland.  And I went to see him, to try and get some insight.  And he was kind enough to spend time with me, and he told me this story about when how he started, he lived in Stamford, Connecticut.  And he was a shoeshine boy in a brokerage firm.  And he just listened.  And you know, became fascinated, you know, even I remember at Salomon Brothers, the shoeshine guy knew more than everybody, right?  And so anyway, they, they took him under his wing.  But he told this story about how he and his friend went to one of these people's mansions in Connecticut, and he said, you know, "I was smart enough," he said, "they brought food around."  And he said they had this thing on the tray, he didn't know what it was, he said.  He was smart enough, he didn't know what it was, to leave it alone.  But the friend, it was a gouda cheese in the, that red plastic coating, you know?  And his friend picked it up and bit into it and I just had this image, because, you know, it was brutal for black people on Wall Street when I went there.  And I had this image of this man being made fun of, you know?  And I, it just, it always stuck with me.  And, but that Russell Goings, he, that's how he started and he has always been, he was always really, really astute.  Always ahead, way, way, way ahead of his time.  And he made a huge impression on me and confirmed that I was going in the right direction.
Story_ID: 643577
Speaker 1: So talk about how, so you had this professor [Nicholas L. Deak], and you know, he's head of the Swiss bank, how do you decide, I mean, who are you interviewing with?   How do you even find out about the job--
Speaker 2: Fine.
Speaker 1: --no less get hired?
Speaker 2: Well, I, as I said, I just started saying, "Who do I know on Wall Street?" And just calling people up and saying, "Will you talk to me?  I want to talk and to know more about what you do."  And there were a few people who were brokers, and I talked to them.  And there was somebody at an investment bank and once I, you know, one thing about being a lawyer is that unless it's really rocket science, you know, you're taught to think and analyze.  So I feel like I can lock myself up in a room for two or three days on almost any topic and be at least credible, right?  So that's what it was like for me.  And so by the time I'd talked to a few people, I mean honestly, when I started, Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] was a phrase I knew and, and the bull.  You know, really nothing, totally naive, literally Alice in Wonderland.  So but after I talked to a few people, then I just started doing homework about who was who, and blah, blah, blah.  And enough to say, "I'm doing this."  Right?  And so I had done a closing for a neighbor of mine buying a co-op.  And I went to her housewarming, and her boyfriend was there.  He looked very bankerly, he had on a pinstriped suit and some kind of shirt with a white collar and anyway, he looked very wall streety.  And he goes, "You know, I know you."  I said, "You do?"  And he says, "Yes."  He says, "You get off the train at Franklin Street.  I see you in the morning."  I said, "Oh."  So I said, "Hm. He sees me get off at Franklin.  The next stop is Wall Street.  He must work on Wall Street.  Right?"  And he did.  And he worked at Salomon Brothers.  And he, so I told him, "Oh, how wonderful that I'm meeting you now.  I'm just doing all this homework and I want to go to Wall Street.  Blah, blah, blah."  And so we talked for a long time, and he called me the next day.  He says, "Can you get me your resume?"  I had the resume to him.  Then he called me, he said, "I don't want you to get your hopes up because, you know, they just started a class and there are five black people in it and that's the most they've ever had."  You know, I think there were two black people at the firm altogether.  So this was like a big breakthrough for them anyway.  And you know, there were two women and the two men, four, there were four.  And he said, "So, you know, I don't want you to get your hopes up.  But, you know, I can get you the interview."  So I had my interview.  I went down there, and I had the attitude of, always do, if I want it, I'm getting it, period, right?  So I go down there and you know, it's like aw, in this place.  And it was on the forty-second floor and you come off the elevator and it's all wood panels and black and white marble tiles, and this is what I later called the false front.  This very expensive imposing reception area, you know, with Duncan Phyfe things and I'd say, statue all, paintings of all white men all around and I sit down and they make me wait a long time actually, right?  And so as I'm sitting there and I'm just looking around at everybody who's going past, I'm doing my New York Times [The New York Times] crossword puzzle and I said, "Well, all these people I see going by."  I said, "I don't know what they know."  I said, "But I don't really see anybody who looks like they're that smart."  Right?  And I said, "One thing I know for sure is that there's nobody that looks like they belong sitting in this room as much as me."  Right?  So let's go.  So I went to my interview.  I believe in life, that things happen for a reason, and I do believe there's a plan if you don't get in the way of it happening, right?  And so I felt that's something, going there, that I was supposed to do.  And so I went to this interview and I was interviewing, I know how to interview.  So I wasn't interviewing to make a certain impression, I was interviewing being myself because I wanted to be the place where I fit.  You know, so I thought, so it was a very swift interview.  He took me up into this, something, huge room and that they used for meetings obviously.  It was kind of a lounge, I would call it, and like, I dominated.  I chose where we sat.  I just went and sat down and you know, kind of like, "Let's go."  Anyway, we went through the interview, snap.  That was like on a Wednesday.  On Friday they called me back for my next interview.  I had that on a Monday, I got hired.  So to me, I said, "Ah.  Why didn't I think of this earlier?"  It was so easy, right?  Only because it was supposed to be, all the surprises were waiting.  But that's how I went to Wall Street.
Story_ID: 643578
Speaker 1: --Or as far as I was concerned (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: And I had to sit at that table, period.
Speaker 2: So you get in, who's in, who are the other blacks?
Speaker 1: There were two men and two women.  The two women were from, I was the only one from New York [New York].  I was the only, yeah.  I was the only one from New York.  So I would say, first of all, I was the most sophisticated.
Speaker 2: Because you, you were probably a few years older.  Were you?
Speaker 1: I was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I, but they were all M.B.A.'s.  Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], wherever.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because M.B.A.'s were what they were hiring.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And so, I mean we all, I, I remember one of the women, like within a week, she had changed her entire persona.  I think she came, she had an Afro and maybe she had on a vest, and no blouse.  Anyway, in a week, you know, she changed.  At that time, women felt they had to, you know, blend in and they were wearing the pinstriped suit and little yellow tie thing like, all that right?  So anyway, she went right to that.  I said, "You know one thing about being here?  Everybody knows we're here.  There's no point in blending in.  It's not even a possibility should that even be your desire.  So this is who I am, and this is who I'm gonna be here."  So I had on like this, red suit, grey, and my high heels.  However, I was--that's how I was, period.  Right?  So I had the attitude that I knew I had everything to learn, but by the same token, I felt that I was bringing something to this table.  And that's how I behaved.
Speaker 2: So who, what, what area were you assigned to [at Salomon Brothers]?  Do they do rotations at that point?
Speaker 1: They do a class and you go into this class.  It's really a beauty contest for the departments to come around and take a look at you.  You don't really realize that at the time.  You think, oh, this week we're learning about treasuries and this week we're learning about equities.  But they come and address the class and they have a book with your background and your picture and all that, and they're really picking, right?  You have the class now, among us there was only one.  A guy who really, I would say, was steeped in that world.  So he came, kind of like, really ready to deal, to go hob knob and all those things, right?  We were kind of more linear about it.  And so, he was the first one to get placed.  Then the other black guy, he had had [U.S.] military, went to not West, I think he went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  And, anyway, he got placed.  Then it was just the girls left.  One woman got shipped to Boston [Massachusetts], which was fine.  But the real thing was to be in New York, right?  So it was down to two of us.  And so, you know, that time, we spent as a book in itself.  It was a horrendous experience.  The long story short was that neither of us was getting placed for a really, really, really long time.  So long that it was almost time for the next class to come in.
Story_ID: 643579
Speaker 1: So you're talking about almost the first year, within the first year, you don't get placed?
Speaker 2: Right, and--
Speaker 1: So what are you doing then?  What kind of work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, first of all, it's like, you felt like Hester Prynne with a scarlet letter because nobody would talk to you.  It was like an embarrassment, you know.  Them, right?  And so, I remember there was this Irish, one of the security people.  And he would always come around and say, "How are you, Marianne [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins]?"  Like, I was some poor little pathetic thing, which I was.  And you have, you have nothing to do.  And so they don't care, right?  So, you know, you go back and watch the tapes all the time and there's no place to hide.  All the office, everything is either trading floor or offices with a glass front.  And so, you know, every once in a while, you get somebody in to interview, and it doesn't go well, and here you are, black and a woman in this environment.  And you have no allies, you have no context.  So what I finally did, and it was horrific.  And I remember there was a taxi strike, and the two of us would take a cab every day, almost like a hundred dollars to come down there to do nothing, right?  And so, and then--
Speaker 1: And they're paying you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  They're paying you and then, you know, you have to keep this game face on and as a woman, you know, you're always told about this environment.  No matter what, no matter what, no matter what happens, you can't cry.  And of course, I was always this close to tears all the time.  Like, you know, it had come to this from being a law professor [at New York University School of Law, New York, New York], right?  And I'll never forget, one time, I was doing something on the trading desk and this woman came in and it was one of my students.  And she was related to one of the most senior partners in the firm.  And I remember being so embarrassed and wanting to hide, because here I was in this situation, right?  So at any rate, you know, you go through so many different emotions to, you know, humility, just anger, frustration, indignation.  But eventually, what I decided was, and then I didn't share it with my family at all because I only, I felt that would only make it worse.  Because every day they'd be calling, "Are you okay?"  That would really drive me crazy, right?  So you kept it in and myself and the other woman would go to social events and go, "Oh, you work at Salomon Brothers?"  They were so impressed, we'd go, "Yes."  And they'd say, "Oh, what do you do?"  And we'd make up, you know whatever thing we could make or say.  It was just horrific, right?  But anyway, finally, I said, "I am sick of this."  And, and I had to report to this one partner who was very, very, very, just a mean person to begin with, right?  So I go to him, and he sends me on an interview and I go up to this department, and I--the one thing I noticed, looking around, I didn't have to know math.  I didn't have to have an M.B.A.  I looked around and I saw the few minorities who worked there, worked either in money markets or municipals.  And I said to myself, "Now why is this," right?  So money markets, that's the area where you make the least, right?  And then here's municipals, and municipals, there were starting to be black mayors.  So I know that's why they're there, but I said, what that means to me is that they're going to be pitted against other black people from other firms, going to chase black businesses, and I'm not doing that either.  Right?  And so this is where they sent me on the interview.  And so, I put on my game face and you know, I know what I'm supposed to say.  And I'm rah, rah, how much money I wanna make and blah, blah.  And so he looks at me and he points to this secretary's desk out there.  He goes, "Well, you know, we don't have any room up here."  He goes, "If you work up, you have to work over there."  I was very nice and polite and all that, and then I went back downstairs to this one I reported to.  And everything came together, and I went off.
Story_ID: 643580
Speaker 1: And he was from Georgia, by the way.  He had run the Georgia office and had a horrible reputation in this regard.  And so I, before I knew it, I was yelling, I was screaming, I was crying, and I was telling him.  I said, "Let me tell you one thing."  I said, "You can subject me to anything you subject everybody else around here to."  I said, "That, and no more.  Because you don't understand who I am."  And I said, I said, "I am Roy Spraggins' daughter.  That means nothing to you, but it means everything to me and it means everything to everybody who ever put anything into trying to make something out of me in this life.  I will do that and no more, and do you understand?"  Well he was like, "Nobody."  One of the things that was my observation on Wall Street is that women, that men have done something that women typically have not done.  They have been either in the [U.S.] military, or been engaged in some kind of active team sport, which means that, you know, I make this move, you make that move.  You say yes, I say no.  Right?  All that.  You go forward, I go back.  To a woman, when you're confronted with a situation, really what you do is supply some kind of logic and common sense.  So if somebody says something to me and it doesn't make sense to me, I don't just respond.  I will ask why.  And then typically, in certainly that environment, they really have no idea what to do with that.  So that is what I was confronting at that moment.  He was livid.  He had never, he was purple, he was out of his chair, he was screaming at me.  He had gone to a level I couldn't care less, and I said, "And everybody tells me I'm not supposed to cry, well, I don't care.  This is what I do.  I see those people out there and they cuss and swear and go to strip clubs and I cry.  And if you don't like it, it's tough."  This is how this was going, right?  So he shut me up and he looks at me and he tells me, "You are gonna, you don't like it up there?"  He goes, "You're gonna sit there."  And he points to this desk outside his office.  Okay?  And he goes, "And you go there right now."  So that's where he sent me.  And so I went and I sat there, and I tried to get myself back together.  And I said, "Marianne, this can't be happening, you know?  Not like this, right?"  So long story short, meanwhile, they had driven the other black woman out.  And they didn't know I was around, that I heard them.  One partner picked up a phone and called the other like, "Guess who's gone?"  Like it's a game, a big joke, right?  And I had said to myself at that time, "I'm leaving here one of two ways.  Either I'm really gonna make it or they're taking me out on a stretcher.  I am not going any other kind of way, period."  So I gathered my things, and that next day, I went to the cafeteria.  At Salomon Brothers, the cafeteria is a place where everybody comes to.  You have your own private dining rooms, right?  So that's where, you know, luncheons take place with customers and so forth.  But as far as the firm goes, in the morning, partner, everybody comes to the cafeteria.  So I set up my desk at a table right near the cash register.  And had all my financial press, books, everything, and I said, "This is my office."  I said, "Because one day," and I'd read everything cover to cover.  I said, "One day, somebody is gonna have to say, 'Who is that black woman?  Why is she sitting there every day reading the papers,' right?  Reading books."  And if anybody made eye contact with me, I went to their office.  And I said, "My name is Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins], and I was in the last class."  Meanwhile, another class has already started.  "I was in the class and I didn't get placed.  Do you have any work you need done?"  Well, first of all, they were probably just so embarrassed and aghast and awkward, they didn't know what to do, right?  I mean, I was, wasn't confrontational, I was just very nice, you know?  "You need anything done?"  And so, I guess they said, "Poor soul."  They would give me something to do.  And long story short, I did that a few times and I ended up working on some publication.  I'll never forget, we were (unclear) write notes, and as a result of that, I got sent on another interview which led to me being placed in a job and it was in, with Lew Ranieri [Lewis S. Ranieri] who is the father of the mortgage securities market.  It was at the very, very, very beginning of it and so that's where I started in an area that was completely brand new and made a way for myself.  That's how I got started.
Speaker 2: So how long did it take you past that?  You know, almost, you know from the time period that that happened, how long (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of that, which thing happened?
Speaker 2: You know, when, when you set up in the cafeteria.  How long did that take afterwards?
Speaker 1: Months, a few months.
Story_ID: 643581
Speaker 1: So ta- talk about Lew Ranieri [Lewis S. Ranieri].  How, talk, talk about him and talk about the, the industry or that part of the industry.  Because that was revolutionary at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Totally.  And so exciting and nobody knew what it was.  We, well on the desk, on the sales floor, and on, and in, and that's my banking.  Right?  It was a novel, you know, exotica they called it, right?  And so you could make of it what you wanted, right?  And you know, he was already a colorful character himself and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Can you describe him as a character?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he, you know, he's Italian.  He started out in the back office of Salomon Brothers and was just a genius.  And, you know, I think became head of operations and then you know, eventually was on the desk and the rest was history.  But he was a genius and he, Salomon Brothers had done the first deal ever.  A conventional mortgage pass for Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation], I believe it was.  And he, you know, spearheaded all that and the whole, you know, trading of government backed, you know, I mean, mortgage backed--government securities.
Speaker 1: Securities. Securities?
Speaker 2: And he just created an industry.  And, you know, it was the idea of packaging these assets and getting off the books, then thrifts, mostly.  And being able to have them do business in a completely different way and that created a whole industry.
Story_ID: 643582
Speaker 1: The importance of this, well, you know the other person I think I talked to who was involved, I think, credits (unclear) or city, was Fred Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think he was also involved.  So is he in your sphere at this point?  Or he's not, it may have been later that he worked.
Speaker 2: I think it was later.  And not direct, 'cause this was the very, literally--
Speaker 1: This is the very beginning?
Speaker 2: Very, very, very beginning.  So because of that, it was really an opportunity.  So I really, so didn't know what I was doing, right?  But he had given me a prospectus to take home and read to come back and have this interview.  And I had, you know--lawyer, going home, (unclear) it up ten thousand ways, called my friends.  "Do you know what this is?"  Dah, dah talk about--got myself together.  I think I had to meet him at seven o'clock in the morning and he took, we talked about it.  He goes, "Well, you sound like every- everybody else here."  I had the job, right?  But then, having the job was a whole other thing.  So you know, I had to just do cold calling.  I had to talk about this product that nobody knew what it was.  I was just calling insurance companies, but first when you do your call, you know, who you know.  I said, I think called, you know, Thrift [Thrift Insurance Corporation], maybe I called Carver [ph.].  A partner called me in and yelled at me, "Why are you calling them?"  And at first I'm going, "How dare you ask me that?"  Then I realized, they're never gonna buy this, right?  He was right, right?  Then I would call up, I don't know Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.] or somebody like that.  And then I would get these calls from somebody I never met in my life yelling at me and cursing at me about, "Why was I calling their client?"  I'm going, "What?  What?"  I'm saying, "Oh, the whole Prudential insurance company is your client, right?"  So then, now what am I gonna do?  Right?  So I just sat down that common sense again.  Women have it, and I said, "Okay.  This is a long term asset.  Who does this mean something to?"  And I said, "Pension funds."  And so I just started calling a few friends.  "You know anybody at this fund, that fund?"  I started calling pension funds and lo and behold, nobody was calling us screaming at me.  So I knew I was on to something.  So I started running around the pension funds and I sold them not on doing one deal, but doing a whole series for mortgage, this is, interest rates are at 20 percent.  There wasn't a mortgage to be found and we're saying, "Buy mortgages, right?"  And so they would do these in state programs that would kind of create activity for their local banks, their local S and Ls [savings and loan].  And they would buy in state programs and it was all new.  And once I did one, then I would just went to the next city in the next state.  And I always say, "I was just trying to keep from getting fired, okay?"  'Cause I was not gonna get fired, right?  So it worked.
Speaker 1: So what cities and states were you, where were you?
Speaker 2: Connecticut was one of the first, the State of Connecticut, New York.
Speaker 1: No black mayor in Connecticut, though?
Speaker 2: No.  But there was a black treasurer [Francisco L. Borges].  But it wasn't always, it was about, in New York City [New York, New York] there was no black, in Louisiana there was no black. I just, you know, I tried to do things that made sense.  And it was to their advantage.  So it worked.  And that's how I got started.  And then, that's how I got started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I became involved in all kinds of things because the firm seemed to always be getting itself in trouble politically one way or another.  And although I was probably the last person they would call on to try to remedy something often, I was the one they needed to call on.  So for instance, when Salomon Brothers was bought by Philipp Brothers [Phibro Corporation] and they were doing business in South Africa and the whole apartheid issue was huge and Salomon Brothers was gonna get fired in different places, I, you know, took on that mantle and different things.
Speaker 1: So, I read in 1984 that the four Connecticut transactions that you did totaled five hundred million [dollars], that was--
Speaker 2: Probably.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: A big, a big watershed. And then you were promoted to, in 1985 to vice president of their immunity finance department.  Do you, is that--?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: You know more than me. (Laughter) I don't even remember (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 643583
Speaker 1: So when do you move to Prudential [Prudential Bache Securities; Jefferies Bache Securities, LLC], and why?  That happens in 1988.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Well, I had been at Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], right?  No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  Oh, Salomon Brothers left the business.  I was at, this (unclear) center and so, and John Gutfreund walked in one day and said, "You know, this has been a very nice business," he goes, "but I never really understood it and we're out of it as of today."  Right (laughter). After, you know, being the lead firm in that business, so that's when I went to Prudential.
Speaker 1: And so you went over to Prudential?  And so, who was, who was doing the work at Prudential?
Speaker 2: Well, Prudential wasn't really on the map.  So that, so it was a good opportunity for me and George Ball was the head of Prudential and when I was, you know, interviewed, I said that I wanted to meet George Ball, 'cause I wanted to know that if I did what I was supposed to do, that I would become a managing director in that company, you know, in a reasonable amount of time.  And we had that understanding; and, and I joined them.
Story_ID: 643584
Speaker 1: What have you learned about yourself in the business and closing a deal?  'Cause it's one thing, you know, you had described learning how to, you know, how you started prospecting.  But at this point in time, you sort of built a book of business and so what is the nature of, the business is a lot of relationships, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you took the words right out of my mouth.  Like most things, it's a relationship business.  At a certain level, I was at the best firms, and at a certain level, if this firm creates a new structure today, you know, by next week, everybody's doing the same thing.  So in terms of what you provide in terms of a product, you know, eventually, it's gonna be pretty much the same.  So the difference is, you know, the service you give, and the relationships you have, the trust that you build.  And that was always the most important thing to me.  The integrity and understanding that because at many times when you're tested in this regard, but understanding that my first loyalty is to my client.  And that has done me well over my career.
Speaker 1: So what was the longest, what was the total average deal?  How long would it take for prospecting?  What, is it a year?  Is it, I mean--
Speaker 2: I mean, it depends.  There's no rule.
Speaker 1: There's no rule?
Speaker 2: It depends on what you're selling at the time.  It--there's no rule.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's not a year (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's several years?
Speaker 2: No, it's less than a year (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, it's less than a year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I see, okay.
Story_ID: 643585
Speaker 1: So who else is in the, in the business that's female or black?  Because this is, we're talking about the early '80s [1980s], well no (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ken Glover [Kenneth Glover].  Ken Glover is at Drexel [Drexel Burnham Lambert, New York, New York].  Garland Wood is at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.].  [HistoryMaker] Don Cornwell is at Goldman Sachs.  A female, it's really hard for me to think.  Merrill [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management], Jeff Humber [Jeffrey L. Humber] is at Merrill.  You can name, Bill Hayden [William H. Hayden] is at Bear Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.].  But you could, I'm just, my memory, I have to jog it, but I could pick up the phone and call each person very easily.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, does it matter that there are now black mayors, you know, because, you know, I always think, when I think of financial transactions and immunities, I think of, of in Atlanta [Georgia], I think of--
Speaker 2: Maynard [Maynard Jackson].
Speaker 1: Maynard.  Because he, all right that's, I don't know why.  Because he really seemed to open up a lot of opportunities.
Speaker 2: He was, he was very vocal.  Of course it mattered because the mayor has a budget and it's bond issues, right?  So there's a lot of debt insurance and there are pension funds, which are you know, public pension funds are gargantuan.  And so they are the source of lots and lots and lots of business.  They control a lot of business, these mayors, that Wall Street is interested in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  And I know a lot of people in Chicago [Illinois], well Ken Glover you know, came and he was part of Maynard's [sic. Harold Washington] things--
Story_ID: 643586
Speaker 1: How was Prudential [Prudential Bache Securities; Jefferies Bache Securities, LLC] then, when you, you joined there?
Speaker 2: It was fine.  You know, I was kind of established then, and so it was just helping them build a business and it was fine.  I probably would have been there for a long time except that David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] decided to run for mayor and you know, as I said, New York [New York], the activities have been pretty minimal and not exciting, right?  And the action had been in these other cities, particularly in the South.  And so, now was New York's chance and I was so excited.  It's somebody I'd known my whole life, right?  And, oh, I was in seventh heaven that he was running, and I took a leave of absence, to make a long story short, to work on the campaign.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about that working the campaign.  Because this is taking you back to your roots, and it's also, these were, he had, you know, been, this is your father's [Roy Spraggins] club, you know, political club [New Era Democratic Club] that, you know, you, you had spoken of earlier.  So what role do you take, take in the campaign?
Speaker 2: The same one I always seem to end up in.
Speaker 1: And at what point--
Speaker 2: Raising money (laughter), one way or another.  But, also, just engagement.  Totally, but that is the specific thing that I did, but just like I knew I was going to Wall Street, I knew we were gonna have a black mayor right then.  And so, you know, I was just nonstop, twenty-four hours, so much fun, so much work, so much stress, just push, push, push, push.
Speaker 1: And this was, I mean, this was a huge deal.  So talk about the campaign and some highlights of the campaign for you.  If you look back?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe not so much the campaign as the biggest highlight was David winning and then, Nelson Mandela coming to New York right after he was released from jail, and the huge, huge parade and kind of being part of that.  That's what this really, really stands out.
Speaker 1: Good.  And then, did you ever think about having, or was there ever any discussion about you having a role in, you know, in his, in his administration?
Speaker 2: I was never--
Speaker 1: So you were just, you took the leave purposefully to get him elected?
Speaker 2: I had to be part of it (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.  That's right.  So when you, how much money did you raise for him?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, but a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay. A lot of money.  Okay.  Well, it says you were.
Story_ID: 643587
Speaker 1: Where does Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] come in at that point?  Have you, were you taking a leave from, see I thought, I had that you were at Smith Barney before the, the campaign?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you just--
Speaker 2: I became, you know, a very valuable commodity after David [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] won, right?  And Smith Barney approached me and the same conversation I had about being a partner, right?  And I was approached at a very high level, by them, from Lew Glucksman [Lewis Glucksman], who was a huge luminary on Wall Street, and you know, after a lot of consternation about leaving one place [Prudential Bache Securities; Jefferies Bache Securities, LLC], and going to another, I joined Smith Barney.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a managing director.
Speaker 1: And this, what other female managing black partners are there in Wall Street (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There aren't any.  I'm the first one.
Speaker 1: That's right. And so that puts you at a whole different sort of level.
Story_ID: 643588
Speaker 1: There was an announcement.  I, you know, I, so do you remember who's there?  One, I wanna know the hierarchy of who's there, and this is in 19--1990?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, 1990.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was big deal because this Lew Glucksman [Lewis Glucksman] had lured me and he was, you know, a figure larger than life who I had read about in books and, you know, wow, right?  You know, I'm talking to him, right?  So that was a big deal, and then, of course, you know, I'm a, actually in municipal finance now and there's so much going on.  You know, so much bond insurance going on around the country.  Of course, David [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] is mayor now in New York [New York].  This is business that historically had been done either by, you know, Koch [Ed Koch] had been mayor for so long, right?  And most of the business had been done by either Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] or Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.].  And they would just trade off.  And this was seen now, here's an opportunity for some new players to come in and I definitely intended to be one of them.  So I was able to play that kind of a role for Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] and then just move around the country.  It was important to me--I feel that as an African American in any large organization, that when I talk to students now about how to navigate their careers, I always say, "You need an external constituency.  You know, people on the outside need to be talking about you to the powers that be where you are."  Everybody knows that you are a factor, right?  So I don't know that I didn't have that strategy, but that's how I operated, for sure.  And so, you know, I had that.  And I loved having a national scope to what I did.  You know, tell me a lie in Chicago [Illinois] today, I'll know in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] tomorrow kind of thing, right?  So I loved the freedom of moving around.  When I think about what I do as a--my mother [Nan Spraggins (ph.)] used to always say, "Tell me again what you do?"
Speaker 1: Well, because in the black community, I mean, there was the whole discussion, I remember the interview I did with [HistoryMaker] Deborah Wright, their family didn't want, they were like, "What are you doing?  Stop that."  You know, because the whole financial area was so totally, sort of an anomaly to the black community.
Speaker 2: Right. And as I told you, that's why I didn't really want to tell my family the travails I was going through, 'cause they would have said, "You're treating our baby like this?  Get out of there."  Right?  So, but at any rate, so I believed in having kind of a national base and having my own, first of all, as an African American in these places, you can't let them define you.  Because it's not you, right?  So you have to know that you're bringing something to the table.  You have to maintain your external relationships, even more so, because you have to be a whole person in order to cope with the things that you are going to have to face every day.  So, I don't even remember the question I'm answering (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  But I, I don't think you need to worry--
Story_ID: 643589
Speaker 1: I just want you really to describe your beginning times there, so you're travel- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so, so you know, I'm travelling all around the country, and one of the more interesting things is that when I went to Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], I brought somebody with me, another black woman.  We had worked together at Salomon Brothers, when Salomon Brothers left the business, she went to another firm, and so I coaxed her to come join me at Smith Barney.  So we would, I was not only the first black female in this managing director role, but we were the only female tag team on Wall Street.
Speaker 1: So what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Michelle Morris [ph.].
Speaker 1: So that was huge.
Speaker 2: Huge.
Speaker 1: Huge, huge.
Speaker 2: Huge.  Because I said, "You know, while we're being beaten up, beaten up all the time, nobody could figure out, 'Why are they always laughing?'" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So who are the, who are the, who are the players in Wall Street at this point?  You have--
Speaker 2: You mean the firms?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The firms that are players, and--
Speaker 2: You know, they're obviously the same ones that there are now.  It's Goldman, it's Merrill, well it was Bear Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.], the major, what they call the (unclear) firms.
Speaker 1: Who are the black people that are players?
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  At this point in 1990.  You have--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh.  Then.  Yeah, well, I had just started to mention some of them to you.  There's Ernie Green [HistoryMaker Ernest Green] at Lehman [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.], there's Bill Hayden [William H. Hayden] at Bear Stearns.  There was Garland Wood at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.].  These are people in public finance.  Of course, there's some people in other areas, not many, not many anywhere, but there are some other people in corporate finance, et cetera.  Jeff Humber [Jeffrey L. Humber] at Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management], I'll just, as we talk, I'll think of more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I told you I could name them all on two hands.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, I mean, because it's such a small, small club, so--
Speaker 2: Not just such a small club, there's so few African Americans--
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) there. Oh yes, yeah. That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm talking about the African American part.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, a small club inside a small club.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 643590
Speaker 1: How does Merrill [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management]--so I'd like you to describe your time there.  'Cause you were there for a total of fourteen years, right?
Speaker 2: On the street [Wall Street]?
Speaker 1: On the street, um-hm.  But no, weren't you there, weren't you at, I thought you were at Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] for fourteen years?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years.  Okay.  No, you're right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: There was something else I had read fourteen years. Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So what, how does the culture differ there than Salomon Brothers?
Speaker 2: Well, Salomon Brothers was one of a kind, one of a kind, you know.  A moment in history, really.  And so it was the biggest, baddest fixed income house period, right?  And they were aggressive, they were, I'm gonna say, non-conformist.  So there was nothing like them.  Smith Barney was a much more traditional firm.  They weren't really a player, you know, they much, there was no retail at Salomon Brothers, and Smith Barney was very much a big retail presence.  So it was a completely different kind of culture.  At Salomon Brothers, John Gutfreund sat at the middle of the trading floor, at the head of it like the captain at the helm of his ship.  And you know, there were maybe twelve partners, or whatever they called them later, managing directors, who really ran everything.  And I always had the sense that you know, whatever I needed, I'd go straight to any one of them and make it happen, period.  Right?  So you know, Smith Barney was much more of a bureaucracy and hierarchal.  And, you know, I don't, how do I say this?  Well, I wasn't stepping up in the world being there.  I feel I was bringing something to them to help them get to a place I had already been.
Speaker 1: Just because Salomon was known in the whole area.  Smith Barney was just a new, a new area for them in some respects, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were there.  But they just weren't like the major player (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They weren't the major player?
Speaker 2: Major, big, you know, player in the field.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Plus I, my scope had been much broader anyway at Salomon Brothers.  So it was different.
Story_ID: 643591
Speaker 1: What other activities are you--'cause you're really in demand; one, you, you know, the fact that David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] won, the fact that you played a major role in his campaign.  What is your strategy then, going into, you know, to Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] and what are you, 'cause it's different than Salomon [Salomon Brothers].  Salomon, you know, you were, you had to work to get in the club.  Here, you're bringing the club, I'm mean, you're bringing a candidate, you know, a new mayor into--
Speaker 2: Oh, and I helped them get into what they call the leagues in this business, which is, you know, the rankings of the firms in the various areas.  Right?  So the New York [New York] business was the biggest, coveted piece of business for any and everybody, and I delivered and I, you know, they became the lead manager for New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, which is a huge insurer.  They did a $2.5 billion deal, which at the time was the largest water deal ever done.  And Smith Barney was the lead, and followed up with another $2 billion deal.  That was huge, huge, huge, huge for them.  So that was my, those were my deals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what other deals did you do there that you were proud of?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), often I was given things considered, you know, unsalvageable, just, you know, thrown, thrown, thrown away and given to me.  So for instance, they gave me the State of Louisiana.  Well, they thought they were just giving me a piece of junk.  Any reason I would have to go to Louisiana all the time?  I was happy as could be, right?  Now the capital was not New Orleans [Louisiana], but that moved.  Which is a completely different kind of place, right?  And, you know, they're thinking they were right because they--talk about club, right?  No outsiders really get much of anything ever, right?  And my attitude was, first of all, I loved being there.  Secondly, I said, "By the time I get done, they're gonna ask, 'What floor do I work on in the state capitol?'"  Right?  So I was down there all the time.  I got to know everybody, I was having an actual ball.  And then, I got the business.  So, you know, to their shock and amazement, right?  So things like that.
Speaker 1: So everything is going well--
Speaker 2: Another one was Chicago [Illinois], and I loved the way that, how Washington [Harold Washington] exercised power.  And I really thought he did it the way it should be done.  And so I was really happy to be around that situation all the time.  And we did business there.  And so that was, you know, very exciting to me.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what--was there any work that you did in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?  Did, was--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In D.C.  Okay.
Story_ID: 643592
Speaker 1: So what happens though, at, at Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management]?  Something, I mean, you're, you're at the top of the game, but what happens?  What do you find, or what ab-?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Smith Barney, I don't want to single them out.  Wall Street, okay.  I'm gonna, let me back up all the way.  [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham wanted, when I first went to the street, wanted me to meet a friend of hers I think she was on a board with.  So we go to dinner, and he was at J.P. Morgan [J.P. Morgan and Co.; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  And we go to dinner, we're making all the nice small talk and all that, right?  And I just very casually asked him, "Oh, how long have you been there at J.P. Morgan?"  Right?  Now I am at, a person who is seldom if ever at a loss for words.  Right?  So I said, "Oh, how long have you been there?"  And that man looked at me and he said, "Seven years of four generations."  What response could I possibly have to that?  Right?  Other than to sit there and say to myself, "Why did I ever come here?  Why did I think I could do this, right?  This is the world that you're in, Marianne.  This is your competition.  Four generations, and seven years, he's been there, now what do you have to say? Okay?"  So I say that as a backdrop to the entire situation because you're in a really foreign territory.  You know, you're there obviously because you're smart and you can get things done.  But as far as like, the real inside, are you ever really gonna be there?  Particularly somebody like me because I'm not trying to be that.  You know, if I had determined, okay, you know, I wanna run Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] as a black person--certainly did, right?  You know, my behavior would have been something different.  But that's not why I'm there.  I said, why I'm there.  This is about power and sitting at the table as not only equal, my view, from the day I got there, though I knew I'd be the first person to say I knew nothing about what they did when I got there, was that, if you're confused about how to deal with me, think of me as somebody who lost it in the war.  That was my attitude.  So, and it still is.  So given that, I feel that in those environments, you know, you can just, you know, go along A, B, C, and be smart and work eighteen hours a day, and do all the things everybody else does, right?  But as far as I am concerned, Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins] is the only one I can speak for, is in order to really make it, you have to break the rules.  The rules were not made for you, right?  So I would say, if I was still just gonna move forward by following rules, I'd still be picking cotton somewhere, right?  So everything I looked at was really mostly, how do I work around the obstacles that are here to achieve what I know I am going to achieve.  So I don't single out as Smith Barney or anybody, right?  I would say that Salomon Brothers because it was so different, right?  I don't put it in a category with anybody.  But, you know, as for the general milieu and it's not that, it's Wall Street.  It's anyplace we are, you know?  If you are trying to really get to the core of it and get the most of what it has to offer, you know, you might get it by just going A, B, C.  But 90 percent of the time, it's, that's not how it's gonna be.  And it's certainly not how it was for me.  And we can attribute this to being African American, to being a woman, to being some combination--I really don't know because it was irrelevant to me because I knew what I was gonna do no matter what was presented to me.
Story_ID: 643593
Speaker 1: You decided to leave Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  And so what did you end up doing after that?
Speaker 2: Well, first I took a little sabbatical and, you know, well deserved after a long, long time.  And then, someone who I had worked with at Salomon Brothers, Wardell Lazard, died.  And his firm [W.R. Lazard and Company] was in a very precarious situation and so I came in to try to help keep it afloat.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you talk about him because, you know, he did die, but he also had done something pretty amazing, you know, on the street [Wall Street].  Can you just talk about him and--
Speaker 2: Right. Uh-huh.  He was very bold.  For a long time, we were not friends because, you know, I'm gonna say the male chauvinism part of it, you know, was at the fore.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a big deal, though.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Uh-huh.  It is.  And, but we became friends and he was very bold, and at the time that he set up his own firm, I mean, really, this was unheard of.  Maybe Travers Bell had a firm [Daniels and Bell Inc.], I think maybe one or two other ones, but for somebody to come in here, the aegis of Salomon Brothers, and so to come in, you know, kind of making a splash, was really unusual and bold.  And so to that degree, he was really a visionary.  And one of the saddest things for me is that, maybe several months before he died, he kept calling.  He called me and he kept saying, "We have to get together because I have finally, I have something that I want to work with.  And you're, and you're the only one who can do it."  And some business that he was going to be going into that I was the person that needed to be at the forefront of it.  And so, I never got to know what that was 'cause he died.  But, so he was, you know, he was like 6'5", really big guy, and he had, I believe, worked for the California pension fund [California Public Employees' Retirement System], State of California.  And that's how he met Salomon Brothers who was one of those big funds out there, and that he had, he had come into Salomon Brothers and he just was kind of a rock star.  And he had a lot of nerve.  That's, I think, what we liked and disliked about each other (laughter), right?  And, and he made his own mark, definitely.
Speaker 1: And so he was actually found dead in a hotel room, right?
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: Unexpectedly, and the firm was really centered around him and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, (unclear).
Speaker 1: And so what, so you, his widow [Betty Lazard] asked you to come in and, so just tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what I can say about it is that it is unfortunately, an oft told tale of African American businesses, of not having a succession plan and always having to reinvent the wheel.  And so that was unfortunately the situation there.
Story_ID: 643594
Speaker 1: And you, you worked hard.  Talk about your role there, what you, what (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll tell you when, I'll tell you what I really learned there.  I kinda knew it, but I got to put it into practice.  That sitting at the head of a black firm, infinitesimal as we were, relative to the larger marketplace, it was an unbelievable perch.  I literally would come in the office, and because we had to get money, we had to get, save clients, we had to do everything.  You know, we were in crisis.  And I would open the newspaper, and if I found something interesting that related to us, I would call anybody, read the story, call anybody and say, "You know, I'm CEO at W.R. Lazard [W.R. Lazard and Company].  Can I come and talk to you?" And 99.9 percent of the time, I was in front of whoever it was I'd just read about.  So for instance, the, you know, story that highlights it most is that Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] was having a huge, huge, huge PR [public relations] fiasco about, I can't remember.  It was around race--
Speaker 1: Right, they had a discrimination suit that was brought against them.  I think [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman was called in.  Does that sound--
Speaker 2: Maybe.  But it was around monkeys, some names, or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think--
Speaker 2: Something.  It was very ugly, whatever it was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The next thing you know, Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] on 'Nightline' and the CEO is on 'Nightline' and it's like big news and it's a PR disaster for them, right?  As it so happened, W- little W.R. Lazard managed money for Texaco.  And after Wardell Lazard's death, they had not dropped us.  They had stayed the course.  So I, Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins] dialed the phone, and I called Mr. CEO, Peter Bijur of Texaco, and said, "You know, when we had our own little crisis, you stood by us and we really and truly, I can't tell you how much we appreciate and what a difference it's made for us.  So now that you're in this situation, I just want you to know, if there's any way we can be helpful to you, we will gladly do so."  That turned into a radio, and, and a whole air campaign.  Print and radio, with me in a red suit (laughter).  That was, said just that, and it was really, widely disseminated, widely, well received, and was a really nice thing for them, as well as for us.  I said if there was anything about this story that, you know, was different from what they expected, is that people remember it as a story about me.  And to this day, people stop me and say, "Aren't you that woman in the red suit?"  "Yes."  I swear to you, right?  But anyway, that's just an example, right?  So I did that, I still do, every day.  I would, so from that perch, I was able to really leverage it to the highest levels of any place I wanted to go on behalf of that business.
Speaker 1: So you're saying, you're saying that perch was even better than the perches that you had had previously?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting observation.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So you, what ends up happening though?  Can you describe that incident?
Speaker 2: They just couldn't hold on.  I mean, you know, it requires capital, requires inventory and (unclear), and the firm was too damaged.  The clients had left and it just, and I left, you know.  It was, again, these situations come down to no succession plans and you know, they become big family disputes and you know, those kind of stories.  And it was, unfortunately, one of those kind of stories.  But I certainly feel like I tried to help.
Speaker 1: But you had to have found, I think you did find a purchaser, right?  At, at some point?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I left before the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --denouement from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 643595
Speaker 1: So then you left [W.R. Lazard and Company] and then you join, I think this is 19--I don't know if this is 1998?  But you join Smith Whiley and Company?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a black, woman owned, money manager who wanted to do more business.  They were kind of Connecticut focused.  So I joined them to, I tend to kind of take on, I'm gonna call them pioneering roles.  Or working with new products, or new teams, or getting something introduced that hasn't been before that if I look over my career so far, that has tended to be the role that I play and it was the same there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I mean, with anyone starting, you being part of them would be a big, big kahuna just because you were the first.  And there's still, in this area, like I'm thinking of the other women that are in, you know, have, were involved in this, you know, this area?  In Chicago [Illinois], there was a woman who had started a firm, an equity firm [The Kenwood Group, Inc.]-
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Barbara Bowles? Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Barbara Bowles.  But they're not, you know, and then, the person at Smith Whiley, her name is--
Speaker 2: Gwen Iloani [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Smith Iloani].
Speaker 1: Gwen Iloani.  But who else is out here?  That's what I'm, I'm just trying to sort of get a sense of--
Speaker 2: Right. There are a few.  I mean, you know, really, this business has been very much a revolving door.  So there definitely are people, but it hasn't really expanded.  So there're people I've, you know, replaced.  This kind of firm today, that time to--but becoming a force has not happened yet.  We'll just say yet.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  And even this--
Speaker 2: And I think I kind of get known also because I have also been involved in politics.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I told you, I move around the country a lot in the things I've done.  So I think that might be one reason (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 643596
Speaker 1: And then so, around this time, you also got involved with Atlanta Life Insurance [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group] you know, in Atlanta [Georgia].  And that's Atlanta's--now I don't, is Atlanta Life--?
Speaker 2: It's still there.
Speaker 1: It's still there, okay.  Because this is, this is a history of a company that goes back, I think over a hundred years?
Speaker 2: Over a hundred years, absolutely, to Mr. Herndon [Alonzo Herndon].  And that was what attracted me to it, right?  I think you will see that thread through everything I have ever done.  It's kind of, you know, maintaining or growing the position of black people in the areas that have to do with finance or commerce in America.
Speaker 1: So, who was head, who was, who were you working with there and--
Speaker 2: The head of the firm at the time was Charles Cornelius [Charles H. Cornelius].  And they decided that they wanted to get into, well they were deciding whether or not they wanted to get into the money management business.  I think, you know, the story of black insurance companies, as many of our businesses.  They started out serving a certain populace in a certain way, and now the world has changed and they have to change.  I often say that as much as we focus on the ills of segregation, there were some things about it that actually were quite positive.  One of which is that we had thriving black businesses because we had a ready market, right?  And that's just not the case now.  And so you have to adapt.  So anyway, they were looking at getting into the asset management business, which is a natural for an insurance company.  And so that's what I went there to do, to start.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they did they actually, were they successful in that and what were some of the complications?  Because, you know, that would be, that's a more sophisticated business then?
Speaker 2: Well, the complication is that, you know, in asset management, what comes first?  The chicken or the egg?  People hire you based on a performance record, and so if you're trying to break in, you don't have a performance record.  So it just takes a while.  But yes, they have been successful in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And in the space of black insurance companies, were there others that were--
Speaker 2: Nor- North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] is the other, you know, you know, established, long established, hundred, I think they're even longer than Atlanta Life company.  But yeah, I mean, you know, I was the romance of this hundred year old company founded by, and his home is still there, kind of almost like a museum and a foundation and the legacy of that is what was just completely mesmerizing for me.
Story_ID: 643597
Speaker 1: One thing that we forgot to cover and that was your appointment by Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  Right, as head of C--
Speaker 2: Not head of, but onto the board of SIPC [Securities Investor Protection Corporation], uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Board, SIPC.
Speaker 2: Right.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that and the role?  I'd like to have you discuss some of your other civic activities that you've you know, played a role in.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that was a very nice one.  That required [U.S.] Senate confirmation, and the whole, you know, all of what that entails.  And SIPC overseas ensures brokerage accounts.  So, you know, if you go into a brokerage firm, you see that little sign, SIPC and I think the number's up to $250,000 in, in an account that's insured now.  And so that was a very prestigious appointment.  I never got a full time job that was a board.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, you know, a very, very prestigious role to play.  In that regard, since then, I worked for a project for what they call a congressional oversight panel, which really kind of monitored for [U.S.] Congress the whole TARP [Troubled Asset Relief Program] spending.
Speaker 1: That was under the [HistoryMaker] President Barrack Obama then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: The TARP--okay, because--
Story_ID: 643598
Speaker 1: Where are you right now?  Let's talk about where you are right now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Happily.  I would say relative to all the other things so far, actually I'm just getting started.  I'm part of a relatively new African American owned company [The BondFactor Company, LLC], and I feel that everything I've ever done before was preparing me to be part of this.  When I say what I do, and my friends see how excited I am, their eyes kind of glaze over and said, "You know, we always thought she was strange.  Right," (laughter)?  They say, "What could she be excited about?"  It's municipal bond insurance, and you know, life is a circle, I believe.  And so I am working with someone I worked with at the beginning of my Wall Street career at Salomon Brothers, who went on after Solly, left the (unclear) business, to Goldman [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] where he spent most of his career.  Who is a brilliant lawyer and investment banker, a mathematician.  I'm sure you would know of his mother, Goler Butcher, and his name is George Butcher [George H. Butcher, III].  And so George invented and patented a new way to do municipal bond insurance.  And this industry completely imploded in the 2008 crisis.  So we have a new way to make this product, in essence.  And we will be coming to market sometime next year and, you know, with what is really a revolutionary breakthrough approach that is going to position us in a way that we will be the next major capital markets event for an African American company since Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] did the leverage buyout of TLC Beatrice [Beatrice Foods TLC; TLC Beatrice International Holdings, Inc.].  And that, I might add, was twenty-five years ago, so it's time.
Story_ID: 643599
Speaker 1: You talk about this, you know, really being able to make a mark with what you're doing there.  What, what are your plans, you know, for, it's called the bar--
Speaker 2: The BondFactor [The BondFactor Company, LLC].
Speaker 1: The BondFactor.  So what, what are your plans and where do you see the growth and the positioning of, of the municipal--
Speaker 2: Of the company?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Of the company.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the municipal market is almost a $4 trillion market, $3.7 trillion.  And before the crisis, about half of the new issue market was insured and maybe a third of what we call the secondary market.  And there were seven companies with about a $40 billion market cap.  They all, except for one, got completely wiped out during the crisis.  So, there's a vacuum, and the opportunity to, we have the opportunity to be the first African American company in the United States of America to be the leader in its industry, period.  So that's the opportunity.  You know, municipalities issue debt and if they, what we provide is basically a credit substitution.  If they're A rated, and we're AAA rated, then they borrow at our rates.  Okay?  And we ensure the timely kind of payment principle interest similarly in the secondary market.  Once bonds have already been issued, they can get insured in the secondary market.  And municipals are very much a retail product, and so retail investors seek safety.  So that is why bond insurance is what's always very important, and even though municipals have been a safe investment sector.  It's a really diverse one, so there are thousands of issuers and thousands of different kinds of credit, so it's very difficult to analyze and put your arms around so insurance has served to commoditize that marketplace.  So it, and provides a certain liquidity, and so it's very attractive.  And now that we've had about four years where there's been almost no insurance, less than 5 percent of the market.  You know, people have said, "Oh.  Is there really a need for that product now?"  Well, with things like Detroit [Michigan] and Puerto Rico happening, this retail investor who will pay up for security, right?  Because they want to take a municipal bond and put it in a safe and forget about it and go to Florida and they will clip coupons when it's time, right?  So people have become skittish and that's what is called headline risk.  So insurance becomes much more a subject again, and there'll be a viable industry.  And we plan to, and we have the reason that I came and joined George [George H. Butcher, III], was that we were on the phone with a potential investor, and that person said, "Well, what's the goal here, really?"  To which George responded, "To become recognized as the strongest corporate creditor in the world."  Whereupon, I said, "Oh.  I got to go do this with him, right?"  And that is the goal.  And that, and we have eight patents for our approach.  And so, we expect to, we know that we are a triple A credit, we expect for the market to recognize us as such over a period of time.  And, you know, to occupy a really unique space in an area which there is actual, very healthy demand.
Story_ID: 643600
Speaker 1: You know, I wanna ask about the, just this almost, well, thirty year period, thirty to forty year period of blacks in finance.  And what you see as pivotal moments with that history, and what you see as sort of opportunities because it's had, you know, it's sort of been up and down.  A lot of excitement when things happen, then some retrenchment, but what, when you look at that, 'cause, how would you describe it?  What were the pivotal moments in it, where are the opportunities going forward?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the pivotal moments have been the emergence of blacks in decision making roles over large amounts of money.  So that has been mayors, comptrollers, treasurers of state funds, for instance, right?  That's what's been pivotal, all other things being equal.  So that emergence has made a very big difference.  Firms started hiring minorities, right?  It's just like, you know, we wanna be in China, so a lot of firms hire Chinese people who would get them to the people who make decisions, right?  No different.  So that happened.  Now of course, we've had a couple of decades where people of color have gained lots of experience in this arena.  So in my view, the next wave is us being bold enough to go out on our own in our own firms and really build businesses.  Now the fundamental challenge in that is that this is a business, an industry driven by capital.  And that is what, you know, has been the barrier, because we haven't typically had access to it.  So that is the challenge that has to be met and there are lots of ways to meet it.  You know, one is for a lot of people who've had the experience in different places, rather than going out, you know, I'll be a fixed income, income house, I'll be an equity house, I'll be a this or that.  To come together and do some things that are required at a level of scale that they can be powerful.  So, and it still for us is the nexus of politics and this finance world at every level where it's, it's what's necessary for us to move forward because I wanna see the day when somebody African American can sit down and say, "Yeah, I've been here four generations, seven years and four generations," 'cause I need an answer to that question.  So that really is kind of what I'm all about.  What is the answer to that question?  I have never actually put it that way until this moment, but that's what I'm seeking the answer to that question.
Story_ID: 643601
Speaker 1: When you talk, spoke about Travers Bell--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about his legacy within the--and what he did?
Speaker 2: Well, 'cause you, you had asked me about what were influences on me. You know, I knew Travers very well and--
Speaker 1: How had you gotten to first meet him?
Speaker 2: A really good friend of mine was his cousin and she was like family.  And so then I knew him in that way, kind of familiarly.  And then we just became really good friends and, oh, I was so, when he opened his doors on Wall Street, first of all, I could count the times I had ever even been down there.  And you know, it's those narrow streets and tall buildings, so you're kind of like looking up like, "Ooh!  What's this, you know, little world down here?"  Right?  And when he opened his doors, I was like, too thrilled with, "What?  A black man with his own firm [Daniels and Bell Inc.]," and he had the chocolate company, cocoa line.  And so I was just, just bowled over to see, I mean, this was really a long time ago.  This had to be like in--
Speaker 1: Well, it was early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yes, early '80s [1980s].  So, I mean, I had no words to describe how excited I was.  And so, I mean, he really was pivotal in my thinking about going to the street, 'cause you know, you, often you have to see it first, you know?  And, and he was from that Chicago [Illinois] mentality.  He was like, you know, he was not an Ivy League type at all.  He was much more rough and tough, you know?  And, you know, "I'm just gonna do this," and I kind of liked that and so it was very, very, very pivotal in my thinking about coming to the street and what could be accomplished there.
Speaker 1: So what was his dream?  What was he doing?  Where was, so can you describe this firm?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, first of all, he was, he was so far ahead of his time because it wasn't just, you know, making his mark on Wall Street.  First of all, you know, he got into a bruising battle to buy Freedom Bank [Freedom National Bank, New York, New York].  So that was a whole other thing and he was going up against Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] and David Rockefeller, and I was going like, "Hm."  Just the whole concept of, you know, being able to be in that position, right?  And then, he was very much involved in Africa because, cocoa line and the cocoa that he bought, you know.  So, you know, he had this kind of international viewpoint and he was very interested as I was, of course, coming from Chicago as he did, and power.  And so that was all very intriguing and kind of right up my alley.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite Travers Bell story?
Speaker 2: Do I have a what?
Speaker 1: A, a favorite story of him?  You know, just because he's this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, we'll keep talking. I'll think of one. I'm sure I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Story_ID: 643602
Speaker 1: I wanna talk about if you had it to do over again, would there be things that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, I told you, I feel like I'm just getting started.  Right?  But that aside, are there things that I would do differently?  I don't know.  If I had been a lawyer, I would have become a litigator.  Let me just say this, that in law school, you asked me what that was all like.  People now like, laugh, but they don't really believe me.  But I actually was shy.  And in class I was so, I was deathly afraid.  I wasn't really hearing anything.  I was afraid I would get called on and make a fool out of myself.  So the way I combatted that, was that I always sat in the front row.  Because I said, "If they do call on me, and I do make an idiot out of myself, then the only thing I have to deal with are the people right around me and the professor.  Right?  I won't see the whole room looking at me."  And so I sat in the front.  And I'm not really sure when this transformation came with me not being shy, but I really, really, really, really was.  So, so therefore, when I was in law school, I wouldn't have thought about being a litigator then.  'Cause I was, you know, I was too, you know, (unclear), and all that, I was just not there.  But, you know, having been in some of the battles that I've been through, and survived them, I know I would make a fantastic litigator.  So if, but I wasn't interested in a career in the law.  So I don't know,  I don't think there's, I don't think there's anything I'd, you know, I could have made life a little bit easier on myself.  But it's okay.
Story_ID: 643603
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your civic activities, and what you're, 'cause you've been very civically inclined--have been and continue to be very civically involved. So what are the ones that you are sort of most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, obviously, the, the politics.  You know, I was around in terms of national politics, I really got involved when, well, I mean, always like presidential elections from here in New York [New York].  I was always, my whole life.  I, but I really became proactive when Ron Brown became chair of the DNC [Democratic National Committee].  That was another thing that just knocked me out, right?  And so--
Speaker 1: It was huge at that time?
Speaker 2: Huge.  And so I really, really, gangbusters, you know?  I really wanted to raise money to help him be all he could be in that role.  That just kind of put me in a different kind of orbit, so all of that, that was a lot of fun, and I thought, very meaningful and you know, so, so that whole political realm.  And I was very interested in helping black people get in positions of power.  So all the elections that way, I thought that would be the case, and again, not for themselves, but for what they could do.  Right?  Just intrigued me and got me heavily involved.  And then I've always been interested in the arts.  So I have always had an avid interest in African art in particular.  And African American art, but African art especially.  And so that's taken me into different realms and I hope, one day, to be a philanthropist.  And as such,  I think that those things now and I think about how I think the way that first of all black philanthropy has, it's started to come together.  But that has to be a big focus in terms of our coming together to do things that are impactful.  That's one thing.  But I think the other is that if everybody just stops, and looks around the place that they are, or that they came from, and really makes a really concerted effort in those places, that you can make a really, really, really big difference.  You know, things kind of get dispersed, and you're giving to ten different things that, but I think if you focus on what you care about and what the deeds are, right where they are, that you can really, really make a big difference.  And I truly believe that our circumstance is not gonna change fundamentally until we do something about it.  Because whether, I thought one question you would ask me, I'll answer it myself, ask it.  Is about, you know, progress.  Do I see progress (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I wou- I was getting ready to ask that question about--
Story_ID: 643604
Speaker 1: Let me ask the question from a political standpoint since a lot of, and then I, an overall standpoint.  But politically, you've seen a lot of both local and national politics from a black perspective over, you know several decades.  And my question for you is, where do you see us right now?  And what do you think the most important time period was?  Or is?
Speaker 2: For bla- ?
Speaker 1: For blacks in politics?  Black political movements?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, well, you know, obviously the civil rights struggle was, you know, the raison d'etre of everything.  But now, I think that what's really important for us, well, first of all, I think that demo- demographics are destiny.  And we live in a completely different environment.  The world is not black and white.  And that's a prism naturally that we've seen things through.  But if I become a philanthropist, in my lifetime, one of the things that I am going to put a lot of money in is the, is making sure that black children know how to speak Spanish.  Because we are in a world that people of color, not just black and white.  And we have to have really strong coalitions.  And I feel that the only barrier, real barrier in terms of Hispanic people, of course, they're not, you know, one monolithic group, but, so I'm making generalities.  But, you know, in terms of culture, history, food, music, et cetera, we have so much in common.  And the main barrier is language.  And if we overcome that barrier, it will be a whole other world.  And to me, that is a pretty simple thing.  Of course, first we, our children have to learn how to speak English also, right?  But that said, that, that to me is really, really, really important.  We live in a different kind of world, and going forward, we have to think differently.  So that's one thing.  And the other, now that we're in this Internet age, is that I would like to see a much stronger nexus between African Americans and Africans, those sort of things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, and you, so that's, so that's politically what you would like to see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 643605
Speaker 1: What about things that you would like to still, still--horizons?  You came of an age where, you know, and I think about you and your father [Roy Spraggins] and his friends.  But first, you know, you were a first yourself when firsts were so important.  Now you've seen a lot of firsts.  What do you think was important moving forward in terms of black accomplishments and--
Speaker 2: Entrepreneurship, no question about it.  It's that simple, right?  So, I was saying, our destiny's not going to change until we change it.  So, you know, we now have skills we didn't have, experience we didn't have, and so, I think there's something that has to change in our mindset.  You know, because of our history, security is so important to us.  And so we have not really, in these last, sev- many decades been risk takers.  And you know, your parents tell you to be a doctor, lawyer, Indian [Native American] chief, anything that involves any risk, they don't even want to hear about it, right?  And I really don't think that's changed that much, so I think, okay.  When I was at Salomon Brothers, there was a guy there in our class who, and everybody was busy trying to jockey for position, to get to know this partner, work with this one.  This guy, he was in his own zone.  Right?  He was just doing the work.  Why?  Because he was from the Bellsburgh [sic. Reichmann] family in Canada, Olympia and York.  And it was so clear to me looking at him, he didn't really talk to many people, right?  He was sent there to learn what he was supposed to learn from Salomon Brothers and go back home and use it.  Right?  And I feel that if we look at these situations that we go to in that way, that this is postgraduate work.  But you're not there to be defined by somebody else, and you know, just, your whole attitude would be so much different if whatever the travails you have to deal with, if you'll realize then that that's what you're there for.  To get what you need to know, to take it out and take it to the next level.  Because that's one thing.  The other is that I talked about our barrier being access to capital.  There are enough pockets of capital among us now to rescale, but they have not come together.  And that is, I don't know how, really that's the challenge of the century to me.  It's about how to make that come together in a way that our future can be different.  Because, to me, there's no question we've made unbelievable progress in areas we've just never could have imagined.  But, it is my view that it's the same people.  It's Du Bois' [W.E.B. Du Bois] Talented Tenth.  So before it was, you were a skycap or a redcap, and your children became a teacher or a doctor or a lawyer.  And so those children are now becoming the investment banker or the software person or whatever, right?  But it's the same people.  And so, but the mass of black people, things are worse than ever, right?  And as far as I'm concerned, as long as my name is [HistoryMaker] Marianne Camille Spraggins, and I have to walk out this door and put my hand up to get a taxi, and can get one, I am who that person driving that cab thinks a black person is.  That's who I am in America.  And so, I can't, you know, you say, "Oh, wait a minute. Here's my Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] degree.  Take me.  Right?"  So that's meaningless.  Right?  So whatever plight of the average black person in America is all of our plights, and that has to get fixed.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we have to do it.
Story_ID: 643606
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the black community then?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I take the subway in New York [New York] (laughter).  And when I see these teenagers who, I'm talking about that learning Spanish, who can't speak the English language.  Who to me, with these pants falling off, and this ridiculous behavior, are to me, screaming out for somebody to discipline them.  That's what that all means to me.  They are saying, you know, "Save me from myself."  And you know, that's fundamental.  It has to start early and otherwise, I don't really know what's gonna happen to us.
Speaker 1: So that's your concern?  Your hopes, I think, you've addressed in, in some respects.
Speaker 2: I think we're so far behind.  I think we're so ill prepared.  I think, we now are in an environment we've really not even thought about that much.  You know, as civil rights, you know, the civil rights issue right now is, what do you call it, LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender].  Not African Americans, not Hispanics, right?  And so, you know, we're kind of like being left at the wayside, and what's gonna happen?
Speaker 1: That's right. So now, I wanna, there are a lot of issues along, along that regard.
Story_ID: 643607
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your discussion about your interest in African art.  Because that is unusual.  You know, there have not been collectors, or that people interested in African art, a lot of times have been more the majority community.
Speaker 2: And European.
Speaker 1: And Europeans.  So can you talk about that and when the interest came to be, and?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a friend who was an African art dealer, you know, early in my life.  And I think that was my first exposure.  I just fell in, I just had a connection to it and fell in love with it.  And speaking of the little highlights, I remember going to an opening and I had bought a piece, and I said, "You couldn't say that I had bought it, right?"  And so I went to this exhibit opening and there were all these art historians and so forth, and I just stood there and watched them talk about the piece and how fabulous it was and I knew that it was mine (laughter).  So it just makes me happy.
Speaker 1: But, so how avid a collector have you been and what areas of Africa have you collected.  'Cause you know, when I think of African art, I think of Nelson Rockefeller because he sort of, you know, that's, he had amassed a huge collection--
Speaker 2: Well certainly I don't have one like his.
Speaker 1: No, I know, but I--
Speaker 2: But, but the antiquities and mostly from western Africa.  I had the pleasure of going to an auction in Paris [France] a couple years ago where there's a collection called the Verite [Pierre and Claude Verite] collection, and this is someone who had amassed an unbelievable amount of African art.  And that's where Picasso [Pablo Picasso], from that dealer, had his first exposure.  And used to buy from, and anyway, they were selling the collection and a lot of it had never been seen before.  And so, you know, I ended up being lucky enough to be in the front row for like, three days and just see every piece brought out and described and, you know, for training my eye.  It was just an unbelievable experience, but you know, I think it's undervalued and it's, it's just, you know, artists understand its value, you know?  So I think it's just an unbelievable treasure and I'm happy to have tried to develop somewhat of an eye.  And hope more people do.
Speaker 1: So you have pieces from, what's the, Benin?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I have a number of pieces from the Cross River area, from Benin, from Ghana, from Nigeria, number of antiquities.
Speaker 1: And what does that say, what is your interest in that?  And you've spoken about that as it relates to Mandela [Nelson Mandela], but let's say the African diaspora.  Can you talk about that a little bit?  'Cause sometimes people, African Americans in the United States are not as knowledgeable of things outside, you know, of the African diaspora outside?
Speaker 2: Well, I just met this very incredible young woman named Hadeel Ibrahim.  And, you know, we were going to have an African art museum, a new one here in New York [New York].  And they weren't able to raise the financing for it.  However, she has taken over this project to make it, it's gonna be a museum [The Africa Center, New York, New York], but also other arts.  More cultural, some are performing arts broader, but it's also, I'm gonna say, it's gonna be a cross between The Asia Society and the Council on Foreign Relations.  It's going to be the center for African commerce happening in the U.S. and those who want to be part of it.  It's going to be a private club, and it's going to be absolutely--never existed before in the United States and wonderful.  And she said, "You know--," and she wants to have a strong nexus to the African American community.  She says, "Because you know, we're all from Africa.  It's that simple, right?" (Laughter) Right?  And I feel that the art, as in many things, is a connector, you know?  And so that's kind of how I see it, also.
Story_ID: 643608
Speaker 1: What do you want to remembered for?
Speaker 2: Why?  Am I about to die (laughter)?  That's a joke, right?
Speaker 1: No.  Remember, you're just starting.
Speaker 2: Right, no, I know.  I'm--no, no, no.  I think I would like to be remembered as, you know, somebody who stood up to power.  Who can will things to happen as they're supposed to?  Who moves forward, period.  You know?  I started to say, who's not afraid, but we're all afraid sometimes about something.  But who, you know, sets a really, really, really, well, my father [Roy Spraggins] set such a really, really, really high goal.  Probably higher than anything I could ever imagine, and close to it.  One time I was, or this friend of mine took me, kind of like, on this hike.  I wasn't, I thought we were going to brunch and we ended up on Camelback Mountain in Scottsdale [sic. Phoenix, Arizona].  And I was saying, "You don't understand who I am.  I'm a girl from New York [New York] who's in five inch heels.  Why am I here, right?"  But as we got to a certain, there, you know, climbing this mountain with, with a rescue people from all the time, right?  But it's like, every day, it's like here running around the reservoir [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir, New York, New York] or something, right?  So people are like passing us by with babies on their backs and all that.  I'm like having a heart in my throat, and we got to a certain point and I said, "I cannot go any farther."  We had, and it's, you know, hot as Hades.  Right?  I said, "I cannot go any farther."  And we looked out, you know, this unbelievable vista, and he said, "You know what, Marianne [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins]?"  He said, "It's just like life."  He said, "At every level, you look out and you see something different, and the whole world looks completely different."  And I never forgot that.  So to me, it all means that you just, how I remember, that, you know, you just keep, you're never done.  You just keep climbing, and you know, you think differently, you see differently.  The whole world opens up differently.  And that only inspires you to go even further.
Story_ID: 643609
Speaker 1: --Wall Street.  I, you know, apart from the obvious reasons of things I talked about, about power, is that I felt that I would never have the luxury of feeling I fit in.  You know, that's the phrase they use when they wanna get rid of you.  So, you know, they won't say, "You're fired," or whatever, they just say, "You know, you're lovely," or something, "this just isn't quite a fit."  Right?  So somehow I knew I was never gonna be really quite a fit.  So therefore, I decided that I had to do something that was quantifiable.  'Cause you might hate me, but at the end of the day, here's how I ran that cash register and we both know how to count.  And so here's what I'm entitled to.  Okay?  And so that is why I chose a profession where that is crystal clear.  And so that if there're ever any issues around it, it is easy to define and therefore, easy to reach a conclusion about.
Speaker 2: So what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 1: I didn't answer you yet? (Laughter) I'm sorry.  I guess that I didn't take no for an answer.  I don't take no for an answer.  And I will fight to the death for what I believe is right.
Story_ID: 643610
Speaker 1: You know, we talked about your father [Roy Spraggins], and the role that he played in your life.  And that you were a daddy's girl.  And he did not really get to see you, you know.  But he saw, no, he never, he never, he didn't, he wasn't alive when you went to law school?
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But his death actually motivated you to really get on the track to fulfill his, his version of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, his version of your dream.  So what would he, when you think back about, you know, him being your biggest advocate, him believing in you, him guiding, you know, the arc of your, your life, what do you think he would think?  And what would you like to, you know, even have him know about how his daughter, you know, and to sort of fulfill his dreams?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I hope that he would be proud.  But honestly, like, I don't feel like, you know, first this, first that.  But really, like, I've accomplished so much.  I feel like I'm doing what I was supposed to do, what I was prepared to do.  And that if I did something else, he would have, you know, been pissed off, right?  That, you know, it's not me.  I was given the wherewithal.  That's why I said I could look that man dead in the eye and say, "You have no idea who you're dealing with here."  Right?  So, I was prepared for it.  I was, in every way, equipped as much as another person can equip you.  And so, it's like a responsibility, I feel, to live out, you know, what was prepared for me.  So I'm just a vehicle is, I guess, what I'm saying.  And that's why I don't even feel, you know, so much like I've done anything so great, right?  I just am doing the things I'm supposed to do and I, the more obstacles I face, the better I do.  Am I answering you?
Speaker 1: Yes.  You, 'cause you have to answer for it.  But, what would you say to your father today if you were talking to him?
Speaker 2: How am I doing?  I would say, I feel like the luckiest person in the world to have grown up the way I did and to have been cared about so much.  When I look at, you know, friends or whatever, who didn't have the benefit of a father, or the kind of relationship, I feel so lucky.  Right?  And grateful.  And that, that's it.  I just feel very, very, very thankful that I have a responsibility, and that I still haven't fulfilled it.  And that I'm still very much, I know I'm very much a work in progress.  And my father was nicer than I am.  Not that I'm not nice, but he had a different temperament, you know?  So I can probably hear him saying, "Now Marianne [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins], be nice, be nice." (Laughter) Right?  I think, I think he would be, I think he would be proud.
