Story_ID: 565907
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and Scott Stearns is videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including middle name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Sanders-Butler, Y-V-O-N-N-E, Sanders, S-A-N-D-E-R-S, hyphen Butler, B-U-T-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: November 27, 1957.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Vaughan, Mississippi, V-A-U-G-H-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Ellenwood, Georgia.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an educator and an author.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 25, 2007.
Story_ID: 565908
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Mm.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm wearing it, yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Watermelon (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Normally, I'm going back to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Going home.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, or bible verse?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite saying and it is, when you know better, you do better.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
Story_ID: 565909
Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your family, and we'll start on your mother's side.  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ruthie Mae Waters Sanders [Ruthie Waters Sanders].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Yazoo County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Y-A-Z-O-O.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She shared a lot of stories about her growing up as a young girl, and going to school, basically, growing up in rural Mississippi.  She was member of the Church of God in Christ, and at that time, that was not one of the largest denomination of churches.  And now she would tell me sometimes the people used to call them the crazy saints.  And before she passed she said, "Isn't that strange?  Now, everybody seems to be a crazy saint."  And she talked about just how difficult the times were growing up in a rural area without, without plumbing, not very much money, and how hard they used to work in the cotton fields.  And she would talk about her father riding a horse to go and, and get foods or certain supplies that they needed.  And just how harsh the winters were, because the houses were not very well built.  Normally, they were someone that they rented from and she just said it was very, very, challenging.  She was a twin.  And her sister died when she was three years old.  And actually although I've always know her as Ruthie Mae Waters Sanders, her name was actually Ernestine Waters, and her sister was Christine [Christine Waters], but they believed that it was bad luck if one twin passed and the other kept its name, that perhaps they wouldn't live.  So, they changed her name at that time.  Her mother died in a car accident when she was fifteen years old, and she was also married shortly after that.  And she just talked about how difficult it was growing up, becoming a woman without a mother.  And she felt that she was blessed because she had seen most of her children grow up to be adults.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: Eighth grade.  My mother went to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.  I did not know my mother's father or mother.  They were deceased by the time I was born.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's father was Shepherd Waters, and my mother's mother was Elizabeth Waters [Elizabeth Hayes Waters].
Speaker 1: Now, you said that they lived on land that they rented?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were sharecroppers as well.
Story_ID: 565910
Speaker 1: What about your father?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is West Sanders.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about his parents.
Speaker 2: I only knew my grandfather.  We called him Papa.  His is--was Jackson Sanders.  And my father's mother [Cornelius Hewitt Sanders] died before I was born and at a pretty young age as well.  And so, I've just heard all of the great stories.  What a great grandmom she was, and she was a great seamstress, seamstress as well.  And that she sewed for so many of the people in the community, especially the whites, very artistic, and died from cancer I believe.  And my grandfather who we all called Papa Jack, Jackson Sanders, he was a person that was very skilled.  When people would come through to hunt, he would often lead those people to the best hunting sights.  And basically, just a farmer that worked the land, and lived off the land.
Speaker 1: Did they own land?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, they also--
Speaker 2: Yes, they rented.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Is there a story about, about any of the relatives besides your, beyond your grandparents?  Was there any talk of any of your relatives being in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I believe that my great-great-great-grandmother was Celie Sanders [ph.], and that was my grandfather's mother, great-grandmother, about them being in slavery.  And, and when they were trying to get away, get out of slavery, sometimes women would leave to gather and to protect themselves, they would break like, the limbs out of trees.  So, that if there would be people, especially, the white bounty hunters or men that would find them, they knew that they would never go back.  And so, you know, they would take and they would light these limbs to sort of find their way to where they were going, and even fight to save their lives if at all possible.  But just, people that had great courage and just great spirit about them.  And some people would say that they see some of that in me, because it seemed that, you know, I love to champion certain causes.  Yes.
Story_ID: 565911
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] and father [West Sanders] met?
Speaker 2: Basically, what I've been told, my mother's mother [Elizabeth Hayes Waters] was killed in an accident.  Actually, her sons, my uncles had came to take her to Chicago [Illinois] so that she could see, you know, what the city was like.  She had never left off the farm, worked very, very hard.  And they had an accident and hit, hit ice, black ice, and they hit a bridge and she was killed instantly.  My mother was approaching fifteen, and they were getting ready to send her off to school, to a school that was basically run by the Church of God in Christ called Saints Academy [Saints Industrial and Literary School, Lexington, Mississippi].  And that school has a very, very historical background because it was ran by Arenia Mallory who was also very close to Mary Leod Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune].  And so, she had seen this young man who was just daring and dashing and absolutely handsome that she had become fond of.  And so, her older brother, since she was the youngest, and sisters had decided she was going off to school to be educated.  And so, I guess she had other thoughts, and so, she actually married my father and she never went away to school.  But just hearing people talk about them, they were a dashing couple, very, very young thought.  Because I think my mother had just turned fifteen and my father was eighteen years of age at that time.  And so they were married and nine months or ten months after that they had their first daughter [Dorothy Sanders Walls].
Story_ID: 565912
Speaker 1: So your father [West Sanders] grew up in the same county [Yazoo County, Mississippi] as your--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, you are born in 1957?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.  Are you the oldest or is there other siblings that are older than you?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm actually, number six.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, there're seven girls.  I have six sisters.  And my youngest brother is deceased--only one brother by my mother and father and I have truly champions for older sisters and younger sisters.  In coming up in the family that I came up in, they were very focused, very focused young women, and they were educated.  It was very important to my parents that we had an education.  My father had a third grade education, and my mother had an eighth grade educations.  And they believed, even then, that the, the way for us to be really free was to be educated.  And so, we grew up as very strong young women, and my sisters went off to, my oldest sister went off to college.  The first person in our family that had ever gone to college.  And so, it was very, very exciting.  She was very focused.  And then, my second sister who did not go to college but eventually became a hair, a hair stylist, and my third sister went to medical school.
Speaker 1: Let's, let's list their names.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do them in order.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then where you fit in.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister is Dorothy Sanders Walls, and she was a graduate of Jackson State University [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]; Jackson State, the home of the Tigers.  She also attended Ole Miss University [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi].  You hear about the Peytons; Peyton Manning and all of those people.  She actually was his father's classmate, Archie Manning.  And she paved the way for all of us because her husband [Johnnie E. Walls, Jr.] who she would marry became, they became very active in the civil rights.  And he was one of the early African Americans to attend, actually to be accepted into law school there at Ole Miss.  And so, we began at an early age because he ran illegal services in the Delta--Greenwood, Mississippi--to be exposed to the Civil Rights Movement and to take part in that.  My second sister who's Lillie Sanders Noel; very creative, very artistic, the artist of the family, went to school.  She did not attend college.  She did go to school to become a hair stylist, and she still does that today.  And she still lives--they, both my oldest sister Dorothy, and Lillie, they both live in Mississippi.  My third oldest sister is Shirley C. Sanders, Cornelia Sanders [Shirley Sanders].  She's named for my, her middle name is my fathers' mother's name, Cornelius [Cornelius Hewitt Sanders].  She actually has been an advocate all of her life.  She went to medical school.  She went to St. Joe's [ph.] in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and then to Mayo medical college [Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota], and graduated there.  And she did that for many, many years, and now she does, she owns her own business.  She's an expert witness most of the time, and she works different cases where there has been alleged people that have fallen to ill will in medical malpractices and things of that nature.  And it's really nice because she never leaves her home and she's consulting with attorneys all over the country.  And so, we grew up in the cotton field together and sometimes we laugh about that, because I'm a little younger than she is.  And how when I couldn't pick all of my cotton, she'd give me some of hers because I was always trying to buy something to go to school with, and so.
Story_ID: 565913
Speaker 1: Then my fourth sister is Doris Sanders [Doris Sanders Porter], and she works as an administrator in a bank.  And we grew up calling her the black Farrah Fawcett.  She has very long hair, and she is such a lady, just so sensitive.  And we, we don't know how she survived the cotton field, but she survived it.  But she's off into health and keeping your body together, and so, she's always calling me to say, "Are you doing this?"  You know, "You taking care of yourself?"  And all of those type things, and so, just a joy.  And then there is number five, Betty [Betty Sanders Mayfield], who was really my big sister and she has been.  We are three years apart and we were in elementary school together.  And she always fought all of my battle (laughter), and so, I think when you have that relationship, even though, we all have, we both have older sisters, she tells everybody, "I am her big sister."  And so, I sort of became really dependent on her because I knew she could make things happen for me, and she could open doors and, you know, if something was going wrong, she would make it right.  And so, it was sort of difficult really growing up and, and stepping out there and not looking back for her.  We were in high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi], we were in this dance troupe together.  And she was the lead dancer.  And I think I just begged so much to be in the dance troupe, and Betty was so good that the dance instructor let me in.  But, of course, I have ADD, attention deficit disorder, so I forget things like, my steps and my moves and so Betty would be up front and they--she would always put me behind her.  And she'd count off for me.  And so, that's how I always knew to where I, I should be all the time.  And then she left and went to another school.  And I said, oh, my god, what am I gonna do?  She's not gonna be there.  So, she'd tell me, you know, how to make it work for me.  And she said, "You can do it.  You can do it.  You just gotta know that you can do it.  And remember me counting."  And so, I would actually hear her counting and I would go from there.  And so, she's in education.  She works in technology and media.  And there is still that bond, that, you know, this is my big sister and, you know, she'll make it happen for me.  And actually, I lived in Louisiana before I came here twenty-two years ago.  I tell people that there was a pre-Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] twenty-two years ago and it was called Hurricane Juan.  Most of the flooding happened in New Orleans [Louisiana] on the east bank, but I lived on the west bank in Marrero [Louisiana] and we was flooded.  We lost our home and everything that we owned.  And of course, the same thing that is occurring with FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] now happened with FEMA twenty-two years ago.  And so, I actually moved here with Betty after just trying to hang on and just trying to make it work, and stay in Louisiana.  And she encourage Floyd [Sanders-Butler's husband, Floyd Butler] and I to come here.  So, probably I would not be in education today, because I would've never moved here.  And probably would not be doing most of the things that I'm doing now, because I actually came out of corporate, and she talked me into going into the school system.  And that's probably why I'm a principal today, and an educator today and doing a lot of the things that I'm doing because of Betty.  And then there's me.
Story_ID: 565914
Speaker 1: Now, talk to me about where you grew up.  Tell me about the neighborhood and the people who lived in the community.
Speaker 2: I tell people, I first remember, I think I first remember me at maybe two or three years old, and my nickname is, everyone calls me, Sugar Woman, where I'm from.  No one ever has called me Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  I don't even know if most of the people know that (laughter) my name is Yvonne at all.  And I love that name.  My father [West Sanders] and my uncles affectionately gave me that name because at an early age, I ate tons of sugar.  My father would go to Louisiana and work in the sugarcane farm, and he'd bring back these long pieces of cane.  And I would see them when they put 'em out at the road and he'd already have a piece cut down for me.  And I would eat sugarcane all day, all night, just addicted to it.  But I had these really round and plumped cheeks, and they're still plump; I think that's my signature.  And the people would, would pinch 'em, my uncles would pinch 'em and they'd say, "Oh, my god, she has sugar in 'em."  And so, they said, "We gonna call her the Sugar Woman."  And so, I remember being three years old.  We lived in a house with maybe four rooms, but I believe that it was three rooms.  My sister said we had a fourth room, but that's what I remember.  And it was poorly built.  I can remember that the house was on, like, tree trunks that had been cut off, and they held the porch up.  And it wasn't any grass in the yard.  I guess we played all the grass away.  And I can remember my mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] was extremely clean and she would make us sweep the yard.  And I always wondered, it's only dirt.  And we had to sweep the yard in the afternoon.  But I actually started to school when I was four years old.  My sisters, older sisters would get on the bus, and I would cry every morning because they left me.  And in the afternoon, I would wait at the bus stop.  And I see the bus coming and I just start running down the road to meet the bus.  And that was okay because a car only came through every four or five hours, because people really didn't have that many cars back then.  And so, one day the bus driver said, "Let her go to school."  And so, my mother got me ready and I went to school and I really wasn't in a class, because they didn't have a class for me.  And so, I just went from room to room and helped people.
Story_ID: 565915
Speaker 1: And before I turned five we moved to another place called Ebenezer, Mississippi, and I actually stated kindergarten there [Ebenezer Elementary School, Ebenezer, Mississippi].  And the principal was my first, second, third grade teacher, and she ran the school.  And basically, we had a school that was next to a women's prison and a church.  And I can remember when someone died, at an early age we went to funerals, because teachers would wanna go to the funeral.  So, we sat in the back of the church, and I thought that not strange, but sort of strange.  Most of the people we really didn't know but we stayed.  And then the after--when we went out or recess, I can remember watching the women.  They would be in like the striped dresses and they will have ball and chains on.  And I would go up in the top of the tree so that I could see them and they would--some of them would sing and some of them would be crying, and I never understood that.  It always sort of upset me why they were there, and why men were out there with guns, you know, watching them.  And sometimes I think, because I was very active as a child in elementary school, my teacher would let me go out and dust the erasers and do all of this stuff.  And I would go and slip and go to the fence to talk to them.  And they would tell me, "Go--it's time for you to go back now, learn all that you can.  Learn all that you can so that you can help others."  And they were like my friends to me, and so, I would sneak out at a certain time every day and I'd go to the fence to see them sing and sway, and then it'd be time for them to come back into their building and, you know, they would pick up their chains and go back.  And I just said, you know, I don't ever wanna be like that.  Why aren't they out?  Why can't they be free?  You know, why are they locked up?  So in between this two room schoolhouse where everybody went and we had like these things that separate our walls from each other.  All the kids were just like there together.  And I can remember one of the best things that happened to me in that school because we had to go get coal for the fire.  We had a party, and the party was called a heaven and hell party.  And so, all the little kids that were like kindergarten, first, and second went to heaven; you automatically went to heaven.  All the older kids went to hell.  So, in hell they had music.  They had James Brown.  They had punch.  They had hot potato chips.  In heaven we had Kool-Aid and cookies.  And all my sisters were in hell and I remember crying because I wanted to be with them and they said, "Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler], but you're in the best place.  You're in heaven."  And I said, "But, I don't wanna be in heaven.  I wanna go to hell.  I wanna be with my sisters."  And so actually, they gave me a pass and I went to hell, and my sisters hated me for it.  Because I was supposed to be in the little kids' party, you know, that was in heaven.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Story_ID: 565916
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned, I wanna just go back, just a little bit.  Two questions: your grandmother on your father's side, what was her name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother on, on my father's, my grandmother was Cornelius, Cornelius Sanders [Cornelius Hewitt Sanders].  My third sister, Shirley [Shirley Sanders], is named, her middle name if Cornelius.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you mentioned a brother but you didn't put him in the progression.
Speaker 2: Well, because he is the youngest, and I didn't even, I named myself, but then I have sister that's younger than I am, Annette Sanders Roberts.  She's a principal in DeKalb County schools [DeKalb County School District] as well.  And actually she's my baby--my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] actually gave each one of us to one of our siblings that were older.  And so, she actually gave her to me.  And so, I guess, it was something if anything ever happens to me, I'll be the person that is responsible for taking care of you.  And so, actually, Annette, very shy, was very shy as a young girl.  I just thought that she wasn't gonna ever talk.  I can't even ever remember her talking before she was six years old.  Very, very tiny.  And I told somebody at an early age, I love sugar so and I told her I said, "Look, don't ever eat sugar, you have to give me everything that's sweet, because if you do, you're gonna die."  She said, "So, does that mean that you're gonna die?"  I said, "Yep, but it's too late for me.  But, you can still live."  And so, she probably was seven old before she ever knew what sugar tasted like.  And I know, I'm horrible (laughter).  But, that's true.  And she's still a, she's grown up and she talks, she still has this quite spirit.  Our birthdays are four days--four years and a day apart.  I was born November 27th, and she was November 28th.  And we are very opposite of each other.  I'm very outspoken and just out there, and she's very laid back and very easy going and very smooth, and so, that's my youngest sisters.  And our brother Johnathan [Johnathan Sanders] who basically was the apple of all of our eyes, I believe.  People used to tell my father [West Sanders] because every time he had a baby it was a girl, and everybody else had boys.  And so, my father who is a jokester and just a great person said, "You know, boys have boys, but men had girls."  And so, his next baby was a boy.  My son [sic.] Johnathan, we all called him Man, M-A-N, Johnathan Man Sanders and just a great kid.  He grew up before his time.  We all thought that he was a little Michael Jackson and we just all just doted on him.  He, today, would be thirty-nine years old, and he actually drowned in Hawaii on vacation, the second day.  He had taken a break from college to go on vacation with two of my sisters' nurses, and drowned the second day that he was there.  He was born on January 15th, and as you know, that's the birthday of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And something was special about him, the first day that we ever saw him, and, it continued to be that day.  And I don't think a day goes by that I don't wake up thinking about him or see him smiling.  Such a handsome young man, just a great person.  I miss him terribly.
Story_ID: 565917
Speaker 1: Let's go back and talking a little more about your parents, and tell me what your mother and father did for a living.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Basically, my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] was a stay at home mom because in the area that I grew up, there wasn't a lot of work to do.  At my early years, basically, most of the jobs were jobs for men or you worked as a cook or something like that.  My mother was very, very strong, and so, there was certainly things that you wasn't going to do and she didn't do.  She had enough kids so she really had a full-time job.  But my father, who I believe that I am a lot alike, not only in features but personality.  He was a jack of all trades.  He was a master mechanic although he did not learn to read and write his name until he was like thirty-two years old.  Very, very brilliant man.  And so, he would rebuild race cars for some of the landowners for them and for their sons, and also he sharecropped as well.  And in the winters, in my earlier years, he would go to Louisiana and work, because there was no work where we were from.  And basically, he stayed with jobs that had to do with agriculture, building, rebuilding machinery.  And then he became a car salesman which probably was what he was destined to be because he is a great salesman.  And also, he became an advocate for people that he believed was less fortunate than he was, championing their causes and I think that that's who I am.  And we had never had much growing up.  But what we did, is that we had faith and we had belief that what we were doing as a people would make a difference in other people's lives.  And people would tell you that my daddy could sell anything.  I never will forget one time, somebody says, I know this for a fact that he sold this car.  And he was telling this guy, he was saying, "Fellow this is a great car.  All you gotta do is take care of it."  And he said, "Mr. Sanders [West Sanders], I really think so."  He says, "Now, you got everything you need."  He said, "Just do what I'm telling you, and it'll work."  He said, "Now, the only other thing you need, you need a motor."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: "And I can even tell you where to get that from."  So, when you can sell a car without a motor, that's a good salesman.  But he took care of people.  I tell people that my daddy will cosign for people's cars.  I mean, and I--my mother hated that.  She always said my daddy would've been a millionaire, but that his heart was just so huge.  And that he felt that people deserved a chance and that, you know, if you can help somebody--she said, "Yeah, I think that's great, but you don't have to cosign for everybody in world to have a car," (laughter).  But those was things that he did.  And he became known for that he could fix things.  If there were political campaigns and people running to be senators or representatives, they knew that it was important that they got my dad's approval.  And he was always honest about who he felt would be best for our community or for the people or if he felt somebody was getting shafted on something.  And here was man that didn't have a high school, elementary diploma, high school, college, and there was these people that would come to seek his advice.  And even now when I go home, his door is just always revolving with all of these people.  And so I said, "Dad," I called him one night, I said, "What are you doing?"  He said, "Well, I'm on another call."  He said, "And I really doing some lawyering tonight."  He said, "But after this, I have to do some consulting with the sheriff," who he talks to every day.  And so, I just think that he is a person that has created opportunities for himself in terms of work.  And basically, he's worked for other people but basically worked for himself as well.
Story_ID: 565918
Speaker 1: Now, you moved from Ebenezer [Mississippi] to Pickens [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's where you actually started school, is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually, when I moved there I was sixth grade when I moved to Pickens from Ebenezer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I actually started elementary school in a place called Ebenezer Elementary [Ebenezer Elementary School, Ebenezer, Mississippi].  And I went from kindergarten to third.  That's where I actually started gambling, in kindergarten.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's--kindergarten was the first time that I ever saw a white man that smiled.  And he was a milkman.  And he had on a white shirt and white pants and he had these, this crate with these boxes in 'em, and I never knew that inside would be chocolate milk.  And he was always so happy.  And after I got the chocolate milk, I was also happy.  But you could only get one box, and I'm saying, you know, how could you deny somebody and give 'em one box.  So I have to quickly figure out how I could get more boxes.  And what I knew is that, if I could play marbles good enough and I could win, that the boys, to get their marbles back, they'd give me anything.  And so, my kindergarten boyfriend, Charlie [ph.], actually allowed me to be a part of the marble game, which girls were not allowed.  But at that time, Charlie and I both were sort of overweight and so, I guess he sort of threw his weight around and they let me in.  And I began to shoot marbles to get extra milk and Big Jack cookies that we would have for lunch, and I think the rest is history.  After I got that first box of chocolate milk, I don't ever remember, I was high most of the time after that.  I was literally high.  I don't even remember what I did in second grade.  I don't remember who was in second grade because after that I was euphoric and you know, I was flying and my teacher would tell me to stop daydreaming.  But it was--and then it was sort of like this let down and I'd be tired and I'd be sleepy.  And so those were my elementary years.  And Charlie and I remained the best of friends until his death about seven years ago.  And I left Ebenezer School then we went to a school for about four years, Lexington high school, Lexington [Lexington Attendance Center, Lexington, Mississippi] K through twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade], and I did three years there.  And then we actually moved to Pickens, Mississippi and that's where I finished up my elementary years, and I went to the high school, Durant Attendance Center [Durant, Mississippi] and I did ninth grade through twelfth grade there.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was Durant Attendance Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The black schools were attendance centers, and the white schools were high schools.
Story_ID: 565919
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about your elementary school years.  After the, say the third, and fourth, and fifth grade, do you remember any of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was a teacher's pet, so I thought.  Now, I think that I ran them crazy because, I, I've--I'm an adult with attention deficit disorder [ADD], and I was a child with attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity [ADHD].  And so I loved my teachers and they loved me.  When you're in a family that's as large as my family, there's always this need for special attention.  And I just loved them.  I loved the way that they smelled.  I loved their perfume.  I think I wear perfume now because of my third grade teacher.  I just--she always smelled like vanilla and lavender, and I can never get that scent out of my nose, and I used to actually, almost every elementary teacher, I would go and stay with them.  They would take me home and I'd spend the night and they'd buy me nice stuff.  And so my sister says today that I was a con artist.  But I don't think that was true.  I just, I just loved my teachers and admired them, because they made me believe at an early age that I could do anything, and that there were no boundaries and limits.  And, of course, you know, in the early '60s [1960s] when I was in elementary school, there were a lot of boundaries and a lot limits on what we were supposed to be able to do.  But they always made me feel that I could do anything.  And so, that feeling along with my parents' support, I just always thought that there wasn't anything that I could do.  And I can imagine some of the things that I would do and get started.  You know, I was a leader at an early age.  And I saw that in my parents [Ruthie Waters Sanders and West Sanders] and, you know, with my teachers, and they sort of set up this environment, you know, and culture so that I could be this person, you know.  I was always in all the plays and you know, I was like, when you're number six in your family, you gotta really bring it, (unclear) you get lost somewhere.  You get lost at the dinner table.  You get lost with all the good stuff.  And so, I was just out there because people made me feel that, you know, Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler], you can be anybody that you wanna do.  I never had a feeling that, you know, I won't make it, it's too hard, even thought it was hard, they made it seem like it was so good that you had to, you know, have a part of that.  So I can remember my kindergarten, first, second grade teacher.
Speaker 1: What were their names? Do you remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My kindergarten, first, and second grade teacher was Mrs. Mary Alice Tate [Mary Alice West Tate].  We also, lived on her mother's land when we moved into that county because they were landowners.  They were African Americans and they were landowners.  So, we actually lived on their land.  And I spent a lot of time with her and she even had me, I was a part of the Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star].  And so, she exposed me to a lot of things.  My first camping--the first time we ever went camping or to camp for the summer, I never will forget it.  Oh my god, I'd never gone anywhere.  And I can remember my mom buying a little suitcase, like a cardboard little suitcase, and I had three short sets.  And we camped out and we did marshmallows and the third, by the third day I was homesick 'cause I'd never been away from home, ever in my life.  But Mrs. Mary Alice Tate made that happen for me.  And so, it let me know that I could do some other things.  It's also the first time I experienced Dippity-do 'cause my mother had straightened and pressed my hair and it was as straight as it could be.  And there was some older girls at the camp that were the camp leaders, and they were putting Dippity-do on their hair.  So, of course, I put Dippity-do on my hair, and that morning it was different hair (laughter).  It was all crunched up, and it wasn't straight anymore (laughter).  So, I knew that Dippity-do wasn't for me.  I can remember Miss Velma Richards--Miss Richardson was my fourth grade teacher, very petite, very tall, very well spoken.  She had a daughter and son that were in high school with my older sisters.  And I can remember she'd take me home and we'd go to the material store.  And she'd have me the prettiest little dresses made, and they had big sashes, and of course, that didn't happen, you know, because my, we, we, my mother purchased what we were gonna wear and that was it.  And she kept it starched and pressed until it changed colors, but that was as good as it got.  And so, I got to feel this special person, you know, like this queen for, you know, a couple of days.  And I always said, "Oh my god, I want all these things," but I always wanted to go home.  You know, I always wanted to go back home even though I wouldn't have the things that I had when I stayed with these other people because they had more.
Story_ID: 565920
Speaker 1: And so elementary was really good.  I can remember when I was seventh grade, all the kids would go to Chicago [Illinois] or St. Louis [Missouri], or Detroit [Michigan] and they'd come back home, you know, and they have these new clothes and all this stuff.  And so, they'd always ask me where I would go.  So I never went anywhere.  I would pick cotton in another county, and I would buy my clothes and so my older, one of my older sisters, Shirley [Shirley Sanders], who became a physician, she picked a lot of cotton for a girl, lots of cotton.  And I was much younger and so I couldn't pick as much.  And so she'd always give me some of her cotton because she wanted me to have enough to get my school clothes, and so, when I'd come back to school and they say, "Well, where did you go this summer?"  And I'd say I went to Chicago, too.  (Laughter) And, so, you know, I guess, I finally had to fess up that I didn't really go to Chicago.  I'd go to the Delta [Mississippi Delta] and I'd pick cotton so that I'd back and I have new things, you know, for school.
Speaker 2: Well, tell me, tell me what it was like to pick cotton in the Delta?
Speaker 1: Well, I was--I picked in the Delta but early on my family, you know, they sharecropped with other families and so, it would be like, I guess that's why people had so many children.  Because it could be three families and it would probably be like twenty-four kids with all three families.  But we always had more girls than anybody else.  So, if you're very, very smart, we were hard workers.  But then some of my older sisters, they figured out that, you know, we got to make this work for us, and the boys would actually pick cotton and, you know, help us out some, you know, get our fields cleared.  We would go to school.  My mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] insisted that we were never out of school during the school year.  But we would pick cotton in the afternoon.  My daddy [West Sanders] would meet the bus with his truck and our change of clothes.  And so, when we got to the field, we go in the pasture and change clothes and then we'd pick cotton.  And we picked cotton on Saturdays or when we were out on break, and they always say that I didn't really pick cotton.  But I really did pick cotton.  But they say I didn't really pick cotton and they did all the work.  But you know, I look sometimes when it's very, very hot, some of the days, it was extremely, extremely hot.  And if you would go in the cotton fields in the morning it would be dew and you would get wet.  And you wouldn't dry out until like eleven and twelve o'clock in the day.  And sometimes the bubs taking the cotton out was really hard and it would--we didn't really realize it then, but it would cut your fingers up some.  But we just did what we had to do and, you know, we made it work.  And our mother would go to the field with us and she was, she was like a superwoman.  I mean, a real superwoman.  She did some amazing things.  And she could, you know, she never complained, you know, about anything.  And she could pick two or three times the cotton that men could pick.  And so, you know, this is our, this is our she-ro.  And so, we were girls but we could out pick boys that were out there with us.  And then, you know, they would come to the field at lunchtime, if it was off season.  And they'd bring our food and we'd eat and, you know, they have water and a bucket and you get your water.  And then in the afternoon, you pull your cotton up, you try to finish this area and pull your cotton and stuff up and get it weighed.  And you know, the strangest this about that business, you never came out ahead in most cases.  You never came out ahead and now the people pick cotton.  So, at least we could have a good Christmas, you know, that was really important, you know, that we had a good Christmas.  But you had to do everything else you did.  And when we finished that, we'd go home and we'd get ready to have supper.  We'd do our work, and we'd go to bed.  That was pretty much how it worked.
Story_ID: 565921
Speaker 1: You talked about having attention deficit disorder [ADD].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They didn't call it that then.  Was there anything that the teachers might have recognized or is this just something that you realized after growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I realized it, I realized it.  I always knew I was different.  I always knew that.  But I think because there was something about my personality that people liked.  I don't know what it was.  I was a pleasure, you know.  I was that person, if the teacher thought it, you know, I was right there, you know, with this big smile.  And so, sometimes kids have personalities that's just sort of grate, I think, person's nerves, they did then.  But I had a way of sort of reading people and figuring out what they wanted, even my parents [Ruthie Waters Sanders and West Sanders].  And those were the things that I did.  But now that I know what kids with attention deficit with hyperactivity [ADHD] look like, and I've been a counselor, I know that I was a classic case.  They would let me run errands.  I would dust all of the erasers.  Anything extra to do because once I finished my work, I wanted to talk to everybody and I wanted to--my boyfriend was in kindergarten through fifth grade with me.  So I wanted to sit and help him read because he stuttered.  And it was very important that he learned to read and so I would sit with him.  And he never learned to read anything except what I wanted him to read.  And I was just all over the place.  Just--and so, really, I guess, they would let me go outside and play by myself.  I could go outside and play, you know, by myself.  And then I'd come back in.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good B student, a good B student.  I was a strong B student.  I could make A's and perhaps if worked at it, I probably could have.  I just thought that that was painful.  I hated math.  It was so painful to me.  And I, I like art.  I like drawing.  I like acting, you know.  Those other things were painful, you know, because you have to concentrate, you had to sit still, you couldn't talk, you couldn't move and I'm saying, "Oh, my god.  Why do we have to do these other things?"
Story_ID: 565922
Speaker 1: What about your, you being overweight.  Were your other siblings overweight?
Speaker 2: No.  I was the only person in my family that was overweight.  And of course, my sisters, whom I love so much, told me that I was the milkman's baby.  And I said, "Well, we have no milkman."  So, they said, like, "You didn't get it."  I was the only person that baked.  I started out at four years old baking with my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders].  They started out painting their nails and learning how to put on lipstick, and walk in my mom's high heel shoes, and I wanted to bake.  And I started out at four years old baking.  She may put a stool beside her, and I'd stand on that.  And then she'd make samples like a long time ago people would sample a cake.  You don't sample a cake anymore, you just bake it and put it in there.  But they wanted to make sure it was perfect.  And so, she'd make these samples and I'd be right there.  And she'd tell me to share with my sisters.  And so, I would of course go outside, but I never shared it with them.  And so I said, "I have to figure out how to make my own cakes, and my own pies."  And so at seven, and eight, and nine years old, I would be baking the community and cook offs and all of that good stuff.  And you know, I was becoming famous, and fat, and I was happy, and life was great.  And when I became thirteen years old everybody was looking at boys, and they were really cute.  I thought they were cute.  But that wasn't my main focus.  My main focus was finding the best pound cake recipe, or the best chocolate cake recipe.  But somewhere in between that, I guess it was puberty, I really did find somebody that I liked and I did eventually marry him.  And, and so that became important.  So, at thirteen years of age, I started to diet.  You know, not eating and taking whatever was on the market at that time.  And it became this vicious cycle that basically lasted a lifetime pretty much with me until the last ten years.
Speaker 1: So, in high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi], tell me about extracurricular activities, besides baking.
Speaker 2: Well, I actually was a cheerleader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader for all three sports in my high school: baseball, I don't how you cheer for baseball, but I figured it out; football; basketball.  And also, I was a part of the dance troupe in my school.  And so, actually, I was pretty active, but I was happy, pretty happy with myself.  It wasn't, I didn't really see myself as this person that had this problem, even though I knew I had a problem.  I did all of the things that, you know, you do in high school, probably did more than some other people in high school.  Any club, I was a part of it, a leader in most cases.  But I had a very pretty normal high school.  But I started to have a lot of problems with eating, just overeating, even then.  But I think because I was active, the weight--I was larger than what I needed to be, but it wasn't as obvious when I was in high school.  And when I went to college [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], people put on the freshman fifteen, I put on a freshman thirty.  I dropped out of college my first semester because basically I binged a lot, I ate a lot, I slept though my first three classes in the morning.  I would 'cause I had a food hangover most of the time.
Story_ID: 565923
Speaker 1: Well, before we get to, to college [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], were there teachers in your high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi] that encouraged you to go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But you know, I tell people, I--they just knew I would go to college, because my siblings had gone, they had done quite well.  They knew it.  I just didn't know it because I was a late bloomer, you know.  I still had a lot of play in me.  I tried to talk my parents [Ruthie Waters Sanders and West Sanders] into not letting me go to school the first year.  I needed--I told them I needed another year to grow up.  They said, "That's not happening.  You won't get another year.  You will be going to college."  But I had teachers in high school, my coach, my PE [physical education] teacher.  I lived with my principal and his wife who was the librarian at my elementary school.  And my principal was, my elementary principal was my, one of my principals died so he came to the high school.  So, I actually spent a lot of time with them, and I traveled with them as well.  And so, it was no doubt that Yvonne Sanders [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler] was going to college.  Everybody knew it but me.  And so I just went with--that's what they wanted me to do, that's what I was going to do.  But I was encouraged, I think they would've been very challenged by the fact that I would not go to school.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea of what you would like to do in life at that time?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a radio announcer.
Speaker 1: How did you come to that realization?
Speaker 2: Because at night I would listen to the radio announcers and I'd call the radio stations.  And I'd talk to them off air about what they were doing and, you know, and I just thought that that was just a dream job.  I mean, it was the thing that, you know, I needed to do.  The thing that needed me.  And so, even in ninth grade, I knew that I wanted to be a radio announcer.  So, I actually went to school and majored in mass communication.  And that is what I did when I first got out of school.  I was radio announcer.  And so, yeah, I knew (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about music and art--
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: I actually wanted to major in art.  I did a lot of--I loved music, all genres of music and I was an artist at an early age because most of my life, I'd been painting and drawing and I bore very easily.  And so that's a way of--it's a distraction.  But it's also something that makes me feel really, really good, you know, when I'm drawing or I'm creating something.  And so, we were putting together something in school, whether it was stage or an art set or something for a play or coming up with a theme.  People say, "Oh, ask--get Yvonne.  Oh god, she can come up with some amazing things."  And so, that's just a part of my lineage.  People are very creative and very artistic in my family.  But I knew that music--I loved to dance.  It's a part of who I am and so in high school that was a part of me.  And then when I went to college, I wanted to be an artist.  I wanted to work in the art, and my dad said, "Look, perhaps all of my beautiful maiden daughters would not get a husband, and they will one day and support themselves.  So, I think you need to get a job that actually pays money."  And for my daddy, it wasn't art.
Story_ID: 565924
Speaker 1: I know you wanna get to college [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], but we're just gonna step back a little bit because the time before you actually graduate from high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi], you told me that your father [West Sanders] was involved in, in what was going on in the community.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me what you remember about your family being involved in civil rights.
Speaker 2: What I can remember is that people were very frightened in the civil rights era in my community because basically blacks didn't control a lot.  There wasn't any money.  Most African Americans still didn't own their homes.  And so, the talk of doing this wide movement and blacks would be directly impacted by it, you know, people knew with the movement that we had to get people registered.  We had to let them know that if we do this together, we can be successful, instead of doing it in isolation.  And so, my sisters were in high school and they were very in tuned to the civil rights and what was going on and the marches and things of that nature.  And so, they were having this big march, I can remember Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was supposed to be coming and people liked him.  And so, I guess, many of the whites were saying, you know, "If any of you are part of this, you know, you're not gonna have a job the next day.  You're probably not gonna have anywhere to stay."  But for whatever re- whatever reason I can remember that they changed their route.  They did not come through the part of the area where we lived.  But the people were all pumped, and you know, they knew that change was coming.  And so, they started meeting, I never will forget going to churches, you know, being at church with my father.  Or my father giving--you know, we would have literature that people would be slipping to people because it wasn't a thing that you could stand on the street, okay, here's this flyer, come vote.  You know, black power, we gonna come into our own, and all of that.  You had to be very careful, because there were still those people that were frightened that were black people.  And you weren't so sure if they were gonna go back and tell who they were working for, and, you know, you'd be shut down.  And so, you know, my father encourage us.  And also brought this information back to us because we were not even in a little town.  We were in the country, country.  So if somebody didn't bring the information to you, it's like, you could be free and not even know it for ten years.  And so, he encouraged us to do what we needed to do to participate in the civil rights in a way that hopefully we wouldn't be harmed from it.  And so, I can remember my dad and mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] being happy that this was happening.  And that there was this major focus on Mississippi about a lot of the wrongs that had been done and what people were doing about it.  Emmett Till was before me, but things just seem to constantly happen in Mississippi over and over, and over again.  They kept bringing people back to, you know, this place that most people thought was just, "Oh my god.  What are they gonna do next?"  I just believe that once we started to get attention and a lot of the southerners especially white landowners saying, "Okay.  Who's gonna pick my cotton?  Who's gonna take care of my kids?  Who's gonna do all these things if you all certainly become liberated?"  And so, people--my parents were young.  But most times, you didn't really know people were as young as they were because they had taken on so much at such an early age.  And you know, seem to be a little worn by it, but my parents were resilient and that they retained, you know, their youth in a way that would be beneficial to them.  And so, in a quiet way, you know, they did the things that they needed to do to ensure that, you know, we wouldn't just stand back and watch somebody else do it.  That we would actually be a part of it.
Story_ID: 565925
Speaker 1: During--when you were growing up, did you watch television?
Speaker 2: As much as I could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, what were some of your favorite shows?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--for a long time, I'm trying, probably I was like four when I remember having the first TV.  But we watched things like--my sisters, they outranked everybody because if you're the oldest, you get to watch what you wanna watch and we just, we were there.  So, there were things like, they liked Westerns, like 'Gunsmoke,' 'My Favorite Martian,' there was something called 'Route 66,' 'Bandstand' ['American Bandstand'].  There was 'Wide Earth' [sic. 'The Wide Country'].  The story called, I think it was called 'Shane,' or something.  Lucille Ball was out at that time and we watched a lot of that.  And my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] loved soap operas.  And so at an early age, you know, they're addictive.  I got hooked on soap opera, 'The World Turns' ['As the World Turns'], 'Young and the Restless' ['The Young and the Restless'].  I can remember 'Young and the Restless' first came on.  'The Doctors,' 'Edge of Night' ['The Edge of Night'], things like that.  'Bandstand,' oh, my god.  And then 'Soul Train' came out.  But loved Dick Clark and all of the things that he did.  But those were basically things that I can remember; 'My Three Sons.'
Speaker 1: Well as far as music, Mississippi is known for the blues.
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yeah.  It's known for the blues.  And it's interesting because my father [West Sanders] liked country western and blues.  My mother was--liked spirituals.  And so, I guess we just became a part of all of that.  And we were in a place, we were in Pickens [Mississippi] but the county seat for my county is Lexington [Mississippi].  And a lot of the, there's a place called Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee].  And so, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, Bobby Bland, Muddy Waters and all those people, way before my time.  And even during my time, I was really young, they would come to this little town and play because that's where they sort of--that was one of the circuits.  And they would come and play, and people would be getting dressed up to go up there.  And women look good and sharp and every now and then, we'd go to the place called the big store.  And they'd be on their way to see these different artists.  But I grew up, because music for us sort of, I put music with things that happened, Muddy Waters, Bobby Bland, B. B. King, most of those guys are from, you know, the Delta or some parts of Mississippi.  And so, it was sort of like--it was who we were.  And their songs always told about the troubles, the heartaches, the relationships that people had.  And you know, if you find a good woman, how you take care of her, you know.  And somebody's in my backdoor, and I left home tonight, and you know.  I had great uncles that loved music and they loved good liquor as well.  And so, you know, sometimes, you know, when they'd had a little bit too much to drink, you know, they, they'd sing the blues.  And the people would always say the blues is a black man's story, and country music is a white man's story.  But it comes out of a very, very--people that are very poor and they're telling you about their--how they feel and how life is treating 'em.  You know, they would say in country music, the country singers talk about, he kicked his dog, Earl.  And somebody's talking about if--I'm catching the blues if I catch you with you woman, I'm going to have to cut you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'd rather see her dead than with anybody, and so.  That, early on, I began to appreciate that.  And also, it all--I would notice that, depending on what was going on in, in the black community, the African American community, writers would write songs about that.  And as times got better, you know, you didn't hear as much about the blues.  You--R and B came on the scene and then you got rock and some other things.  But for a long time, we were in the bluesy era, you know, because most people had the blues.  You didn't have no money, you didn't have no job, and some of 'em didn't even have no woman.  Or, somebody took my man.  So, I've had the blues, so (laughter).  I, you know, I'm not a singer, but I probably could've written a song or two, yeah.
Story_ID: 565926
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about church because you said your [maternal] grandmother [Elizabeth Hayes Waters] was in the COGIC [Church of God in Christ] church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that passed on?  Because music is not something that, well, not that type of music--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, tell--were involved in--?
Speaker 2: My mother's [Ruthie Waters Sanders] family is probably fifth generational COGIC, and also some of my father's [West Sanders] family.  But my father's basically Methodist, come from a Methodist background.  And when they married, they moved into an area which was Baptist.  But my mother very petite, and probably 5'8" and a half, 5'9".  I never saw her dance.  Never--very cool and calm.  I knew she could dance, but I never saw her dance.  And my oldest sister [Dorothy Sanders Walls] said, "When they were younger, she would dance sometimes when she on the back hanging clothes."  And I never even remember that part of her.  You know, that youth that, you know, you just feel like that.  When I knew her, she was a mother, mother, mother, and so, she would always be singing spirituals, you know.  And that is what I remember most about her.  I heard her sing a song, a little part of a song once.  And I was coming in, in the house and the radio was on because she had teenagers and the thrill, 'Your Thrill Is Gone' [sic. 'The Thrill is Gone'] was on.  And I was coming around the corner and she was singing of the last stands of the, of 'The Thrill is Gone.'  And I was just saying like, "Oh, my god, I can't believe this is my mother."  But no, she was not, we were allowed to play music and, you know, and be teenagers and have fun.  We were never restricted in that way.
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the Baptist church then?
Speaker 2: I grew up in the Baptist church, but there was a Church of God in Christ directly in front of my house, directly in front of my house.  And sometimes I would have to go every day in the week.  Not my other siblings, mind you, only me.  Because I was very energetic and, you know, of course, I always spoke my mind.  And so, I believe that my mother knew at an early age that I would be faced with some great opportunities, but I must be disciplined, and I must be focused.  So she not only sent me to the Baptist church but there were times that she felt that I need extra support.  So, I would go across the street, two minutes from my house, walk out of my door, fifteen paces, and I was in the Church of God in Christ.  And souls were being saved and demons were being cast out.  Normally, they were casting them out of me but some other people as well, and it was amazing.  It was amazing, and I become to, to understand the COGIC method very well.  And as I became older I would go back.  My mother and father divorced after twenty-five years and she went back to her home church, which would be Church of God in Christ.  And so I would visit with her, but I thought in my earlier years that it was punishment.  And she assured me, no it wasn't punishment.  It was for all of the great things that I would experience in life.  And so, here I am.
Story_ID: 565927
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about your experience at the COGIC [Church of God in Christ] church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you wanna talk about any of the experiences or should we go on?
Speaker 2: Well, basically it was sort of frightening at first, because I had basically been in the Methodist church and the Baptist church.  And so, I wasn't used to church being so rigid and, you know, the elders and everything had to be just right.  And you had to be a certain way.  There was no talking and you had to speak and sort of share with them, you know, not why you were there, but what is it that you wanted to get right with your life.  And, you know, there would be the people that would be moving and sort of like in convulsions sometimes and speaking in tongues, and I had not seen that before.  And so I was frightened by it at first.  But after I would go numerous times that my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] would send me, then I became, I became used to what would take place.  And after a while, it sort of became a part of me.  I understood.  I wasn't frightened anymore.  And I think sometimes when we don't know what something is and we've heard about it or we've seen it from afar, we're frightened by it.  And so, I never will forget, I was a cheerleader, and we had this big tournament coming up against these two major, major high schools.  It's almost like, maybe, Southwest DeKalb [Southwest DeKalb  High School, Decatur, Georgia] playing Stephenson [Stephenson High School, Stone Mountain, Georgia], and I was the head cheerleader, but of course, somewhere I had had an infraction in the week.  And so, everybody was calling me saying, "Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler], come on, your bus will be here, we gotta get ready to go to the game."  And I just couldn't break it to 'em, "No, I'll be in church for the tournament."  And I remember being so angry, so angry about that, with my mom and I'm saying, "You're ruining my life.  Why am I having to go over here with this little hot church with no air?"  You know, "And watch these people do backflips and all of this stuff," and you know, when you're younger you don't understand why things are being done, you know.  But as I got older I understood why it was what it was.
Story_ID: 565928
Speaker 1: So, tell me about graduation from high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Graduation from high school; I loved high school.  I loved high school.  College [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] was okay, but I loved high school because basically, high school was about Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  You know, I just felt great, and, you know, I talk about being a leader but there was certain things that we wanted to do in high school that we wanted to make happen.  And people, they were frightened to do it.  We wanted to like, change the name.  We had this book, we have course called black history.  And even then I wanted to change the name of the course.  Why can't we be called African Americans?  I don't want it to be called black history.  And so, people would say, "Yvonne, what's in a name?"  I said, "A lot is in a name."  I said, "It is time for us to be African Americans.  We don't need to be in a class that's called black history."  And so I started getting all of these people to sign, to say they wanted the book changed.  What I didn't really understand then, that it probably took us ten years to get that one book, and it would be another ten years before we got another book so it wasn't gonna be changed.  But I still went on about my way collecting my signatures to see if it was going to be changed.  And just people, to get the energy and to get the people invested in, in my thinking.  You know, they believed, they say, "Well, you know, Yvonne said that she's gonna have this done, and you know, we're going to do it," and, so, things like that.  If we wanted to buy certain things for our school or you know, uniforms, you know, I'd be the person that would start the fundraising, you know, set up to go door to door and all of things type things.  We stopped riding the bus.  I figured out as seniors in high school that there was a Trailways bus that stopped at a store in our little town.  And that on the days that we had games and we got in late from traveling that we should catch the Trailways bus and not ride the bus because we needed extra rest to go to school and be productive students.  So, I go up one morning with several of my friends and we meet the bus driver.  And I ask him, "How much would it cost for us to ride the bus to our school?"  And so, he said, like seventy-five cents or something like that, very cheap.  So, then it was to say it to our parents that we weren't gonna catch the yellow bus and the reason why.  Because we would have gotten in too late, and that it was very challenging getting on the bus, and that it would be better if we left later to go to school.  So, this Trailways bus actually would stop and pick like eight of us up.  They would drive into our school and you hear all the noise that a bus makes when it stops.  And here we bop off the bus like, hey, it's another great day in the neighborhood.  And you know, it was things like that, you know.  I don't think we skipped school but sometimes we just figured that, I said, "Well, why don't we look at the calendar and figure out what days would be good to have a picnic instead of going to school."  And we, we lived near a sandbar.  Big Black River runs through my town, and we figured out the certain days would be days for us to reflect.  And we would actually go to the store and buy wieners and hot dog buns, and of course, some desserts and we would be on the sandbar, people would be in school.  And they say, "Well, what happened to you?"  They say, "Well, we had a picnic."  You know, there should be a day and--I mean, things that people didn't think of.  We'd go fishing in the middle of the day.  We should've been in school, but I just thought there were experiences that we need to be exposed to.  Yvonne Butler thought this.  And just happened to have some people that believed in what I thought.  And I thought it was amazing.  And so a lot of times, you know, if something was going on in the schools, the teacher, the coach would come to me and talk to me.  And say, "Yvonne, what do you think about this?  Do you think they'd buy it?"  And I say, "Well, you have to give me some time to think about it, and you have to buy me lunch today," (laughter).  And you have to do all these things.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I was just like, maybe a little adult.  I don't know.  But I respected my elders and they respected me as a power broker.  And it was really sweet.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 565929
Speaker 1: So you graduated [from Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi] in 1975.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you decide what school you were gonna go to?
Speaker 2: Well, all of my, my siblings basically went to Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had family, had a lot of family in Jackson, Mississippi.  That was probably about thirty-nine, forty miles from where I lived.  And there wasn't really a question.  I didn't really have a need to, to leave, to be too far from home.  I loved home and so that would bring me closer to home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell me about your experience in college.
Speaker 2: Well, I actually left home with about, probably ten of my classmates and myself.  Actually, went to Jackson State and probably three of us stayed.  I think we all dropped out, except for maybe two the first semester, I being one of those that dropped out.  I'd never been on my own before in life.  I never stayed in a dorm my whole college career, because I had older sisters there.  And so, I stayed with them.  I couldn't, I couldn't get adapted to college life in terms of staying on a campus, you know, being with so many people that I didn't know.  Something was just not right about that.  And so, actually what happened is my sister worked at UPS [United Parcel Service] and she brought us to campus at 6:30 in the morning and dropped us off.  So, I would go and I would sleep the first two periods and then I'd go to the student union, get my lunch, and I'd watch some soap operas.  And so I had fun, but I just didn't quite always make it to class.  I went to art though.  I loved art, so I went to art class.  And I sort of had this feeling that if I had been a year older maybe I would've been more focused.  But nobody--there was nobody to tell you when to get up, when to come home, you had to go to church.  So Sundays, I had a field day.  I only went to church when I went home.  And so I think I had too much freedom, and I couldn't really handle it.  I just wanted to have fun, you know.  I didn't want the summer of high school to end.
Story_ID: 565930
Speaker 1: So I was smart enough though to know that my grades were gonna come out, and that I probably need to be in another state when they came out.  I didn't think they were gonna be good; I knew they weren't gonna be good.  And so, actually the second semester of my freshman year, I talked my sister [Shirley Sanders], who was getting ready to go to medical school, into letting me come to Rochester [Minnesota]; sorry, Minneapolis, Minnesota, coldest place on the earth.  I'd never been out of Mississippi in my life.  And so, I told her I just really needed to come and to get myself together.  And then I would return to school that summer.  But people never tell you everything.  I never had any intentions of coming back, but fate would not have it that way.  I never been in a place so cold.  I would be bundled up like a snowman trying to go outside.  The snow would be up to your knees.  You had to catch busses.  I'd never been on a bus to get and transit to change.  I thought I would have a heart attack.  I thought I would die.  I was nineteen and I said, "Oh, my god, how do people live like this?"  So, I did learn to ski a little bit when I was there.  And so, that was really nice, and what I know now is that, she lived not too far from where Prince was born and lived and grew up.  And so, that was pretty cool as well.  But I be- I was homesick.  I couldn't stand the cold and I wanted to come home.  So, of course, my daddy [West Sanders] was angry with me because he never knew I was leaving.  My mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] knew it.  And he was very angry because I'd left school.  And I told my mom I wanted to come home that if--I promised if I came home I would go to school for the rest of my life.  I never had that intention but I've actually end- ended up going to school it appears for almost all of my adult life.  And so, I returned to Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] that summer.  Hot pants were in full bloom.  Everything was going on.  Everybody was happy.  And so, I came back and I buckled down, and I went that summer.  And I actually got out of school on time.  But I wasn't a student on campus and that's what I missed I think about the college life.  I really wasn't connected.  I was always an off student, off campus.  You know, so, I really didn't attend a lot of the games and just people sitting out, you know, waiting in the afternoon for their boyfriends to come.  And I missed basically all of that as part of my college career.
Speaker 2: What did you--how long did you stay in Minneapolis?
Speaker 1: Four months.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe three and half.  Too long.
Speaker 2: What did you do while you were there?
Speaker 1: Well, I promised my sister that I would still study.  She would give me assignments, and I would go to the library in the snow.  And I had to get a job.  I never knew I was gonna have to get a job.  She didn't tell me that either.  So, I would go to the library and I would study about African Americans.  And about what I wanted to do and what was going on in the world.  God, she made it hard.  And then I had to work.  And so actually, got a job in a very, very nice store there and I worked.  And then, and the other time I would go to the library and I believe at that time I guess I was doing research on, you know, what's going on in our country.  And so, it wasn't long because I worked a job and I worked so very hard.  And it paid little, very little money.  And I said, "No.  I know I can't do this for the rest of my life."  And so, then college began to look better, and better, and more better.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And that helped me to make up my mind to know that I would come back and finish school.
Story_ID: 565931
Speaker 1: So you graduate [from Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] in 1979.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you said, you were really ready to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --leave in '78 [1978].  So the '78 [1978], '79 [1979] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: And were you still thinking that you wanted to be in radio?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still wanted to be in radio, had a great teacher that was basically over the mass communication department.  He was called Heavy Herb [Herb Anderson], and everyone idolized him.  He was on the radio there, and did an outstanding job.  And you know, I would just say, "Oh, my god, if I could be like Heavy Herb," you know, "I'm just gonna have this great listening base."  And just idolized him.  And it was sort of like, you know, "When I grow up, this is what--who I'm going to be."  But I got out of school and I was married [to Floyd Butler].  I married shortly after that.  And I stayed home and worked a year at my high school [Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi] as a teacher's aide, but I left.  My husband was on the coast working at Ingalls shipyard [Ingalls Shipbuilding] in Pascagoula, Mississippi.  They build a lot of the destroyers.  A lot of things for the, the [U.S.] Navy ships there on the coast.  And so I wanted to be with my husband, and so young, young bride, and so I moved to the coast.  And I applied at several of the radio stations, and I actually went to work for WKKY [WKKY Radio, Pascagoula, Mississippi].  And we did our NB--we did rock and country, little R and B.  It was all males, five males, and there was Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  And I enjoyed it; I had an audience between thirteen and eighteen years old.  Had a great time doing that.  Did it for probably a year and then we decided to move to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And moved to New Orleans, advertised, I mean, I auditioned for WYLD [WYLD Radio, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But I was at a small town and I was going to this big city, and totally, totally different in terms of the things that you had to do and your auditioning tape and all of this.  And it was sort of overwhelming to me as well; really big city.  And so, I sort of shied away from that, because I really did wanna have a family as well.  And what I saw then and what I knew from where I'd came from was really fast pace.  You were on locations a lot doing broadcasting.  And something about that, I don't know, I don't know, if I started to grow, a part of me started to grow in a different direction.  Because it would be very hard to be, you know, on location, at a club or a concert and trying to raise a baby and those type things, and so I just decided that I wouldn't do that.  That I still enjoyed it, I still enjoyed my music, but I wanted to look for something in the corporate structure.  And so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 565932
Speaker 1: And tell me your husband's name.
Speaker 2: Floyd [Floyd Butler].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what year did you marry?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and what type of job do you take there?
Speaker 2: Well, at first I had a lot of little jobs.  He was fine because he actually was welder and he had worked for the oil companies.  And so, he just moved straight over and got this wonderful paying job.  I had a degree in mass communications so now I'm getting out of my field.  So I'm trying to get any job that I can find.  Worked at a place called Schwegmanns.  It was a grocery store.  The biggest grocery store in New Orleans, and it was very interesting.  That wasn't for me.  Then I had a job at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], and I think I was actually cleaning glasses and, you know, putting little screws when they came out.  That was not for me.  And then I went to General Electric Credit Corporation [GE Capital] and I went into collections and customer service.  And it was okay.  It was something different.  It was talking to people, helping people, and so I enjoyed that.  I certainly enjoyed the people, the upward mobility was great.  It paid very good money, and so I worked there a couple of years.  I became pregnant with my son, had some challenging--challenges during my pregnancy and went on leave early.  And so, things were sort of changing.  It was during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] era.  A lot of jobs were being lost in the oil industry in Louisiana and Texas. Both were big oil states, and so it became very, very challenging.  I had my son, Floyd Denard [Denard Butler], ten pounds, May 24, 1984.  And so, I actually went back to work after his birth, after a couple of months.  And it was so difficult leaving him.  Even though I think he liked the babysitter better than he liked me, it seemed.  But it was very difficult leaving him at such an early age.  And so, they actually asked for people to take an early layoff because a lot of major companies were closing down divisions in Louisiana.  And so actually I ended up going to, going on leave.  And I actually, went on an early leave and then my husband was laid off like three weeks later.  So here we are with this new baby and we are both unemployed.  We never knew what that looked like, very interesting, very different.  And we actually did everything in our powers to stay in Louisiana.  We absolutely loved Louisiana.  Just the thought of having to leave there was very, very challenging for us.
Story_ID: 565933
Speaker 1: And so, we did eventually move with the encouragement from my sister, Betty [Betty Sanders Mayfield], and of course, other family members.  But Georgia seemed to be the place, DeKalb County [Georgia] seemed to be up and coming and moving twenty-two years ago.  And so, we actually moved in with her.  She and her husband, Thaddeus [Thaddeus Mayfield], twenty-two years ago with very little money.  I was really challenged because we had worked very hard to have to give up everything that you have and to come and stay.  Even though my family loved me, it was just, it just seems like overnight, you know, we were just losing everything and that was so challenging.  It was so difficult for us, and so we came and I didn't work for a while.  I stayed with my son [Denard Butler] and then I went to work for Rawlings [Rawlings Sporting Goods Company, Inc.] for two years, and I worked there in collections and customer service.  And Floyd [Sanders-Butler's husband, Floyd Butler], of course, went into welding.  He had a trade that he basically could, you know, make it anywhere.  And so, I did that for two years, but with the hours, my son has asthma, and that was very challenging.  I had to work weekends and Floyd was basically the big bread winner and sometimes he would have to go out of town.  And so, then my sister Betty and I worked on what would be the next best move for me.  And she actually lived on the street with a gentleman who worked in human resource for DeKalb County schools [DeKalb County School District], Dr. Lonnie Edwards [Lonnie J. Edwards, Sr.].  And I went and interviewed with him, and I got a job as a paraprofessional twenty years ago.  And it's so funny about it, and I tell him this every time I see him, he, he said, "I didn't want--." I wanted a job in communications in their PR [public relations] department, 'cause I wanted to get back to my background.  He said, "No, that's not the job for you.  The children need you."  He said, "You were sent to me because you are an educator."  He said, "You'll start at this position but you won't stay."  And I said, "Yeah, but I really wanna do PR or human relations or--."  He said, "No."  So he glorified this para job; paraprofessional.  I know what it is now, but.  So I came back home and I was telling Betty about this great job that I had been hired for and whatever and I got the pay scale.  And I said, "Oh my god.  I'm gonna starve to death."  I mean, I quit my job.  And so after that I'd pass him on the street not even wanna look at him.  I said, "This man is gonna starve me to death.  I'm going to die."  But it's one of the best moves that I've ever made in my life.  So I have my sister Betty Mayfield, and Dr. Lonnie Edwards to thank for that.
Speaker 2: And so you were a paraprofessional for how long?
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I went back to West Georgia College [University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] and received my certification in early childhood.  And I became a third grade teacher at Dunaire Elementary [Dunaire Elementary School, Stone Mountain, Georgia].  Enjoyed it, I taught third grade my entire career which was three years.
Speaker 2: Three years as a teacher?
Speaker 1: And I became a counselor.  I went back to school and got my master's in counseling.
Speaker 2: Where did you go to school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) West Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was a counselor for three years.  In the meantime, I was still in school working on my leadership certification, and I was a counselor for three years and I became an instructional lead teacher, which is now an assistant principal for instructions.  But I was an instructional lead teacher at Knollwood Elementary [Knollwood Elementary School, Decatur, Georgia] for one year.  And after that, I became an instructional lead teacher at Hambrick Elementary [Hambrick Elementary School, Stone Mountain, Georgia] and I was there for two years.
Speaker 2: And what year are we in now?
Speaker 1: We are probably in--we are probably in 1998.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], '96 [1996], '97 [1997].
Story_ID: 565934
Speaker 1: So now, all of these years up until this point, after you, even after you get married [to Floyd Butler] and have your baby [Denard Butler], are you still struggling with your weight?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Since thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was struggling with my weight.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm having more problems now, though, because I'm having a lot of highs, a lot of lows.  I'm losing weight.  I'm going on all these drastic diets, losing this weight, starving myself to death then putting all the weight back on, getting very depressed, just a range of emotions.  It's really getting the best of me.  Very tired, very tired of all of it and no matter what I do, how much money I spend, nothing is helping me.  I've gone on all of the diet pills, you know, I've done the laxatives.  I've done--I did everything but purging, but everything else that you could do to lose weight, I did those things.  And I'm in school.  I have a family.  I have this problem that's bigger than all of it, it seems.  I'm a closet eater.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did?  What is a closet eater?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--you eat when people don't see you eat.  You're always dieting but you're eating a lot as well.  And my mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] would say sometimes, she said, "I just don't understand how you can't, you can't get rid of this weight, because you don't really ever eat much."  But it was when they never saw me.  It was like at night I had this romance with food.  I would go to the grocery store and I'd make certain things and I take it all out of the car and I'd put it up.  And then there would be the things that people never saw.  And I only ate it when they didn't see me, you know, because if nobody saw me eat it, then I didn't really eat it.  And then I'd be angry, you know, because I ate it and I, I would feel really bad about that.  And you know, people saw me as this big, this strong person, this go getter, you know, great Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  And you know, I was so miserable, so miserable, depressed a lot.  And yet, you know, when people would say is, they say, "Oh, my gosh, she's always the life of the party," you know, "Great attitude."  Struggling every day of my life to survive.
Story_ID: 565935
Speaker 1: So what makes you decide that, well what happens to make you decide that you have to do something?
Speaker 2: Well, I almost lose my life to a stroke ten years ago.  I was working on my doctorate in Sarasota, Florida.  And of course, my friends talked me into it.  I didn't think I needed to have a doctorate, but you know, it was this group thing.  We need to do this together and support and bond, and you know, be strong women and go after the gusto.  Yeah, the next time somebody tell me that, I'm gonna hang up the phone.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And we actually were going to our first class in Sarasota.  And we went down that afternoon and oh god, we were so excited because we had worked so hard.  I don't think we'd--any of us had been on vacation in twelve years, if ever.  And the closer we got to Florida, you know, the palm trees, the white sand, I'm saying, "Oh my god."  We had this condo with four people in it.  It backed up to a golf course, absolutely beautiful.  Decorated in all of these nice breezy colors and starfish pictures and we're saying, "Oh my god, we're going to rip this city.  No husband, no kids.  We are students."  We were actually students again and I, we went out to eat that afternoon.  And I started to have a headache, but it was not a bad headache, but it was a nagging headache.  But I didn't want to, you know, put a damper on anybody's afternoon.  So you know, I'm a southern girl from Mississippi, when you get a headache, you take a BC Powder and a Coke.  Hey, that's as good as it gets.  And I probably took like five BC Powders, like four Cokes.  And it wouldn't go away and so we were retired for the after, for that afternoon and I went to bed around 9:30, 10:00 and--'cause we had class that morning.  And about 11:30, I thought my head was going to blow off.  I got up and I looked in the mirror and my right eye is bloodshot.  I can't even see out of it.  And so, of course, my best friend, girlfriend, Anita [ph.], is with me.  And I ask Anita to get up to look at my eye to see if we can fix it.  Because we are mothers and we are educators, and we are nurses by trade.  And she gets up and she looks at my eye and she screams to the top of her lung.  She said, "Have you seen your eye?"  I said, "Yes.  That's why I'm asking you to look at my eye, because I know it looks bad."  I said, "Can we fix it?"  She said, "I don't know."  She gets this towel, she dampens it and she puts it in the microwave, and she puts it on my eye.  I screamed so loud.  I said, "I swear, if you come to me again, I'm going to jail for murder," (laughter).  "Stay away from me."
Story_ID: 565936
Speaker 1: So we go to the emergency room.  And I thank God today that Sarasota [Florida] is a retirement town, because nobody's in the emergency room but elderly people.  And they come there every night so that somebody can talk to them.  But when they saw me, they knew I was in trouble.  They didn't wanna see my insurance card.  I said, "God, these people are really cool.  This doesn't happen in Atlanta [Georgia]."  And they asked me to come back to a room and they start taking, you know, my blood pressure and vitals and all of that.  And I go from the front desk to a room, to a bed, the people are actually putting in IVs.  And I'm saying, "Hm, this is different."  And you know when something is wrong when a physician and the nurses won't make eye contact with you.  I knew something was really wrong with me, and I was frightened, very frightened.  And I could hear them saying that they had to get my blood pressure down.  You know, they had to get it down to save my life.  And the strangest thing about that, I would think that, people don't like to think about death or dying, but I wasn't frightened.  It seem like I was just going to this place, out of body experience.  You know, things that you see on TV and say, "Oh, that's a lie.  That doesn't happen."  I'm saying, "This is like what I've seen on TV."  And I can remember feeling so cool, my body was so cool, and I was saying "Well, if I don't make it, I forgot to get Denard's [Sanders-Butler's son, Denard Butler] baseball suit out the dryer. Who's gonna remember it?"  And then I thought about, I thought about him going to Brown's Field Rec playing baseball.  And his dad [Floyd Butler] would be coaching sometimes and he'd be screaming to the top of his lungs.  And Denard would look over at me and I'd wink my eye because whatever he did was great for me, and I wouldn't be there to cheer him on.  And I said, "Oh my god, it's come to this?"  And I thought about I wouldn't be there to see him grow up, and marry.  And I wouldn't be there when he came home with the girl that I didn't like and say, "Honey, take her back.  Can't bring her home.  Get mama a different girl."  And but, I don't think that was what did it.  And I'd tell people this all the time, Floyd was thirty-nine, I was thirty-nine, we had been together since we were thirteen years old.  And he say, he's a real cowboy probably the last of the Mohicans and I thought about it.  I said, you know, Floyd's probably gonna grieve himself to death.  He's probably gonna think they didn't take care of me.  He'd just seen me that morning.  And I started laughing and gave him thumbs up and I said, "So how is gonna--how is he gonna react to somebody calling him and say that, you know, your wife died at 1:00 a.m. this morning 1:30.  And then I thought about it, and I thought about it, and I said, "I wonder how long he's gonna be a widower?"  Something about that sort of entered my head and I said, "Oh, no.  I have to fight this thing with everything I have in me."  And I said, "God, if you let me live, so that I can see my son grow up.  And if I die, I wanna be ninety and my husband can remarry then, it'll be okay."  And I think he granted me my wish.  But what I do remember telling him, if he allowed me to live that I would spread this message and I believe that I've kept my promise.
Speaker 2: So how do you get to the point after you find out, after they get your blood pressure under control, what was the diagnosis?
Speaker 1: Well, my blood pressure was 200 over 140.  I was about to have a stroke.  It was so very elevated that, you know, I had to go on medication immediately.  I was to fly back to Atlanta [Georgia] in two days.  I couldn't fly back, because they were afraid that the pressure from the cabin could actually cause a stroke.  And you know, they basically, the doctor looked at me and said, "You're a young woman, and everybody that has a stroke doesn't die.  And perhaps you'll be a vegetable and somebody will take care of you.  And you have some hard decisions to make, like taking better care of yourself, losing some weight."  And I wanted to tell him, I've really tried, it hasn't happened.
Story_ID: 565937
Speaker 1: You were saying you had hard decisions to make.
Speaker 2: Well, I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and I was frightened to death because I don't, I don't think most people know when people are challenged with an addiction no matter what it is.  Whether it's drugs, or whether it's food, or--which is a drug, that people actually really try and that it's not about will power.  And that I'd done everything that I knew to do, so to tell me now that you're gonna die if you can't get your act together.  I'm saying, "You know, I probably am gonna die 'cause I don't know if I'm gonna be able to get it together."  And I never will forget, I'd gone, come back, and I'd gone to my sister's house, Betty [Betty Sanders Mayfield], of course.  And she told me about some of her clients that were going to this church, to this place, and that they had stopped eating white flour and white sugar and butter and I'm say like, "What kind of program is this?"  And they had lost all this weight and looked fantastic and great, and so, I actually went to Harvester [Chapel Hill Harvester Church; Spirit and Truth Sanctuary, Decatur, Georgia].  And they had an Overeaters, Overcomers program there, many.  And I actually went to OA, Overeaters Anonymous.  And I never will forget the first night that I went in there.  Everybody was talking about I haven't had cake in five years, and I don't eat any sugar.  And I'm saying, "God, this is a cult.  These people are insane.  They haven't had cake in five years?  I don't know.  There--I must be in the wrong group.  She could not have meant to send me to this group."  And I said, "God, they are crazy."  And all that night I sat in the back and I just looked from person to person and I said, "They all saying the same thing."  And at the end you say, you know, your little prayer that say you keep coming back.  It works if you work it.  And I said, "Well, I know who won't be back, and that's me."  And I left there that night because on my way there, there was this convenient store and they had Hershey's three for ninety-nine cents.  So I actually was getting ready to turn into this store to get the Hershey's, 'cause I love Hershey with nut.  I love that.  And I never saw the transfer truck.  And when I focused he was leaning on his horn.  And he came so close to, just demolishing my car.  I just veered to the right and my car was, my truck was sort of spinning.  And it was that moment I said, "God, I got it.  I got it."  Didn't go in the store to get the Hershey's with almonds.  That was ten years ago, and I went back to group and they said, "Keep coming back, it works if you work it."  And through their twelve step program, I really realized that my eating wasn't about me being hungry.  It was about dealing with things that I didn't even know I was dealing with.  And through that education and research, you know, I learned that I was just one of 60 million people who was suffering from being overweight, or obese and the diseases that it bring like hypertension, diabetes, high cholesterol.  And so all of my life, I thought that I was weak, something was wrong with me.  I didn't know that when I ate certain foods, they had a reaction within my body that caused me to do certain things.  And I also ate foods that cause me to crave like carbs, you know, simple carbs.  And just learning things to eat and what not to eat and certain foods that you didn't mix together.  And to be able to have people that understood me, because one thing about everybody that was in group, no matter what, how much you had or how less, we were all addicts.  And the beauty of that was, is that you couldn't lie because everybody had been there, done that.  And so, I had to come clean which I never come clean about anything in my life.  I always had a way to work around it, you know, I can talk myself out of it.  And for the first time in my life I saw Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  And I think it was the first day of my life, actually.  I saw things clear for the first time and after being sober and it was being sober, I had now been placed at Browns Mill School [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia], and I was the assistant principal for three whole weeks before I was named principal.  And it gave me an opportunity to see that I needed, that children there needed my help as well.
Story_ID: 565938
Speaker 1: So you're at Browns Mill Elementary School [Lithonia, Georgia] as the principal.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But tell me how much weight did you lose once you started the program?
Speaker 2: I lost fifty-five pounds.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to lose that much weight?
Speaker 2: Four months.
Speaker 1: That's astonishing.
Speaker 2: And everybody says that.  And you know, it has been the easiest thing that I've ever done, because I did some very daredevil things to try to lose weight and it didn't happen.  I mean, water, popcorn for a month, oh, my god.  Cabbage for a month, and water.  Just cabbage and water.  It was so painful and I might have lost five pounds.  And I would weigh two and three times a day.  I'd weigh all through the day; I was just obsessed.  I would get up in the middle of the night and weigh because I thought I had gained a pound or I dreamed I gain ten pounds.  And it was--mentally it was so stressful but, you know, I started my diet originally was a lot of carbs.  I love bread, I love cakes and pies, and I ate candy for snacks.  And I eat everything else as well.  So that's a lot of calories.  No structure, it was just, once I started it was no stopping.  And so what I learned is that I really wasn't eating because I was hungry at all.  And that I really didn't have to have all the foods that I was eating.  And so, I could cook.  I was a good cook.  I still am a good cook.  So I started to bake instead of frying everything, every piece of food, having rice with every meal.  Oh, my god, even for breakfast.  And I started doing a lot of fresh fruit.  I started to grill a lot.  And I grew up on vegetables, and so I love vegetables.  There was never a place for vegetables in my diet.  I had a treadmill lifestyle.  We ate out a lot.  I picked up food on the way home so I could have some time to work on something when I got home.  So I just put the bag out there and everybody go for it.  Fried chicken one night, pizza one night, and you know the rest.  And so I still ate three meals a day, snacks, and I've never been a person that was a picky eater, ate real small amounts because I grew up on a farm and you had to have energy so you had to eat.  But I could eat, be full, not want any more food.  And it appeared that I was eating too much.  And at somewhere it stopped being about vanity, and it start being about my sanity.  And I stopped just obsessing over, okay, am I gonna lose some weight today?  Am I not?  I start feeling so good about myself and just feeling energy.  Instead of getting up like I had a hangover every morning.  Like, what day of the week is it?  Just pressing through the day, I had all of this energy and I started to walk.  And I'd walk anywhere from three to five miles every day.  And I just noticed my clothes started to get bigger and I'm saying, "Well, what's going on?"  And I weighed one day and I'd lost like fifteen pounds and the next time I remember to weigh, I'd lost like thirty and I'm saying, "What's happening?"  And before I knew it, I had lost that weight.
Story_ID: 565939
Speaker 1: So is this what made you decide that that you needed to take it to the schools?  I know that you noticed the correlation between what the kids ate for breakfast and how they performed the rest of the day.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, I had had an opportunity to work in several schools in DeKalb County [Georgia], and some schools were more challenged in terms of economics than others.  Some of the schools were Title I where all kids want free and reduced lunch; there was not a lot of money.  But here I was in a middle, upper middle class school where most parents were educated, had one or two degrees, kids had exposure to everything imaginable to man, whether it was science or math or going out of the country to study in elementary school.  And yet the test scores were very sluggish.  There weren't that much difference between those test scores and kids that basically came from very impoverished areas, and I just thought that was very challenging.  But what I decided to do--when you come in new you don't wanna make wholesale changes, if you're smart.  I at least wanted to be a principal longer than a year.  So I pretty much observed the children.  First of all, I noticed that they were overweight for their ages, most of them were.  And I watched them in the lunchroom because I did breakfast duty and lunch duty.  And it seem like when we were at lunch it was like somewhere like we were at a race track.  Kids were, it was almost like they were gambling.  You know, they would be trading food like they were on Wall Street.  You know, they would just be talking like the announcers, "Okay, you give me your French fries, I'll give you my milk.  You give me your milk, I'll give you cake."  And I said, "God, this is wild."  And you see a child with four or five boxes of chocolate milk, stacked on the side.  And French fries that were piled, four servings, and they would not eat a vegetable or a fruit.  So I did something as simple as a plate waste test.  It's where you take garbage cans and you assign one to vegetables, one to fruit, and one to your carbs and whatever else.  And nothing would ever be in the carb barrel, the yellow barrel, nothing, nothing.  All the fruits would go back in whole.  They wouldn't touch 'em.  Vegetables, would not touch them.  And they would leave the cafeteria in the morning, either they, some of them would be off the wall just doing everything.  And the others would be zoned out.  And most, for most schools reading is first periods of the day.  And so, if they aren't focused, it's gonna be very hard for them to comprehend the skills that they need to be successful.  After lunch, especially if they ate, even a lot of fat.  People think just carbs but if you eat too much fat, they'll make you sluggish as well.  So some would go back, nobody wanted to teach reading or math after lunch, because the kids would be sluggish and they would sleepy.  The other thing that I noticed, we had a lot of slips for children not to be participating in PE [physical education].  It was too hot, they didn't wanna (unclear), they didn't wanna walk, they didn't wanna do any of those things.  Because they had all of these big games at home, and they played that, they never went outside.  And I thought it was very strange when field day came, they came and everybody was well.  Nobody had asthma, nobody had a sprain.  And I said, "Well, this miraculous.  How did this happen?"  And so, we had some kids that had been afforded much more than they needed, because parents loved them and they felt that this was a way that you show kids that.  And I saw something much bigger than that.  We had a morb- case of diabetes and I wanted to see.  We even had kids with hypertension.  And just their behavior mimicked my behavior as a child in a lot of cases.  And I knew, I didn't really have all of the research because seven years ago, it wasn't nearly as much research connecting eating to academics, and I had to prove that because I was in a middle class area.  You don't tell people what to do there.  They sort of tell you what they want done.  And so, I had to share with them the research that I had done and my own experience saying that, "If we don't change our children's diet for the better, and get them involved in more physical activity, I promise you that you're going to bury them from a disease that could have been avoided."
Speaker 1: I know a couple of years ago it was a gospel singer, I can't remember, one of the Pace sisters--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Her ten year old daughter [Xenia Rhodes]--
Speaker 2: Yes, LaShun Pace.
Speaker 1: Right.  Her daughter passed away.  I think she was ten--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very obese.
Speaker 1: Being obese.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 565940
Speaker 1: So what did you decide to do once you--did you take it to the parents and talk about what you wanted to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.  I took it to the parents, to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  And I talked to the PTA president, Dorian Joyner [Dorian Joyner, Sr.] was the PTA president, very strong, loved sweets, a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate.  And I knew if I could sell him that I could get the other people on board and he would help me.  And he said, "Dr. Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler], I really do wanna help you do this."  And he says, "I'm gonna support you.  But I'm not sure.  I'm just not sure it's going to, to fly."  He said, "Because not only the children addicted, but parents are as well."  He said, "But let's, let's give it a shot."  And so, I appealed to parents who I knew loved their children and wanted the best for them.  And you know, I also shared with them, because just like children, parents are competitive.  I shared with them the test scores of several neighboring schools that basically should not be performing, not even in the same league with Browns Mill [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia].  They were devastated.  They could not believe it, and, of course, they wanted to, to do something about it right away, like that night.  And they said, "Well, what do you think?"  I said, "Well, I think it's a number of things."  I said, "But I think that's--it's more related to what our children are eating and their inactivity than anything else."  I said, "Everything else, it doesn't add up."  I said, "If they need tutors, they have that.  We have a magnet program.  We have a discipline based art education program.  Everything else, they have."  I said, "But they are not focused, they are unhealthy, they are not eating properly.  I've watched what you all send to lunch for them."  Oh, my god.  These thirty-two ounce, sixteen ounce sodas, hot fries, potato chips, grandmamma's pound cake, coconut cake from Alabama.  And you expect them to function.  I said, "It's just like a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], a luxury car.  It will not run off regular gas.  Nor will our children with the diet that they currently have."  And I said, "Unless we do something about this, their scores are going to continue to plummet.  We're going to begin to see more case of diabetes and hypertension."  I said, "More than that, instead of our children going off to college or going into the work world to do something great, perhaps they're going dialysis or they have stroke and a heart attack.  I will not be a part of that.  And I know that you as their parents, the people that gave birth to them and love them want to save their lives and make them the brightest children in this country.  And I believe that I have a plan to do that."
Story_ID: 565941
Speaker 1: What did that plan consist of?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing that we looked at and people always say, "Oh my god, she took all the sugar out of the school."  Well, we came up with a plan well, well before the wellness policy came out two years ago, we created our own wellness policy in our school [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia].  We had a health committee that consisted of PTA [Parent Teacher Association] members, cafeteria workers, people on the school--the teachers, cafeter- the custodians, anybody that would touch a child's life in some way, we had to have representative.  And we looked at the menus, what we served every day, how often we served it, what we could take away, what we needed to add.  We looked at all the fried foods that we had.  We look at how much fruit, how much dessert, which you had to have dessert every day.  And of course, we had a southern state.  I mean, just comes with the territory.  We wanted as much fresh fruit and vegetables as we could have.  We wanted to bake as much as we could.  We looked at ordering more fish, chicken and turkey for protein.  Of course, seven years ago, I wanted a lot of fiber.  I wanted yogurt.  I wanted soy milk.  And I was told that, "Oh, my god, are you insane or what?"  Well, today of course, we have that.  But those were the things that we wanted.  No more chocolate milk, no strawberry milk, no milk of any color.  Parents had to agree that they wouldn't send fried chicken, the dinner from the night before, hot fries and all things that just were not supporting our health policy.  And they agreed.  We also looked at any parties that we had, Valentine's and winter holiday, Christmas parties, that they would not have every cake and pie in--that they could imagine and candy.  Those were no longer things that would be a part of our school.  We created our own list, preferred snack list for our students.  And parents have abide- they've abided by that.  But it didn't come without educating them.  It wasn't something I told them; it's something we did together.  And I brought in anybody, everybody that could educate them on how food worked with or against the body, how physical activity with or against the body.  We looked at our physical activity program.  We also bumped that up to include things that kids could relate to.  Instead of things that they were doing fifty years ago when I was in elementary school; twenty-five sides drill hop, bend, touch your toe.  You know, kids like dance, they like movement, they like yoga, they like aerobics.  And so we looked at doing stations in PE [physical education].  And so, everybody agreed that we would move forward with a contract that every parent and student signs during registration.  If they're new entering the school, they sign a contract saying what they will do to support their health and academics.  And so, we became the first sugar free zone school in the country, in '99 [1999], 1999.  And the kids actually said that because when they came for the first day of school that year said, "Oh my god.  There's no chocolate milk, there's not even cookies, Dr. Butler's [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler] taken all the sugar out.  This must be a sugar free school."  And so, actually, that is how it started.
Story_ID: 565942
Speaker 1: Once it was started and, and you rolled out the plan, how were the test scores affected?
Speaker 2: Well, we noticed some things that happened immediately.  Six months into this we noticed that discipline had dropped about 28 percent.  We had a lot of counselor referrals early on with children not being able to get along and socialize with their neighbors.  And we noticed that those referrals dropped by 23 percent.  And our test scores went up between 10 and 15 percent.  We were a Georgia 2005 School of Excellence [Georgia Schools of Excellence].  We were also a National Blue Ribbon School as well, the only one in DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia], only three in the State of Georgia.  And we were one of those schools, and to know that this is working.  When I first came to Browns Mill [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia] we were a 23 percent free and reduced lunch.  We're now 50 percent.  Normally, when a school's free and reduced lunch numbers go up, there's--the scores normally plummet or go down, ours have continued to go up.  Children have continued to perform exceptionally well.  And I know that it has a lot to do with the educational curricular that we have in place.  But also children are healthier, and when you're healthy, you just automatically perform better.  And our children our educated.  We have a curriculum throughout the school from pre-K [pre-kindergarten] up.  They understand how to read labels, they know about sodium, carb, how much salt, how much water, so they're educated.  Two years ago, we graduated the first kids that had never known anything other than a sugar free zone school.  And so they now have been empowered to take care of themselves, and what I know is when kids buy into something, they will be with it forever.  They're loyal.  Adults get tired, we have a lot on our plates.  But my children bought into the sugar free zone, about being healthy and, you know, looking good and, feeling good and, being the smartest kids in the country.  And they've been very supportive of it.
Speaker 1: Have you been able to take it to the board of education to have other schools in the county or in the state become sugar free?
Speaker 2: What I have done is, of course, you know, and in case you don't know, we've had three superintendents within the last six years.  We have Dr. Crawford Lewis.  This is his well second year, he's completed his second year going into his third year.  So actually I have written a proposal upon his request looking at doing a wellness program thought the county.  We have over one hundred thousand students here in DeKalb County to look at how we can better support other schools and their health environment, students and our staffs and educating our parents.  And so, I believe that going forward this year that we'll see some changes in DeKalb County schools [DeKalb County School District] as it relates to wellness.
Story_ID: 565943
Speaker 1: As far as, we talked about the parents had to buy into it, the students had to buy into it, how are the teachers buying into it?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing that I noticed and I've been a teacher, is that teachers basically, they have their own minds, and they have to be sold on projects and programs.  And basically, I knew that they would be the people in the trenches, they would have to hold the line.  They couldn't bring cakes and cookies and eat junk food, nor give out candies when the kids pass tests.  No birthday parties with--celebrated with cupcakes anymore.  And things that they used to get kids to, you know, to do the things that they needed to do, like I did as a classroom teacher when I didn't know any better.  You know, I shared with them, I said, "Don't you want to come to school and do what you signed the contract to do every day?  Educate children, see them learn, see them grow, or do you want to talk to kids and discipline them all day?  Do you wanna hold your breath every year and pray that our test scores come out okay or do you want to be assured that they will?"  I said, "I need your support.  I need you to come on board with a program that I believe would change all of our lives for the better.  Not just our children but us as well.  And if you support me in this sugar free zone, I think you'll be able to come and to be able to better do your job every day.  And I think it perhaps it would probably even help some of us as well."  And I knew who my powerbrokers were [at Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia].  So I worked on them first.  And we had the first year probably 70, 80 percent buy in.  And you know, I encouraged people, if this isn't for you, you know, we're going to do this and perhaps there's something else or someplace else that would fit your needs better.  So I did some career counseling as well, because I knew that we owed this to our children and it wasn't about Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler], or about other the adults.  It was about us preserving the health and lives of our children.
Speaker 1: So once, once the teachers bought into it, did they become active as far as--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: --exercising
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We have wellness center.  We have a gym.  And so, it's actually a wellness center before and after hours.  We actually had a personal trainer to come in to work with the teachers.  We have staff members that have certification and they go out, down and work.  We ordered treadmills.  We have steppers.  And so we have some people that, you know, they're conscious of what they eat, and they feel good about themselves.  And so, of course, you know, they work out as well.  So we make it an environment--teachers come very early, they leave late.  And we wanted to make, we wanted to make it an environment that would also support their health as well.
Story_ID: 565944
Speaker 1: Tell me about, about your books.
Speaker 2: My first book, I self-published.  It was 'Naturally Yours: Desserts' ['Naturally Yours: Gourmet Desserts,' Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  Desserts was the hardest thing for me to conquer, but one thing that I noticed when we were in, when I was going to group, is that people lose 50, 150, 200 pounds.  And as I went, I would noticed that in some cases it would begin to come back, and this person that was so full of life and so full of energy, I could see it leaving them.  And them sort of getting lost and going back and, you know, it's almost as if it's the shame.  I'm gaining this weight back and all this stuff that I've been saying, it's not working.  What do I do?  And I said, "Well perhaps if people didn't have to pull their sweet tooth or give up sweets forever, you know, have it in moderation, have 'em healthier, they could still have desserts and it'd be a part of their lifestyle."  And so I believed that I can create a natural dessert book and not use refined flours and sugars which often led to cravings.  And it would allow people to still enjoy desserts in some point in their lives.  And so, I created this book and it's different from other books because each chapter whether it's ice cream or cakes, soy cream in my case, or pies, or cookies, I tell what that meant to me and how I came to know that in my life.  I talk about sweet bread.  It's the first cake that I ever remember my mom [Ruthie Waters Sanders] making without any frosting or icing because that was basically saved, reserved for hol- for Christmas and for Easter, or something like that, you got icing.  But it was just a simple pan of sweet bread.  And I wanted to share with people in there things that I believe that they needed to know that would help them, give them a regiment.  And so that was 'Naturally Yours.'  And about two or three years later, I was picked up by a publisher, Penguin books, that's by Putnam out of New York [Penguin Putnam, Inc.; Penguin Group USA].  And they did a remake of 'Naturally Yours: Desserts,' and it was called 'Dessert Lovers' Choice' ['Dessert Lovers' Choice: Naturally Sweet, Naturally Delicious,' Yvonne Sanders-Butler] which included the same recipes but more health information.  We did a diabetic exchange.  We did recipes for people that were trying to cut carbs or fat or they were diabetics, to show them what they could eat.  We told them where they could find, you know, all of the ingredients.  A lot of health information went into that.  And my editor actually talked me into writing 'Healthy Kids, Smart Kids' [Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  And in that book I tell the Browns Mill [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia] story.  I actually tell how I came by implementing the program because of my personal health challenges.  And you know, I tell parents who I think that are bombarded this day and time by, you know, everybody with a health product, or what do you do to get it right, you know.  There's so much propaganda out there; it's so much information that I think that parents are sort of confused or people are just confused.  And I just wanted to tell, you know, people, very straightforward.  People that are spending lots of money, like I did, to make something happen.  It's just common sense.  It's just common sense and things that you already know.  And I tell them how to access that, you know, how to shop in the grocery store, what to look for.  I also have fifty recipes in there that are not desserts.  Fifty recipes that rock, according to children.  They've been children tested and approved, so we believe that they're really good recipes.  And we talk about physical activity and how that has to be a part of your program.  And it's just Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler] to other mothers, to other sisters, to friends, to fathers if they're raising their children.  And as an educator, you don't have to go out and pay all of this money for every program to raise test scores.  There're some things that we can look at, like diet and exercise, that will give you an advantage as well.  You know, because most of these programs, they're temporary.  After they've done what they needed to do, the child isn't any better off than they were before.  And so, in 'Healthy Kids, Smart Kids,' I give this information.
Story_ID: 565945
Speaker 1: When you were talking about 'Healthy Kids, Smart Kids' [Yvonne Sanders-Butler] and the recipes that were proven to be really good by the students.  I understand there's an oatmeal cookie.  Do they make it at your school [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  There's a schoolhouse oatmeal cookie [schoolhouse oatmeal raisin cookie].
Speaker 1: Schoolhouse, okay.
Speaker 2: And one thing that happened, I believed that my students and my parents were doing really, really well, And you know, they would be going all over.  That's before everybody had some healthy on out, you know, stocked.  And they were saying, you know, "What do we do?  You know, with the holidays coming up, and you know, it's the worst time for me."  And so, really for my family and my parents and children, I came up with a lot of these recipes and the schoolhouse oatmeal cookie is famous.  Everybody that has ever come to that school has asked for that cookie.  And basically, it is a cookie that's made with--it's made with the traditional oats and raisins and cinnamon and unbleached white flour, and wheat flour, and of course, we use soy margarine in it, and it's very natural.  It's really light, and the kids absolutely love it.  And so, we call it the schoolhouse oatmeal cookie because actually I made for my kids, you know.  I know that children at some point they're gonna want something that's sweet.  And I just wanted them to know that, you can eat healthier and you can eat healthy and you can still enjoy it.  So, we also made soy ice creams as well.  And so, they've all went out and bought Cuisinart blenders.  And we have twenty-two flavors of soy ice cream, and they know all of them.  And sometimes when we're doing different things with math, they'll bring and make a recipe using measurements.  Because you can teach across the curriculum and they'll bring it in and then I'll sample like 130 students and it is overkill, but they have internalized it and they know what it's all about now.  So, if Yvonne Butler [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler] should get hit by an ice cream truck, my kids have it.
Speaker 1: Okay. And there's something--did you, you sent Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] an, a sweet potato pie?  Was it sweet potato pie, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah I--
Speaker 1: --and, and your cookies?
Speaker 2: --did.  I did.  I sent sweet potato pie made from sweet potatoes from a place called Vardaman, Mississippi, which is the sweet potato capital of the world.  It is in Mississippi so, of course, I used those sweet potatoes.  And we sent oatmeal cookies, and I would send better than brownies [better than fudge brownies] samples as well.  And we actually sent those to the cafe manager, Rosie [Rosie Daley].  And so, they thought that they was absolutely wonderful and we're sort of waiting to hear how that came out.  Yeah.  But they certainly enjoyed them.
Story_ID: 565946
Speaker 1: Now, you find, found your company, and what year was this?
Speaker 2: Ennovy [Ennovy, Inc.] was founded almost three years ago.  We're going into our third year with Ennovy.  Actually, it's Yvonne, the name turned backwards.  After I made my lifestyle change, I didn't want to change my name my mother [Ruthie Waters Sanders] gave me that name and I love it, but I did, a part of me had changed and would never be the same again.  And so, I reversed my name.  And my company is Ennovy.  It's a wellness behavior management company that support nutrition and health in schools, universities and in corporations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that we did not talk about that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I think we've covered everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 565947
Speaker 1: One thing that I know that you'd like to tell us about is, your husband [Floyd Butler] and your son.
Speaker 2: Oh, my husband and my son.  Basically, I've known my husband since I was thirteen years old.  I actually knew at thirteen years old I wanted to marry him.  He, he's great.  He's a great person.  He's very opposite, very laid back, and he actually was raised on a very large farm.  And we also live on a farm, a horse farm.  We have horses here.  And very quiet spirit, he's always afforded me and allowed me the opportunity to do whatever I wanted to do.  And he stood by and supported me in doing that.  And he's made tremendous sacrifice for me to, you know, step out here, to be on the road.  He raised my son a lot when I was out advocating or championing a different cause or in school.  And so, I just don't know what my life would be without him.  And we have our son, Denard [Denard Butler], who's twenty-three.  He is a cowboy.  He's away in college in Oklahoma [Bacone College, Muskogee, Oklahoma].  He's on the collegiate rodeo circuit and professional circuit as well.  He's a team roper, a bulldogger, and a calf roper.  And my husband trains and breeds Tennessee Walkers, and he shows.  And I get to ride, when I behave or at least attempt to do anything in the barn.  And so, they have been very supportive of me in my career.  And we know that it takes a lot of energy.  Actually, I mortgaged my home to spread this message.  And $150,000 to save kids, to save people because I knew that the obesity crisis, I didn't know that that would be the name of it, but I knew something was happening.  I think that the obesity crisis with children and with adults, it's our tsunami.  It's our Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], and having almost lost my life I knew I had to take a stand.  And so, they would hear me go on and on and on and preaching about this and something has to happen.  And I'm just so glad that I still have a husband that loves me and a son, because I'm sure it can get old at time.  But they're very excited for all of the things that I've done and for all of the national attention that we've gotten.  And they love being out of the way of the camera and the lights and it works for me, though.
Story_ID: 565948
Speaker 1: Besides the obesity problem in our children, what are your concerns for the African Americans?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm concerned that we, there's now a culture that is breeding apathy within our children, and that they've lost their way.  And we as adults and as parents, we have to help stop this madness.  I want them to be young people.  I want them to enjoy being young and doing all of the fun things, great things that we did, at least we thought they were, but with responsibility.  And our music, I'm sure that there is message in some of the rap.  But a lot of it is so not responsible.  In the videos, in the things that are being placed on TV, children are more concerned about that, than graduating from school.  The male dropout rate for African American males.  To be--to say that our children will go back, when a black man couldn't get a job in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], to say that they won't even be able to have a factory job or construction job because you'll have to have a degree and they seem to not even care.  That is very, very upsetting to me.  And to see that many African Americans who are profiting off these young people to say that it is an art, I think that, you know, art is not something that's supposed to kill you, or devastate you, or to keep you from not being able to support yourself.  So many drugs on the street, I think we should be doing something.  It is time for a revolution.  We don't have to wait on any one person to do it.  We as individuals, as adults, we are the caretaker of these young people as people took care of us, and I think we need to take a stand.  I think our churches need to be more active.  The roles that they once played in the African American community, they're not playing those roles anymore.  It's not personal to me, I think that ministers, I think they have a lot on their plate.  It's a hard job to do.  Anytime you have to listen to all the concerns of the world, I think it's very taxing.  And I think that, not like when I grew up with ministers, they had to work a job and then come to church and preach, and do revival, and work a job, and it wasn't any money, and people still had problems.  We're at a time now that we have all the megachurches and sometimes I don't know the world from the church.  The glitz and the glitter and all of the stuff.  And now, the young people are worried about getting theirs and not about their spirit, their soul.  They're worried about music, a ride, clothes, and good time.  And to only worry about those things and not about education, the future of where we're going, I just think it's a cocktail for genocide for us as a people.  And so that concerns me greatly.  And we have to step up to the bat and be responsible, even if it's not a message that they wanna hear, or that's popular.  And I think that we're shirking on our responsibilities as adults and as parents, and as leaders as well.
Story_ID: 565949
Speaker 1: Because this, this information is going to be available for the future generations, what message would you want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: I would like to tell them that they come from a beautiful place in this world and in this country.  They come from queens and they come from kings, and they come from people that in some cases stood ten feet tall.  They came from a people who gave their lives so that they could be free.  Even if they had to die to make sure that their future was insured.  And I want them not to be selfish, but I want them each and every day to think about the sacrifices that were made for them.  And that these aren't just people that are on pictures or in song.  But they are people that actually believed that they were going to be so great that they could do nothing less than give their life.  And I want them to be responsible and I want that for their children to have a future and for them to make the sacrifice today, not let another day go by without saying that they too will make a difference to keep us a great people.
Speaker 1: I wanna thank you for taking the time to share your story with us.  It will truly be an inspiration for generations to come.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much for coming to interview me.
Story_ID: 565950
Speaker 1: This picture was taken I believe in '91 [1991].  I'm gonna start at the top to my left.  That's Annette [Annette Sanders Roberts], that's my youngest sister.  And next to Annette is Doris [Doris Sanders Porter], and Doris is number four.  And that is Johnathan, my late brother, Johnathan Man Sanders [Johnathon Sanders], who we miss very, very much.  And that is Betty [Betty Sanders Mayfield] in the pink next to Johnathan to his right.  Betty is number five, and I'm number six, yours truly, in the beige in the top with, of course, a great '90s [1990s] do.  The bottom to the left is Shirley, Dr. Sanders [Shirley Sanders].  She has one of her legs tucked because she has a fracture for being on call and walking the floors.  And my late mother, Ruthie Sanders [Ruthie Waters Sanders] who is certainly a champion.  And my father West Sanders.  My oldest sister Dorothy [Dorothy Sanders Walls], who basically got it all started for all of us, first college member and next to her is my oldest sister, Lillie Louise [Lillie Sanders Noel].  And that is the Sanders family.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good enough.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is Floyd Denard Butler [Denard Butler], my son, and Denard was in high school when he took that picture at eighteen.  He's now twenty-three years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: 'Healthy Kids, Smart Kids' [Yvonne Sanders-Butler] was published in September, 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: 'Dessert Lovers' Choice' ['Dessert Lovers' Choice: Naturally Sweet, Naturally Delicious,' Yvonne Sanders-Butler] was released in May of 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: 'Naturally Yours: Desserts and More' ['Naturally Yours: Gourmet Desserts,' Yvonne Sanders-Butler] was actually published in 2001.  It's self-published by me.  And the recipes were created by my mom and myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me when I was fourteen years old in Greenwood, Mississippi, the Delta of Mississippi.  And it is in the book 'Black Women's Lives' ['Black Women's Lives: Stories of Pain and Power'] written by Kristal, Dr. Kristal Brent Zook.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Got it.
Speaker 2: God that is the biggest Afro in the world, 1975, my senior year [at Durant Attendance Center, Durant, Mississippi], great year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good.  Next.  And description please.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of--I am to your left and that is my sister Betty to the right.  I was three years old and she was five years old in this picture and I believe it was in 1960, June of 1960.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 2: Well, that is me after a Thanksgiving dinner.  And if I am correct I was thirty in that picture; twenty-eight, I'm sorry, in that picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is my picture as a third grade teacher, and if I am correct I was thirty-five years of age.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I got it.
Speaker 2: That is my mother to the left with the white pants on and that's my father's sister to the right.  And that picture was taken in 1960--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --at our home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is my mother and her beautiful baby daughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's great.  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  That is my seventh grade picture, my seventh grade promotional picture (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: That picture is a picture of, standing to the left of my father is Doris, and to the right is yours truly, Yvonne [HistoryMaker Yvonne Sanders-Butler].  At the bottom to the left is Annette, and to the right is Betty, and I think that picture was taken in 1978.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Where?
Speaker 1: In Pickens, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of myself and my husband, Floyd [Floyd Butler].  And that picture was taken in 1979.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Durant, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.  Good.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.  This is a picture of myself, expecting.  I'm the only that looks like I'm expecting to the left.  And that is my sister Doris in the center, and to the right of her is Lillie, and Annette is posing with the white shirt on, and my oldest sister is peaking from behind Dorothy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is Black Enterprise, the February issue of 2007, the motivation section, An Apple a Day.
Speaker 2: And you're in the picture, in school?
Speaker 1: And that is me in my cafeteria, in my school [Browns Mill Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia], eating a healthy lunch.
Speaker 2: Issue--December 2006 issue of Southern Living magazine and that is the Georgia Living section.
