Story_ID: 19764
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I'm the interviewer.  And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  Today's date is Wednesday, August 11th, 2004, and this interview is taking place at the Capitol Hilton in Washington, D.C.  Now if you would, just first for the record please tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Joseph Monroe Segars, S-E-G as in George, A-R-S.
Speaker 1: And Ambassador could you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: November 6, 1938, Hartsville, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Could you spell Hartsville?
Speaker 2: H-A-R-T-S-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: Presently retired, former school teacher and foreign service officer.
Story_ID: 19765
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Salmon.
Speaker 2: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Spring.
Speaker 2: Your favorite color?
Speaker 1: Blue.
Speaker 2: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Jamaica.
Speaker 2: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 1: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  In response to "How you doing?"  "If I were doing any better there would be two of me."
Story_ID: 19766
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your mother's name, where she was born and how she grew up and that kind of thing if you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was born in South Carolina, Hartsville, Darlington County actually as well.  She grew up as a youngster in South--in Hartsville, married at a very young age as most women did in those days and started to raise a family.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Carrie, Carrie Lee Bailey Segars, yeah.  She married as I said before and started to raise a family there.  Myself and my older two siblings were born in Hartsville, South Carolina and shortly after I was born my family migrated to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where the other three were eventually born.  There are six of us.  She is still living, presently in a nursing home, just outside of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about what life was like when she was a, a little girl, when she was a young girl growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really because of the circumstances of her leaving when I was quite young and I was left in the care of an aunt and uncle.  So I didn't really spend a lot of time, social time with her as a child growing up.  It was only later on when I eventually moved to Philadelphia that we really became a, a family.
Speaker 1: And what precipitated the move to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: The same reason why many people were, were moving north at that time, better jobs, better opportunities, more money, improved living conditions.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you, when you made the move to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: I didn't make the final move 'til I graduated from high school.  I was back and forth practically every summer and they were there on those other occasions.  But I didn't move permanently until I graduated from high school which would have been 1950--I'm aging myself, 1956.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk a little bit--well actually tell me this, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very strong willed woman, very domineering and she had a very fierce sibling rivalry with her older sister, older, older sister who is also in a nursing home now and still living.  The only, only, the only, there are only two of them still live in the entire group.  But they had a--and as a, as a young woman trying to raise a family in, in Philadelphia it was a pretty tough struggle and she became tough minded as a result of that.  And I would describe her as a very tough minded lady even today.
Story_ID: 19767
Speaker 1: And then let's talk a little bit about your father starting with his name and where he was born and how he grew up?
Speaker 2: Theoplises Segars also born in South Carolina, 1913 I believe.  Not very much education, married my mother, started a family and he--and as I said they moved north.  He worked for Pennsylvania Railroad in the mail department for most of the time in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Unfortunately he didn't take care of himself.  Probably drank too much and smoked too much and died at the very early age of 52.  But here again I didn't really know him until I was about thirteen, fourteen years old but loved him.  He was a great guy, a very, very good pal so to speak, kind of rough cut but a, a very nice person.
Speaker 1: And could you spell Theoplises for us?
Speaker 2: T-H-E-O-P-L-I-S-E-S.
Speaker 1: And did your father ever, did he ever have the opportunity to share some stories with you about what life was like for him as a little boy?
Speaker 2: Not really, didn't talk much about that.  I know that he had a pretty rough life.  His, his mother was married twice so there are two sets of children, half brothers, half sisters.  And I didn't know my, my original grandfather on my father's side but I did get to know the second one.  His name was Mr. Engs, I remember that quite nicely.  And I remember they left South Carolina after my family so I got to know them a little bit before they moved north.  They eventually settled in Pleasantville, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is your--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, yes.
Speaker 1: Your paternal grandparents.  And what were their names?
Speaker 2: Engs, Janie Engs and [step-grandfather] Foster Engs.
Speaker 1: And could you spell Engs for us?
Speaker 2: E-N-G-S, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about them?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot about my grandfather but my grandmother because she was actually in New Jersey, got to know her real, real well and she was quite a character. She enjoyed--I remember after I grew up and got on my own, I enjoyed sports cars, tiny ones, midgets.  And she thrilled in riding in my sports car with the top down, yeah.  She was a riot.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Rough cut, rough character.  He didn't take any stuff off of anybody.  He was a real pal but not very, not a good disciplinarian.  My mother was a disciplinarian so everything that needed to be done in terms of punishment, she was the one who meted it out not him.  He was more of a "pal-ly" type and didn't mind you having a beer with him or smoking a cigarette with him, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 19768
Speaker 1: And can you talk a little bit about the aunt and uncle who raised you, who you lived with? Starting with their names and tell us a little bit about them?
Speaker 2: Walter and Frances Hines.  My uncle was born in North Carolina, moved to Hartsville [South Carolina] with his family at a very early age, didn't have much education again because people in those days, education was not a primary consideration. But I remember him, he was, he was a painter.  He worked in the cotton mill in, in South Carolina as a maintenance person I guess you would call him.  He did the primary painting there and as a second job he also painted you know and I learned how to paint working with him.  He was--my aunt and uncle didn't have any children of their own so I sort of became their adopted child in principal and he was a good provider.  I found him a bit mean spirited at times but you know we survived that.  He died in 1962 I believe.  She's still living and became very ill a few years ago.  And because she had no one else and because she had been very good to me, my sister and I--my youngest sister and I were perhaps the closest nieces and nephews in, in her life. And so I felt an obligation to bring her to Washington [D.C.] and put her in a nursing home because she couldn't stay there.  She could have stayed there but I didn't feel that was the very best situation so we brought her to, to Washington.
Speaker 1: And how was it that--?
Speaker 2: (off camera discussion)?
Speaker 1: And Ambassador how was it that you came to live with them?  How was that decision made?
Speaker 2: I'm told because I was quite young at the time that the decision was based on the fact that I was very young and as a baby not in the best of health and, and moving to the harsh winter environment or the harsher environment might not be a good idea at the time but at some point I would be allowed to, to join them.  So, I started my life there.
Speaker 1: And this aunt and uncle, was this your mother's sister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 19769
Speaker 1: How far back you can trace your ancestors?  Do you know if your people came from free people or if they came from slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestor and the origin?
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Frankie Bailey] on my mother's side tells us that her father was born into slavery, she was not.  We, I--because I traveled overseas I did not participate in a lot of family reunions but these things were discussed during these times.  But as, as best I can tell her father was, grandfather was born into slavery.  She was not of course.  And her memory was not that good and there were very few records in, in those days.  I mention there's something in the question regarding names.  Segars is a very popular name in South Carolina, particularly among Caucasians.  And so I, we speculate that the name derives from the fact that some 'benevolent' land owner or slave owner gave us my family name, Segars.
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit more about your grandparents.  You talked a little bit about your paternal grandparents.  What about your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandmother lived with my aunt and uncle so that--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Frankie, Frankie Bailey, so I got to know her and her side of the family very well because they were living in Darlington County.  She is a Kelly by birth and so I got to know the Kelly family very nice.  Grandmom, Grandma was very, very nice.  My aunt--my wife got to meet her before she passed and found her to be a charming old lady.  She, of all the sisters she preferred to live with Aunt Frances.  They, they got along perhaps better than, than with the rest of the children and whenever she went to visit the other sister, the other daughters, she didn't stay very long.  She was always back home with Frances.  And they, they quarreled and they fussed and all but they got along very well.  And she was an excellent cook, very, very gentle also.  And used to sit in a rocking chair and tell us stories about her growing up as a child and the things that she didn't have and how kids were so spoiled and how they--even way back then.  But she was a very, very sweet old lady.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the stories that she told you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really, no.  Mostly about working in, in the cotton fields I suppose and collecting tobacco, whatever.  They harvested tobacco I suppose, yeah.
Story_ID: 19770
Speaker 1: Ambassador, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember my first day in, in--they call it kindergarten now but during those days they called it primer school because they primed you for the first grade.  I remember going and luckily the school was in walking distance and we had other kids going at the same age so walking to school and starting out.  As a matter of fact my first teacher's name was Mary Harold.  I, I don't know why I should remember that all of a sudden but I, but I do, yeah.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit more about like what was a typical day like for you as a young boy?  You'd wake up in the morning and what would the day be like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned early on that I was expected to help out with the chores so I learned how to do things at a very early age, washing dishes and, and gathering firewood and bringing in water and stuff like that and eventually learned how to iron my own clothing.  And when I became old enough I started helping my uncle with you know the painting on the side.  And during--and also in an effort to earn money for clothing and stuff like that, working in the fields.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do?
Speaker 2: We harvested tobacco and picked cotton.
Speaker 1: And what was harvesting tobacco like?  Could you kind of go through the process for us?
Speaker 2: It was a dreary process and I didn't like it  because had these huge worms, called them tobacco worms and they had a pretty good bite and some of them were poisonous as well.  I was never bitten, but I was always concerned about that.  But the tobacco is harvested I think about August-September, it was very hot.  And the tobacco it was planted far enough apart so that you could drive a cart with a mule or something down the rows and people could pluck off the leaves and put them in the cart.  They hauled them to a table where they're placed on a table and they're tied several leaves together and then they go into a barn where it's heated and, and they're cured.
Speaker 1: And what was picking cotton like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a drudgery.  I hated it.  And I never became good at it purposely because the more you picked, they more they expected you to pick.  So if I got a reputation as a lousy picker, then I'm better off in school and not being out there.  So I didn't want to do it,  I didn't enjoy doing it and I was glad I didn't have to do it.  Painting was much more preferable.  I wanted--so I became very good at painting so I could spend time painting rather than picking cotton.
Story_ID: 19771
Speaker 1: And can you kind of share some stories with us about what holidays were like in your house?  What were Christmas and Thanksgiving, what were they like growing up?
Speaker 2: In, in the South, Thanksgiving was fun because my uncle who was an excellent provider was always going out getting the hog slaughtered at, at, holi--Christmas time, holi--Thanksgiving time.  And was able, he would go out and buy this--we had, didn't have a farm, we lived in the city.  He would go out and buy a hog and bring it home.  It was already killed and so he'd put it up, tie it up and, and split it down the middle and, and all this horrible stuff came out (laughs).  It was fun to watch but I didn't, didn't enjoy you know doing it.  And then you'd put the meat away.  Some you'd put into the smoke house and you cured it, save it for a later day and then you, of course you at the, the chitterlings and the pig feet and stuff like that right away.  But it was a lot of fun.  And then at Christmastime there was always a turkey and I don't want to describe it though because it's, it's cruel to think about you know killing the poor bird but that's what they did.  You know Thanksgiving and Christmas were a lot of fun and got lots of toys.  And I believed in Santa Claus and then I, I discovered the great deception one night, quite innocently looking in a closet and found all the things that I told aunt and uncle I wanted Santa Claus to bring me and they were there.  So then I knew what was going on.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh I was, I was a--I was, I was fooled for a long time.  I was almost at the magical age of twelve I believe when, when I guess it's--they're not supposed to come.  But one of the nice things I got for Christmas was an electric train and that was the fantasy of every, every boy in those days getting an electric train and I had gotten mine.  And I kept it for a long time and so that my youngest brother played with it, and then that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 19772
Speaker 1: Can you please give us your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Joel, my oldest brother.  He's two years older than I am.  He was born in 1936.  Carolyn, my oldest sister, 1937, she passed away, cancer about ten years ago, me, 1938, November, Jerry, the next boy, Cynthia and my younger sister Marilyn.
Story_ID: 19773
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe your community for us?  Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on and what was your community like?
Speaker 2: I remember it very well but even more so because when my aunt  [Frances Hines] became ill in 1997, I had to go back several times.  The same house is there.  They expanded it, added a bathroom, another kitchen, etc., etc.  But it's, Tillotson Avenue, Hartsville, South Carolina.  The neighborhood--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Could, could you spell it?
Speaker 2: The avenue?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: T-I-L-L-O-T-S-O-N Avenue.  And there were lots of other kids around my age, some older.  People had lots of kids in those days.  We grew up together, went to school together, we played together.  We had a great time.
Speaker 1: And like how was your community, you know, were there mainly houses or were there stores mixed in, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Mostly homes.  There were a few mom and pop stores.  One--there were several stores were you could go and buy candy and ice cream and stuff like that and then you'd have the commercial section which was called 'Downtown' and everybody went downtown on the weekends to go to the movies, to do shopping, department stores, etc.
Speaker 1: So Ambassador tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells?  Smells and sounds, our neighbor--there was no such thing as zoning law in those days.  Our neighbor who was a part time farmer kept his farm an--his, his mules on his property which backed up to our property so you could always smell the barn and hear the horses and mules making noise.  And then some people had pigs right in, in the city and so you could hear those.  We had chickens so the chickens were always making noise especially old roosters.  And smells, flowers, always flowers around.  I enjoyed flowers.  I enjoyed flowers.  I enjoyed walking in gardens and stuff like that.  Those were the things that, that, that attracted me.  Today I love the smell of flowers and luckily our, our house will have jasmine all around us so that will be a great thing to, to enjoy.
Speaker 1: And what sounds, the sounds of the animals?
Speaker 2: One sound that I, the sounds of the animals yes, but in addition to that in those days we had these air raid practices and always these air raid sirens going off. [during World War Two] And whenever there was a fire there was some special whistle in the fire station that then let people know there was a fire somewhere.  But I remember mostly the, the air ring, the air raid sirens that were constantly going off.
Story_ID: 19774
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories that you'd like to share with us of your childhood and what growing up was like for you?
Speaker 2: I wanted to, to get away from that place as quickly as possible.  I wanted to join my family [in Philadephia, Pennsylvania] on a permanent basis so when I graduated from high school I left.  And it's interesting you asked that because I was just in South Carolina in June.  My old, my old high school has been turned into a home, a social, sort of social center for the community and it, with a particular emphasis on less privileged.  So we spent a lot of time raising money for the foundation and I was there to participate in the program along with [US] Congressman, with a Congressman from, from South Carolina.  And it was--and, and many people that I had gone to school with, most of them were gone.  There were few that are still there.  We sort of talked about the old high school days and some of the, the good times we had and the bad times we had and our old high school principal who is still alive and about the rough times he, he gave us.  But no I wanted to leave as quickly as possible to, to be with my family and so when I got out of high school there was no need to stay.  I was planning to go back to go to school at South Carolina State but I changed my mind.  I just wanted out.
Story_ID: 19775
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about elementary school.  What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Butler, Butler Elementary School, Butler High School.  They were two separate institutions but Butler I guess was one of the leading bright figures of that, of that era in the, that part of South Carolina.  He was also a minister so everything was named after him.  So--.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in elementary school?  Do you remember any of your teachers or any of your friends in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said earlier my first teacher was Mary Harold.  I remember Ms. Becote (ph.) who taught elementary school but eventually moved on to high school so I, I had her in second or third grade but then also I had her as an English teacher in senior high school.  I remember her.  There was a Ms. Jackson.  There was a Ms. Manning who was our seventh grade teacher.  Professor Norwood, Professor McQueen, Coach Thomas.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school, friends of elementary school?  A kid who lived next door to me, his name, we called him Joe Boy.  He was my best buddy and I had a few cousins on my father's side who were you know pretty close.  Pretty close (unclear)(simultaneously)?
Speaker 1: What were things that you guys did?
Speaker 2: We played stickball, we played football, we had bicycles.  And it was nothing more fun than taking a new bicycle and taking the fenders off, turned into a hot rod, yeah.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what type of student were you in elementary school?  What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Pretty good.  As a matter of fact, I went from first grade to third grade.  We sort of skipped to second grade because we were so advanced.  I guess as you would, you would say using today's jargon, academically talented.  We were pretty smart but at the same time very playful so I got into a lot of trouble because of talking and not paying attention.  And I couldn't go and tell my aunt because you know that meant more punishment so I had to endure.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things that you, some of your favorite subjects in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed reading, read a lot.  And reading was my favorite, favorite subject and I, I when learned to read I just kept reading, reading, reading.  I remember one of my first books was by James Fenimore Cooper called "Last of the Mohicans" which I thought was a delightful book.
Speaker 1: In elementary school?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: Read a lot of comic books too.  Read a lot of "Tarzan" comic books and had a lot of misconceptions about you know the real world.  But I guess I enjoyed reading.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you during this time, during the elementary school years?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: At home I was very good because my aunt and uncle particularly she did not believe in you know sparing the rod.  And so we were punished for things that we were not supposed to do.  So I was, I was pretty, I was very obedient.  And even today whenever she can remember sometimes about that she talks about you know how, what a good child I was.  Those are her words.
Story_ID: 19776
Speaker 1: And at this time during elementary school, did you have dreams and aspirations? (pause)  Like what did you want to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted mostly to be away from South Carolina.  I didn't really start thinking about the future until I was much older because my, my preoccupation was to sort getting out, out of that place.  I didn't really, as I grew older I detested it even more because it was during the height of segregation and we didn't have as much as the whites kids had.  We--it was just not a very good time to do anything in, in the South and, and we felt very, I felt very threatened by authorities because you know bad things had happened to people and were indeed happening to people so I just wanted to get out of that, that situation.  It's interesting because I was, when I was there [recently], one of my high school buddies took me to the country club for lunch and that was the first time I'd ever seen that place.  I knew it was there.  We all knew it was there but you couldn't go close unless you were working there.  But to go there for lunch and even--didn't have time to play golf but when I go back I'll play golf but that was, that was quite something.  But it's amazing how things have changed now, yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you think that your desire to leave was fueled by you know your siblings being gone, your parents were gone?  And, and did they share stories with you about what the city was like and--?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I made trips to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as well and I got, and now the riding on the trolleys and people mixing freely together without any, any, any harm being done and that sort of thing and going swimming in the lake.  I didn't swim very well but it was a lot of fun, going to the zoo and that sort of stuff.  And the kids were just neat.  I mean they were you know cool.
Speaker 1: And why, why didn't you leave South Carolina earlier?  Why didn't you--why weren't you reunited with your family earlier?
Speaker 2: Good question and that's one I've, I've wrestled with quite a bit and, and I've had some conversations with my mother [Carrie Bailey Segars].  My father [Theoplises Segars] of course was gone but I, I don't have a good answer.  Now probably because my aunt and uncle [Frances and Walter Hines] had no children and they, they felt an attachment.  And my aunt in particular felt though I couldn't survive.  She felt I was very timid and you know I needed to be there with her cause I couldn't survive in, in the rough and tough Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And my mother and father you know, I guess feeling that because she had no children of her own you know and I'm being well cared for, of course not a burden on them.  I'm speculating.
Speaker 1: Yeah sure, sure.
Speaker 2: But I, I suspect that there's some truth to that, yeah.
Story_ID: 19777
Speaker 1: This is a, an early childhood picture with my family, part of my family in [Hartsville, Darlington county] South Carolina where I was born.  The little tyke in the middle is me.  My sister's on the left, my brother on the right, my grandmother, my aunt and uncle respectively.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Could I get everybody's names?
Speaker 1: Yes.  My sister's name is Carolyn, of course I'm Joseph in the middle, my brother Joel, my grandmother Mrs. Frankie Bailey, Mrs. Francis Hines and Mr. Walter Hines.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars (bottom center) with (clockwise from top left) his uncle Walter Hines, his aunt Frances Hines, his grandmother Frankie Bailey, his brother Joel Segars, and his sister Carolyn Wyche, South Carolina, ca. 1940.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19778
Speaker 1: This is me at age approximately fourteen.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars, ca. 1952.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19779
Speaker 1: My wife Elizabeth and I on a cruise approximately 1989.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with his wife, ca. 1989.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19780
Speaker 1: Elizabeth and I walking away after getting married.  This is June 13th, 1964.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with his wife, Elizabeth, at their wedding, June 13, 1964.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19781
Speaker 1: This is our son Ryan who was about thirty years old at that time.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with his son, Ryan, and wife Elizabeth, ca. 2001.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19782
Speaker 1: I'm with the Director General of Foreign Service, Ambassador Carol Hayes, Elizabeth on the left and Ryan our son on the extreme right.  This is on an occasion honoring me with a Consulate Service Award.  This was 1984.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with (from left) his wife Elizabeth, Ambassador Carol Hayes, and his son, Ryan, 1984.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19783
Speaker 1: Here I am on the cover of the "State" [State Department] magazine.  This is Christmas season, 19--about 1987 and I am deputy chief commission in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania.  I'm on the extreme bottom in the middle.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars on the cover of 'State' magazine ca. December 1987.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19784
Speaker 1: I am delivering a very brief speech after being the recipient of a doctor, doctorate of humane letters at Southeast University here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars giving a speech at Southeast University, Washington D.C. ca.1990s. From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19785
Speaker 1: Here I'm shown with my good friend and mentor Dr. Bernard Coleman also at the awards ceremony.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Bernard Coleman, at Southeast University, Washington, D.C.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19786
Speaker 1: I'm being embraced here by Mrs. Maureen Reagan, the daughter of the late President Ronald Reagan.  This is Dar es Salaam, Tanzania about 1987.  She was on a goodwill trip to East and Southern Africa.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Maureen Reagan, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, ca. 1987.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19787
Speaker 1: November 2nd, 1992, I'm being sworn in as Ambassador to the Republic of Cape Verde.  Elizabeth my wife is in the middle.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars is sworn in as ambassador to the Republic of Cape Verde with his wife, Elizabeth, November 22, 1992.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19788
Speaker 1: Here I'm signing my oath of office as ambassador [to Cape Verde].  My wife and son are in the background.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars signs his oath of office as ambassador, with his wife Elizabeth and son Ryan, Washington, D.C., November 1992.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19789
Speaker 1: My family and my wife's family who had come to Washington for the swearing in ceremony, my brother sitting in the middle with the dark suit, my mother to his immediate left, my mother-in-law to her left and my aunt to her right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what's your aunt's name?
Speaker 1: Mrs. Frances Hines that you saw earlier.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars' family, including (front, from left) his aunt Frances Hines, his mother-in-law Ethel Graham, his mother Carrie Bailey Segars, and his brother Joel Segars, Washington, D.C., November 22, 1992.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19790
Speaker 1: This is June 1976.  This is shortly after our arrival in Johannesburg, South Africa where I served as U.S. consul during the era of apartheid.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars, in an article from a Johannesburg newspaper, Johannesburg, South Africa, June 12, 1976.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19791
Speaker 1: Cape Verde, during the eruption of a volcano on the Island of Fogo.  This is 1995.  We'd gone to the island to, to gage the damage and to see what kind of assistance the U.S. and other donor communities could give Cape Verde.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars near an erupting volcano in the Republic of Cape Verde, 1995.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19792
Speaker 1: A family portrait, my wife, Ryan and myself shortly after being sworn in as ambassador.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with his wife, Elizabeth, and son Ryan after his swearing-in ceremony for his ambassador's post in Cape Verde, 1992.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19793
Speaker 1: Lagos, Nigeria approximately 1985, I have just been named an Honorary Chief.  I'm there in my glowing robe.  Chief Doss Benson (ph.) on the extreme left made the presentation.  My mother-in-law Mrs. Ethel Graham is beside him.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Chief T.O.S. [Theophilus Owolabi Shobowale] Benson, Segars' mother-in-law Ethel Graham, and others, Lagos, Nigera, ca. 1985.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19794
Speaker 1: Chief Doss Benson (ph.)and yours truly at the, at the, at the ceremony.  The Chieftancy-ship Ceremony.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Chief T.O.S. [Theophilus Owolabi Shobowale] Benson, Lagos, Nigeria, ca. 1985.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19795
Speaker 1: 1995 approximately we're on an island, Fogo Island where we've gone to donate a water well, which will bring water to the citizens of this tiny village.  I'm standing here with the Prime Minister of Cape Verde Carlos Viega.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Prime Minister Carlos Viega, Fogo Island, the Republic of Cape Verde, ca. 1995.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19796
Speaker 1: In Cape Verde with the prime minister on the occasion of the United States government donating a coast guard patrol craft to the Cape Verdean navy.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Prime Minister Carlos Viega, the Republic of Cape Verde.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19797
Speaker 1: Cape Verde, Republic of Cape Verde again on the occasion of the visit [US] Congressman Barney Frank who, who has a large constituency in Cape Verdeans in his district back in Connecticut [sic. Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Barney Franks and others, Republic of Cape Verde.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19798
Speaker 1: Diplomats do have a little fun sometimes.  Here we are on the U.S. sailboats to (unclear) in Cape Verde.  Our captain, Gary Dahm, and our consul Russell Hanks.
Speaker 2: [Joseph Segars with Gary Dahm and Russell Hanks, sailing near  Republic of Cape Verde.  From the collection of Joseph Segars.]
Story_ID: 19799
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were those experiences like?  And do you remember the name of your church?
Speaker 2: The first church I attended was First Baptist when--and I was there for most of my stay there.  We subsequently moved into another church because there was a church squabble and a new preacher came in and some of the, the members enjoyed that preacher, others did not so half of them decided to leave.  My good buddy in South Atlanta [Georgia], we were talking about the fact that my aunt was one of the ring leaders of the rebellion and led a whole lot of people out of that church into another church which was called Second Baptist as you would guess.  So, and well yeah I was an active churchgoer.  We--I participated in the Sunday school.  I actually taught Sunday school later on.  Yeah we were, we were avid churchgoers.
Speaker 1: And do you remember what some of your experiences were like in church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Going to church in the morning was fine but in the afternoon services and the evening services were a drag particularly as you got older because you wanted to be out in the street chasing the girls and doing other kinds of things that teenagers did.  So it didn't happen every Sunday but it was nice to be away.  When my, the second church opened because of conflicting schedules I don't know for some reason we had our service in the afternoon and that was also a drag.  But eventually we reverted to morning and that was a lot more do-able.
Story_ID: 19800
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends during the middle school years and what were some of your favorite subjects, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well friends were pretty much the same ones throughout the entire school history.  We all started together, some migrated in, others left.  More came in than left so we had pretty the same group of people that we grew up with right through.  Favorite subject again was reading and literature and history.  I enjoyed history very much, not as--reasonably good in math but didn't really, really care for it.  Chemistry I enjoyed as well.  We, in middle school of course we became more involved athletically.  I was not a very good athlete because I did not get an opportunity there again that protective shield was strung over me so I didn't really get a chance to, to really get out until I was older.  And the other kids had a lead on me but gradually I got pretty you know pretty good at it.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite sports?
Speaker 2: Football was my favorite sport.  We had football, we had basketball.  I was lousy with basketball so I didn't really have, you know enjoy it as a kid.  And but football was, was my favorite.
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this time in your life?  So yeah, around like the pre-teen years, who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: The older guys, yeah we looked up to them pretty much because you know they're a little older and had older kids living around so they were always--and my brother as well because he was a big shot in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he would come down and take care of all the bullies who had been picking on me during his absence.  He was my, one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: --And what kind of young man were you developing into and were you still the same somewhat quiet and, and what kind of young man were you developing into?
Speaker 2: I would say quiet yes and always trying to help other people out, girls became attractive and so you're always trying to, to get a girlfriend and usually someone that somebody else is already you know dating so that was a bit of a mess.  And a few of us had cars and so our, our guardians and our parents trusted us enough to let us go out joy riding on Sundays and that was always a lot of fun going to the drive-in theater, that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 19801
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your high school years.  What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Butler.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things were you interested in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Literature and acting and singing in the choir.  We, we had a very good choir.  We sang, we traveled a lot and, and we had--I enjoyed the lit club and particularly in the plays we had.  I remember one play when I was, it was called Sunny of Sunnyside and I was the, the main character was a handicap.  I had to learn how to walk with crutches and that was a, was a lot of fun.  It made me think about acting one of these days but somehow I lost interest in doing that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from high school?
Speaker 2: Ms. Richardson stands out in my mind because she was a lit teacher, literature and she was a very, very stern teacher but we--she was a very gorgeous woman and all the guys were just in love with her.  She was very nice figure, she drove a real tough car.  I mean just a real sharp person and everybody fell in love with her and she was pretty good.  We would get our mind on, on the work and I guess Ms. Becote (ph.) I mentioned her earlier, she was one of my favorites in high school because of her emphasis on English.  And our chemistry professor, Professor Norwood was a favorite.  He was a great guy and, and he wasn't afraid of kids using his chemistry lab.  You know you could go in and experiment, do all kinds of things within reason, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that, what, what were your dreams and aspirations at this time during the high school days?  What were you thinking you wanted to do when you grew up, when you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: At first I thought I wanted to, to go into the military because a lot of kids from Hartsville had gone into the military, they'd come back with lots of money and all the girls were attracted to them but then I said I don't want to do that.  But I did want to go to college.  I wanted to become an electrical engineer.  As a matter of fact we had the recruiters from the rural schools in the area all of them black of course, come by to talk to us about what their schools had to offer and I was dead set on going to South Carolina State to major in electrical engineering.  But something, somehow when I left after high school I lost interest in doing that.
Story_ID: 19802
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school, what did you do next?  And what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: 1956, after graduation I said earlier I, I left.  I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: What was that like for your aunt and uncle [Frances and Walter Hines] when you left?
Speaker 2: Well I left with the intention of coming back.  I was just going to be gone for the summer and, and come back and go on to school.  But when I got to Philadelphia, I decided that I wasn't going to come back.  As a matter of fact I didn't go back until Christmas.  And I had chat with my uncle and told him you know I thought I was going to go on off to school.  I didn't go to school right away, didn't have any money.  And my father [Theophlises Segars] didn't have any money to send me.  He thought it was a great idea.  He said fine, go ahead.  So anyway I, I worked for a year and anyway and, and in a way I was very helpful to my family because my father was not very conscious about paying taxes and that sort of thing and so taxes had lapsed and they were in trouble with the IRS and so we needed all the money that they could to make it straight.  By this time, my older brother had gone off to the service.  My sister, my older sister was working and we had three other siblings to look after too.  Because I was ten years old when my next--my oldest, my next brother was born and then my mother and father had two more kids after that, much to our dismay. We couldn't understand why these people were having all these children all of a sudden so, because we had to care for them and look after them.  Anyhow, so I worked for the first year.  I--
Speaker 1: What kind of work did you do?
Speaker 2: I worked in a lamp factory, making lamps.  Minimum wage was a dollar an hour.  My take home pay for a week's work was $33.70 and I used that to you know help out with food and stuff in the house.  I, I worked for a year and, but the desire to go back to school was still there and so I heard about Cheyney University [Cheyney, Pennsylvania].  The school sitting out from the country side which had a reasonable tuition for in-state students and that was something I ought to consider.  So I applied and was accepted.  I started school in, I guess September of 1957.
Story_ID: 19803
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences at, in college?
Speaker 2: Different.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Initially--well there weren't many people there who were not from Philadelphia or Pennsylvania or Washington, D.C., very few from South Carolina.  But our educational backgrounds were very similar and we had a--Cheyney it was based on the family concept.  It was an HBC [historically black college] which catered to, to young, underprivileged, poor people like myself.  So from that aspect I was able to fit in quite nicely and they made the process easier because of freshman orientation and the real family atmosphere that was associated with the university so I was able to adjust quite easily. And how did you get the money to pay for college?
Speaker 1: Well the first year my mother was able to assist.  Six hundred dollars was not a lot of money and I was commuting so that was a lot easier than living on campus.  And then I was, as a commuter I was able to use the family car and I made money taking people, other commuters back and forth to school, yeah.
Speaker 2: So what did you decide you'd major in?
Speaker 1: Well, at that time you had no choice if you went to Cheyney but to major in teach--education.  You could major in industrial arts, home economics or elementary education so I decided elementary education.
Speaker 2: So what happened to your dream of becoming an engineer?
Speaker 1: Forgot all about it.  Forgot all about it.  I lost complete interest in that because this was a totally new environment, I was you know quite happy.  It was a struggle but it was a nice struggle because other people were struggling too, you're not the only one.  And they had athletic programs, a choir, drama club, all of these things (unclear) to achieve.
Speaker 2: Were you--did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm?  What fraternity?
Speaker 1: Omega Psi  Phi.
Speaker 2: And why did you decide to pledge Omega?
Speaker 1: That's a good question.  Peer pressure.  Peer pressure.  We, we--the Omegas and the Kappas were the, were the two favored fraternities on campus and so the competition between the two was very keen.  They had these rush parties and things of that sort trying to attract you and we went to those.  And the guys that I developed a relationship with early on at Cheyney were all going to pledge Omega.  So my friends were going that way, it must be good enough for me, so I did.  But unfortunately I didn't make it that first year nor the second year.  I guess I was kicked off the line twice.  But my--.
Speaker 2: Why were you kicked off the line?
Speaker 1: Arrogance probably and the second year pledging with guys you pledge, pledging under guys you pledged with the year before was not, not easy.  And, and interest in my studies and maintaining friends I decided not to, to do it at that time, but eventually I did.
Speaker 2: And so what were you thinking you were going to do with your life?  What, what kind of profession were you thinking you would have?
Speaker 1: Well it's a teacher's college so the initial thing was to get your teacher's degree and then get your license and then you could go from there.  So I, I finished school in 1961, went off to Indiana to teach because they were heavily recruiting teachers and it paid more money than the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] school system.  So after, after four delightful years of college I headed off to, to [Gary] Indiana.  But college was, college was really fun.  I really enjoyed it and they helped you out if you helped yourself and so I was able to get jobs and several jobs which allowed me to pay my way after a while.  And by the, by the end of my second year I made enough money to live on campus in style and it was a lot of fun.  It was very good social life for me.  We, we studied hard though because it was tough.  They expected you to do well.  And Cheyney at that time had a very good reputation for turning out quality teachers so we had a tough reputation to, to--to live up to.
Story_ID: 19804
Speaker 1: And so what was the name of the first school where you taught and what grade did you teach?
Speaker 2: Gary, Indiana, Froebel [High School, Gary Indiana].  Actually Froebel at that time was a high school but we still had sixth through twelve and I taught sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And what was it like that first year of teaching?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was fun.  I had done reasonably well with my professional practicum and my student teaching so I had a very good basis to go into the classroom and that helped me out a--so it wasn't a, really a strain on me.  I was able to make the transition without a lot of trouble.  And I had a big group of kids.  They were different.  They spoke differently, different dialects and alliterations and things of that sort. But you get used to the MIdwestern jargon as we called it and it was, it was fun.  And, and we had a very good social life too because so many young teachers were starting in Gary at about the same time.  I think the year we began there were about 500 new teachers in the school system, most of them fresh out of college.  So we had a, we had a very great combination professionally and socially.
Speaker 1: And how did you like living in the Midwest?  How did living in the Midwest compare to living in the South and also in the east, on the east coast?
Speaker 2: Well you have to understand that Gary is a mill town.  Steel mills form the basis of the economy there.  And, and that's something I, I had not anticipated.  As a matter of fact I found Gary lacking in the new respects and I always tell a joke that if I had enough money to get back on the bus to go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I would have.  But unfortunately I did not, so I was stuck, had to make the most of it.  But it was different because on the one hand you have a society where people make a lot of money in the steel mills and other places, but socially a lot to be desired, sort of a backwater.  My, my wife who's from Indiana also, she's from South Bend which is sixty miles away, but in a much more cultured atmosphere.  They, they sort of shunned Gary.  They looked down on Gary from where they were because of course Notre Dame was at South Bend and a lot more you know uppity kinds of people.  But anyway, their school system was a very good school system, very, very, very advanced with good ideas, good leadership so it was a lot of fun teaching there despite the other negative drawbacks.
Speaker 1: And did you, how long did you continue to teach?
Speaker 2: I taught in Gary for six years and by this time I was married and my wife and I decided we didn't want to stay there, so we left.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: She was a new teacher as well, recruited from Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky] .  We met in the bowling alley.  Yeah, she was introduced to me by some friends, lady friends who had gone to Cheyney with me and they were teaching together.  And I was on the hunt for a, a, a date or girlfriend and, and they knew her and they thought they knew me so they thought we'd make a nice (unclear) so they introduced us.
Speaker 1: And so you, you taught in Gary from 1961 to 1967?
Speaker 2: '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: And where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: Back to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: To teach?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And where did you, where did you teach in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Taught at, G.W. Charles Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Sixth grade again?
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.  And my principal, a very nice guy Joe Klein was, was favorably impressed with my abilities and ability to handle the children and he made me his assistant.  As a matter of fact, recommended I go back to school and get my, my principal's license.  And I was just starting at Temple [University, Phiadelphia, Pennsylvania] in 1970 when my processing of the Foreign Service was completed.
Story_ID: 19805
Speaker 1: So how did the whole Foreign Service come about?  What were you--how did that come about?  How were you introduced to the Foreign Service and why did you want to join?
Speaker 2: I was introduced to the Foreign Service in Jamaica.  That's why Jamaica has such significance for me.
Speaker 1: So were you there on vacation?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Another couple, my wife and I decided to save our money together in a club to go on this summer vacation to Jamaica, which was organized by a travel agency here in Washington [D.C.], Capital City Travel.  The husband of the, the trip organizer was a Foreign Service officer and we got to know him because of some fiasco with the chartered plane which had us leaving Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] a day late.  So we spent a night at the W. Strafford Hotel that the company put us up because they had a whole lot of irate travelers on their hands and so they put us up overnight and fed us nicely and I got to know Barney Coleman, the Foreign Service officer.  And at the same time I'm very disgusted with the school system because of the things we were talking about earlier.
Speaker 1: But tell us about it.  Why were you starting to become a little disgusted with the school system?
Speaker 2: Well the conflict between the school and the home was a primary concern.  I'm trying to instill certain values on children and during the day you're reasonably successful but they go home and then there's a totally different atmosphere, totally different environment.  So it, it's sort of a, a wasted effort in many respects because some children you know are strong and they, they can make it but others succumb to the, the home environment.  And, and at the same time you have a situation where the schools are failing academically, administratively because there's no money in the budgets for anything.  There are lots of things you want to do that you cannot do because there's a lack of funds.  So being discouraged as I was, I was looking about for something else to do really and so this was sort of dropped in my lap.  So Barney said "Why don't you consider the Foreign Service," and it sounded like a good idea and of course we discussed it when I got back home.  He said "Come to Washington [D.C] and, and I'll introduce you around and see what you think."  And I said to myself this guy he's not really serious so I didn't bother to call him cause I didn't think he was serious.  I just didn't feel you know that--anyhow, he called me about a month after we returned from Jamaica and says "I thought you were coming to Washington."  And I said you know, "Were you serious?"  He said, "Of course I was serious."  So we, my wife and I, Elizabeth, drove to Washington [D.C.].  He took us to the State Department, I met people there, talked to them about the Foreign Service and gee whiz you know travel, meeting new people, going places, that's not so hard to take.  We'll, we'll think about it and we did and we made a decision to change.
Story_ID: 19806
Speaker 1: And so what was your first assignment in the Foreign Service and what was it like, the Foreign Service process?
Speaker 2: Well upon entering, it was a little difficult for us economically because both of us were teaching and living now on two incomes and then relocating to Washington [D.C.] which was much more expensive than Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on one income.  We had thoughts about that, but we decided to make a leap anyway.  And then after seven years of trying to have children my wife decided to get pregnant and so we had a crumb crusher on the way as well.  But anyway we made the adjustment, settled into Washington in suburbia Washington, Fox Hill.  And we--.
Speaker 1: And this is in the early 70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: This is 1970 yes, we, we moved to, to Washington [D.C.] in June of '70 [1970].  And we went through our initial orientation program and we got our assignments probably in about September-October.  I was assigned to Austria, Vienna as a council officer.  Why Vienna?  We wanted to go to Africa but there were forty-four young officers in my class.  There were two African jobs listed and the competition was quite keen and, and others were wanting to go as well.  And so we discussed, my wife and I, where would we like to go other than, than Africa of all the posts on that list.  And Vienna became our first choice.  It's ironic because Vienna had never had a black Foreign Service officer.
Speaker 1: So you were the first?
Speaker 2: And the--yes.  The Ambassador [John P. Humes] had come to Washington on a visit and he let it be known to his personnel people that we wanted more diversity in his embassy.  There was a, a black secretary, but no black officers.  At the same time the, the personnel officer, I'll never forget her name, Ree Dolan said "Well, it's excellent Mr. Ambassador because a black officer in the new class has bid on a job in Vienna."  And without even looking at my credentials he said "I'll take him.  When is he coming?"  Well we couldn't go right away because I had to learn German.  And because my wife was pregnant and the medical office advised us it was best to have the baby in, in Washington [D.C.] rather than in Austria because the medical facilities there had sort of gone downhill.  So that delayed our departure until after our son was born.  He was born in April and so we left for Vienna in June of 1971.  He was six weeks old.
Speaker 1: And what did you do in Vienna?
Speaker 2: I was a, a Vice Counsul.  What that means is that you work in the visa office and you, you enter new Austrians who go apply for visas to come to the United States, you look after Americans who are there in distress, ill, in jail, etc., etc.
Speaker 1: And how did you enjoy that first assignment in Vienna?
Speaker 2: We loved it.  We loved it tremendously.  It was a, fun, it was alot of fun, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was it like for you being out of the country?  Was this your first time out of the country?
Speaker 2: Other than Jamaica, yes?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And Canada, first time overseas.  Interesting because the Austrians--there are not a whole lot of black people in Austria. And every black person there they thought came from Africa.  So it was great, it was a lot, lot of fun.  If you have a sense of humor you can get by.  As a matter of fact when our son was born he was very, very fair, extremely fair.  Because I had friends who had children who were also you know fair so I just kid them, you know where did this kid come from?  And here my kid comes out looking the same way.  So when we got to Vienna he was still you know very, very light skinned, as we say.  So the Austrians assumed that he was adopted.  They never--had a hard time believing that we dark people could produce this, this--this fair child (unclear).  And because we were new parents, first time, they were always giving us advice on how to hold a baby and how to carry him and that sort of thing.  That was, it was fun--yeah, fun.
Speaker 1: And how long were you in Vienna?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Story_ID: 19807
Speaker 1: So what did you do in 1973?
Speaker 2: Back to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: And that's when you worked in, you were the, worked in the crisis management center?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, we--the, during those days people were recommended for this kind of work.  So whenever there was a need for personnel the, the operations center would just call, always send out cables to embassies  asking the ambassadors to recommend people to work in the operations center.  And so--my ambassador didn't want me to leave because he wanted me to stay--he was a great guy by the way--recommended that I be considered for that.  So I came back and worked there for a year
Speaker 1: And, and so you stayed there for a year.  And then what did you do in 1974?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four, I worked, went to the Office of West African Affairs and I was, held a position, as we called them desk officers.  In other words the Africa Bureau is divided into several regions, the West Africa Bureau, East Africa, Southern Africa and Central Africa.  I worked in the office of West African Affairs and I think there were about 18 countries under that umbrella.  I was desk officer with responsibility for Liberia and Sierra Leone at that time.  A desk officer is nothing but a liaison between the embassies in those countries and, and the Department of State keeping the embassy informed of things that are going on and fielding cables and, and writing reports on events and preparing VIP trips and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: And you stayed there until 1978, for four years, is that correct?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed there two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: Seventy four [1974] to '76  [1976].
Speaker 1: And what did you do in 1976?
Speaker 2: Went to South Africa.
Speaker 1: And you were the first African American--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Family.
Speaker 1: --to go from the State Department to (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Second officer--as a matter of fact two of us went at the same time.  Jim Baker had preceded us by a couple of years as economic officer in Victoria [South Africa] but didn't, didn't stay very long.  He just couldn't take it.  So we were the first family to go and we went in, in June of 1976.
Speaker 1: And what, what was your position in South Africa?
Speaker 2: I was Consul for Counsular Affairs in Johannesburg.  It was interesting, my wife had no, no desire to go to South Africa during those days and I was, but I was asked to go.  Here again it was an ambassador's, an ambassador in South Africa, William [G.] Bowdler who wanted more diversity in his mission.  And the South Africans, if they had their way, would not have any black Americans traveling there particularly to work in, in, in the field of diplomacy.  So they were opposed to this.  We didn't think that they could dictate to us who we could and could not send to our mission overseas.  We didn't tell them who they could send and who they could not send to their mission in Washington [D.C.] so we were going to send--we had a few racial incidents in South Africa regarding--involving sailors and, and people sort of passing through.
Story_ID: 19808
Speaker 1: We were talking a little bit about when you first, your experiences in South Africa.  You were saying that there were some racial incidents between some sailors, you were about to tell a story.
Speaker 2: Yes.  At one point, a few years prior to my going, a Navy ship made a port call at Durban.  I mean was it Durban?  Durban or Cape Town?  It may have been Cape Town, Simon's Town is what it was in South, in--near Cape Town. And of course sailors you know have shore leave and a couple of black soldiers had problems, racial incidents there.  And occasionally when black officers passing through Johannesburg going to Swaziland or certain places like that could have racial incidents there as well because of the separate system.
Speaker 1: And were you at all concerned about going to South Africa after you know your experiences in the South and really wanting to escape that kind of life in the south and to go here to South Africa?
Speaker 2: No, because I--not at all.  As a matter of fact, if I can just back up a bit?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: A little history of, of the decision to go.  Ambassador [William G.] Bowlder wanted black officers in his mission.  He wanted to show the South Africans that we were a diverse society and got along with each other without regard to race or color.  So he asked the department to consider sending people.  I was getting ready to change jobs and so I--the person in charge of the office of Southern African Affairs asked me if I would consider it.  And so I said well let me talk to my wife and see what she thinks.  She was dead set against it.  We had Ambassador Bowlder who was in town at the time come by our house, had been with us and talked to us and said he was very sincere.  He would do all he could to protect us you know and to make certain that no ill came to us.  And so he convinced my wife you know that it was okay to go.  So we decided to go and we went, but we went with the idea that we would not be on the defensive.  We knew there were signs telling us where we could and could not go but we would just ignore those signs because we would go where we thought we, we wanted to go.  So we went with that idea in mind and our, our families were very, very--they were, said "Are you crazy?  You're going to that place? No."  So we assured them that things would be okay.  We arrived in Johannesburg [South Africa] on June 6th, and despite our best assurances Soweto erupted on June 16th [1976], so they were further concerned but we assured them that we were quite removed from the violence.  It was terrible but we were, we were fine.  So we went and we, we stayed for three years.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in South Africa?
Speaker 2: We experienced every emotion in South Africa: anxiety, frustration, anger, exhilaration.  There was a great sense of hope when you see how people are forced to live, but without giving up hope that there was never any, any, any acceptance by black South Africans that you know the day would come when things would change.
Speaker 1: And did you have that hope because you were familiar with this way of living and knew that things could be different because they were different or progress was being made in the United States?
Speaker 2: Yes, but at the same time--and South Africans that you engaged politically would always bring this up, "well you have a segregated south what are you talking about?  How can you tell us what you do?"  It's segregated, but yours is, yours is segregated by, by law.  Your laws say that white people can't live here.  White people can't live there,  colored people can't live here.  Even in the South, whites have more freedom than you people have.  They didn't realize white people in South Africa at that time didn't realize that they were pretty much handicapped too.  They, they were restricted as to where they could go.  And for example in the sporting area the, the South Africans are great football enthusiasts, I mean sports enthusiasts.  They loved football.
Speaker 1: And soccer.
Speaker 2: And soccer.
Speaker 1: What we would refer to as soccer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  And so they were making efforts to have white teams play against black teams, you know that's, that's a step in the right direction.  They had, they scheduled one of their first matches in Soweto.  Soweto, people think it's an African name but it's not.  It's an acronym for 'Southwest Township'.  Having a soccer match in Soweto between one of the better black teams, one of the better white teams and people were enthusiastic because they're making progress. But then at the very last minute the whites were denied permission to go to Soweto.  Why?  Because there were no separate toilets, so the whole match was called off.  So, you know, these were the kinds of dichotomies and things like that you find that are extremely ridiculous and when people walk in front of us and they say well that's dumb.  They, they found a skull on the beach in Durban, washed ashore and they couldn't tell whether it was a black skull or a white skull.  And the forensics department spent thousands of dollars conducting all kinds of tests to determine where this skull should be properly buried.  The newspapers got wind of it.  The progressive papers made a big mess out of it and the whole issue was, was you know turned aside.  So you had these kinds of strange things.  John Drury, one of the famous South African authors, wrote a book called "A Very Strange Society" and it was indeed a very, very strange society.
Speaker 1: And--what do you think was your biggest accomplishment in South Africa?  Do you think that you did a lot of bridge building or what do you think was your biggest accomplishment there?
Speaker 2: I think our being there and working in that kind of environment where you're actually supervising people, white people, Indians, Asians and all, I was doing a pretty good job and, and working well together at the same time, let them know that that was possible.  We had--and, and then coming into my office and getting advice from me you know.  What am I doing giving you advice?  I had--recall an incident where one, our black South African visa clerk was talking to a gentleman at the window and of course he would not believe anything she told him, because first of all she's incompetent, didn't know what she was talking about.  So, I walked into the office and she called me over.  She said, "Well, this is my boss, I'll ask him."  Of course I'm black so I don't know what I'm talking about either.  So, but sitting in the office was my, my--my junior officer, Sandy Crutchfield, who happened to be white and a female so he sort of sees her, he beckons her over and she comes over.  He explains his visa problem to her and he said "Well what can I do?:  And she said well "You'll have to do exactly what the Consul said because he's the boss."  Well if you could see the look on that man's face.  And he walked away scratching his head, what're these Americans coming to?  You know this sort of situation.  But. yeah, working together and showing people that it can be done and harmoniously was also good.  And I think there in terms of accomplishments, back to the point you were at, you were referring to, we helped to move a lot of petty apartheid out of the way, petty apartheid meaning sitting on a park bench or going into a store and trying on a dress without having the, without having to buy it or a suit without having to buy it or taking the kids to a theater or having a pool party where you invite kids all over, from Soweto as well as from your neighborhood and to see how they get along and get along so famously and that sort of thing and, and, and, and showing people that there's nothing wrong with, with black and white people sitting together in a restaurant.  You know it works okay.  The newspapers--we had one incident, one major incident where we were going to lunch and the restaurant denied us permission and the newspapers got wind of it and all hell broke loose, you know and it led to a lot of, of back and forth.  The conservative papers you know said now here go these Americans throwing their weight around again.  Who do they think they are?  Go home.  And the, the liberal papers you know sort of using this as an example of how on the one hand South Africa is claiming to be moving away from this sort of thing and then a diplomat can't get a meal or any black can't get into a restaurant.  And one newspaper I remember wrote that you know maybe it's time we got to the point whereby a person irrespective of color walks into a restaurant, gives the appearance of being able to pay for a meal, why not let the person sit down and buy their meal?  So yeah we--a lot of, lot of things happened you know as a result of these, these incidents.
Speaker 1: Was it at all painful though to be there and, and to know that you know this was once how you know many blacks in America lived and this was you know the lifestyle.  And there had been so much progress made in America at that particular time.  So was it painful to see this happening again?
Speaker 2: It was painful not because of what happened in America but because of the situation there was just so awful.  Nothing I experienced in the South compared to what was going on with those poor people in, in South Africa, just brutalized, I mean treated like scum.  You know the word kaffir [an offensive term for a black African] is not the same as, pardon my expression, 'nigger'.  Kaffir was far more demeaning if you can you know visualize that.  I mean it, it was a hate brought about by fear for one thing and particularly perpetrated among the, the lower income whites who were afraid and they were kept in fear by the establishment, you know the fear that the blacks would you know take over and, and annihilate them.  And the, the more forward thinking people were saying well if we don't let them have a stake it's going to happen, it's going to be much worse.  So it was always that, that battle.
Speaker 1: So did you to say--are you saying that there was a difference between like South African apartheid and segregation in America?
Speaker 2: Don't get me wrong, segregation was bad.  It was really bad.  I experienced it.  But--and, and to see how people were mistreated and how the long arm of the law sort of in, intervened to make it even worse on people. And to see people taken out of their homes.  They, they're thrown out of tenth floor windows and the, the excuse is they jumped out, you know they were fighting to hang themselves. To be picked up at 4 o'clock in the morning and not be seen again or heard from again.  Conditions under which people lived were really, really bad, really bad.  And, and, and the people who were for change, blacks, whites, Indians, coloreds, the, the non-blacks were tolerated much more so than the others but you know they were seen as traitors and communists.  Everybody who was anti-apartheid was pro-communist.  It sort of went hand in hand. Yeah,  it was bad.
Speaker 1: And so you stayed in South Africa for two years until 1978?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you went to Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Story_ID: 19809
Speaker 1: And what did, what did you do in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Consul General.  That's just a fancy name for running a big visa operation, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you enjoy Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Jamaica at first was a bit--I'd been there on vacation earlier but going--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: And it was much different I'm sure?
Speaker 2: Yeah, much different.  And in many ways it was though I'd never left South Africa because in Jamaica was a strange dichotomy between haves and have-nots, between light skinned Jamaicans and dark skinned Jamaicans, you know.  And they often refer in conversation to 'they' or 'them' and stuff like that.  "Well who are we talking about?  Are these people Jamaican?"  "Well yes they are."  "Well, and so are you." But anyway, interesting incident looking for a home, when we got to Kingston, my boss at that time and I arrived at about the same time so we were both house hunting.  And we compared notes you know frequently and he was looking at homes at one level, I was looking at homes at a level beneath that, same realtor.  And so he said well did you see this house on such and such street?  I said no.  And anyway they were always homes that were better than the ones that we were being shown.  So I asked the realtor,  "Why are you showing him one level and us another level?" And he said well you know "I didn't think you could afford it," you know and stuff like that.  And so well we, we got rid of him right away and ended up looking for a home ourselves.  But there were some similarities but you know nothing even close, but it was a very interesting, very interesting two years.
Story_ID: 19810
Speaker 1: After you left Jamaica you came back to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: After a year we went off to a year of mid-career training.  I went to the University of Indiana [sic, Indiana University], the African Studies Center there and did a year of, of research and some lecturing in Africa.
Speaker 1: (pause) And then that's when you went to the Office of Southern African Affairs?
Speaker 2: After that yes.
Speaker 1: And that was in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes, back in the same department.
Speaker 1: And you were there for two years.  And tell, tell us a little bit about the things that you worked on there.
Speaker 2: Well I was, I actually--the university training and the assignment back in Washington [D.C.] were all sort of part of a package and I, I knew where I was going once my university training was completed.  And I went into the Office of Southern African Affairs and I was desk officer for Zimbabwe, Swaziland and Lesotho.  At the same time Zimbabwe just becoming  dependent.  So it transitioned from Rhodesia to Zimbabwe and I was there as the officer of that and a lot of nation building going on and a lot of it supported by the United States with substantial financial assistance.  At the same time we had in, in Congress conservatives who felt that we never should have supported the revolution.  They were right, very happy with Ian Smith and Rhodesia and felt that it should remain that way.  The only reason some people in Congress supported what was going on in South, in, in Rhodesia-Zimbabwe was the fact that Dr. Abel Muzorewa was going to win the election.  They didn't give [Robert] Mugabe a chance.  They never would have supported the revolution had they thought Mugabe or even [Joshua] Nkomo would have been a, would have been better than, than Mugabe.  So there was a lot of rhetoric when he was elected and, and the, the idea that he was going to turn Zimbabwe into a Communist-Marxist state.  Unfortunately-- it's not become that but Mugabe has just made a mess of things I'm afraid.  But at the outset we had a, we had a hell of a time supporting the country and maintaining economic support.  We had to report to the Congress every sixty days, every ninety days on the state of affairs in Zimbabwe otherwise lose assistance.  So we had to struggle to, to always paint Mugabe and the country in a favorable light.  And at that time it was quite easy to do because things were moving in the right direction.  It was only after a while that things began to turn you know downhill.  And one of our, one our strongest opponents was a young man who is now [2004] running for Congress, the [U.S.] Senate in, in Illinois.
Speaker 1: One of your strongest opponents?
Speaker 2: Opponents, yes.  He [Alan Keyes] was working the State Department at that time and, and felt that we had no business supporting those countries.  But anyway, we prevailed and was able to maintain a reasonable level of support for Zimbabwe for quite a long time, including getting Heinz to invest quite heavily in, in agriculture.
Story_ID: 19811
Speaker 1: So Ambassador--and you did that until 1983, and then from '83 [1983] until 1986 you lived in Nigeria.  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I was trying to remember, yes
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about what you did in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Consul General in Lagos, here again a very big consul operation.  A lot of interest in Nigerians coming to the United States.  Also interesting too to be there at that time because the Nigerians were very much becoming involved in fraud.  There were several fraud rings operating in New York.  It was so great that they had a task force in Nigeria, the federal building doing nothing but documenting Nigerian fraud.  So fraud, visa fraud, a lot of theft, theft rings and then at the same time when I got there they were just beginning to get involved in drug trafficking.  And, and we had a very large American expat [expatriate] community in Nigeria, many women married to Nigerians who spent years studying.  And some were getting along marvelously, others were not doing so well so they became problems for us to handle.  We had some very interesting cases.
Speaker 1: A lot of domestic issues?
Speaker 2: Domestic problems, yeah and women wanting to get back to the United States.  They, and they wanted to take their children along with them and that was just taboo in Nigeria.  You just couldn't--you could leave but the children had to stay because they were Nigerians and the, the authorities were not very cooperative.  And at the same time we had two coups.  I arrived in June of '83 [1983], had our first coup in December of '83 [1983], then another coup the following year, then an attempted coup about a year after that.  So these were, these were times of great anticipation, great anxiety, particularly with a large American community trying to ensure they are reasonably safe.  Fortunately the coups, the first two were bloodless and other than a change of government, nothing really, really happened.  With the first coup it was brought about by concerns about corruption so the government cracked down on the economic sector and private business.  And unfortunately one person arrested or caught in that trap was an American citizen.  And because it was being handled by the military, it was very secretive and they did not feel obliged to honor the terms of the Vienna Convention which required them to notify the sending country that one of its members is incarcerated.  They didn't notify us.  We learned about it because of the, the lady's children in New York were concerned and they called the State Department, they called us and they called Congress and a lot of acrimin--acrimony over this arrest.  Well we had to take our case to the Nigerian authorities.  They didn't even admit having the woman.  It took us three months to get them to admit that they had her.
Speaker 1: And she was in jail?
Speaker 2: In jail.  Took another three or four months--well I'm sorry, no probably another month to gain access to her.  And then when we did get a chance to talk to her the, the security officials were right there in the room.  They, they thought that this lady was, was some American spy.  Why else would we invest so much, you know including having the Ambassador call on a foreign minister to get custody of this woman?  But she was just an ordinary citizen who you know gotten involved in some difficulty and she was entitled to our protection as much as we could give.  So we finally arranged to see her, made several visits and she got a lawyer.  They had a trial but the whole process took over a year and she was finally exonerated.  They didn't give her passport back though.  They said okay you're free, but you know she didn't have a passport.  So she came to us for a passport and any American coming to the Embassy for a passport they had proof of citizenship and a good excuse for why you don't have a passport.  We're obliged to give them a passport.  So we gave her a passport and she left the country.  We were accused of aiding and abetting her escape--of course. But that was an interesting time because we had so many interesting stories about women in particular running afoul of Nigerian men and Nigerian law.  One young lady--if I can just relay you with one more story--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 2: --had been married to a Nigerian and they were living in Chicago.  The marriage did not work out and so eventually ended in divorce.  Had one daughter, the father came back to Nigeria and hadn't seen the daughter since she was quite young.  He pleaded with his ex-wife to bring her to Nigeria so she could see her, her grandparents and the girl was 12 years old.  He brought her--she brought the daughter to Nigeria and the husband what did he do, ex-husband, he absconded with the child.  Took her into the bush,  that's how we refer to, you know, the country. And the woman came to the office and she was just you know crazy with fear and concern and she asked us you know for our help and we had to try to help her as best we could.  She said that you know she had to go back--it was over the Christmas holidays.  She was due back in Chicago [Illinois] to go back to work but she was not going to leave without her child.  Reminds you of the thing about the thing in, in Iran, [ref. to film] 'Not Without My Daughter', and what could we do to help her out?  Well, not very much at that point in time.  So we put our heads together and convinced her that if she was not going to leave then the best thing for her to do was to try to you know talk to the husband, the ex-husband, get close to him, you know, and regain his confidence.  And then he might let you see the daughter.  And so she did this and actually went to a place in the outskirts of Lagos where he was living and spent some time with him.  The daughter eventually showed up.  But he was very concerned that she would you know leave.  So he had her watched day and night, she constantly watched day and night.  So she played along with the game.  And as the husband you know gained confidence you know and thought that he had things under control, gave her a bit more freedom, let her take the daughter out for a walk but always watching by the other people.  Finally she managed to, to get the child in a taxi and into the consulate in Johannesburg [South Africa], getting her in is one thing but getting her out and on a plane is another thing because the father has, has custody.
Speaker 1: Because of Nigerian law?
Speaker 2: Nigerian law.  The authorities would not let her leave the country.  If he said no she can't go.  So what were we going to do?  Well we finally took her and the child undercover to Benin which is the country next door and we worked out something with the authorities and the airline authorities got her flights and things changed and they were able to leave the country, leave, leave Africa via Benin.  Of course the authorities were very, very angry with us, very, very angry.  Well we hadn't done anything wrong.  We hadn't broken any law.
Speaker 1: Did you find the Nigerian authorities to be somewhat difficult to work with?  And were you surprised cause--were you hoping you know as a, a, a black person that you know this would be not an easy relationship but it would be you know somewhat of a, a cordial relationship and a good working relationship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you're American.  Your blackness is second nature.  And, and many, many black people who go to Africa are finding this out, you know.  You're American first.  I don't care how you look, how you dress, you are an American and then the subject of your blackness is secondary.  But yeah Nigerians were difficult in general, but at the same time we had some very, very good and fun loving Nigerian friends.  Once you get through the abrasiveness, the toughness and things like that there you find some very decent people and we were able to find a lot of them there.  As a matter of fact we extended our stay by a year.  We actually stayed in Nigeria three years rather than just two.  We had, we had a great time.  The job was interesting and there were, it was tough no, no doubt about that.  But you know that's what Foreign Service was about, you have to adjust and certainly we did that in, in Nigeria.
Story_ID: 19812
Speaker 1: So after you left Nigeria you went to Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about what you did in Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Well, in Dar es Salaam, I was Deputy Chief of Mission so second person in, in charge.  It was good for me because when I got there, we had no ambassador.  Our ambassador was about six months away.  The ambassador was leaving and his replacement was not due until about six months down the road.  So I was, it was my mission for six months so I ran the whole show and it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Were you getting a little antsy about getting your own ambassadorship?  Were you ready to be an ambassador at this time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well you, you work toward that.  I was very fortunate in Vienna [Austria]--my, my supervisor was sort of forward thinking and told me what I needed to do to get to where I--he said "Where do you want to go in this work?  You have to figure out where you want to do and you have to figure out a strategy for getting there."  There's, there's certain kinds of jobs you have to have, certain kinds of things you have to do.  It's called career you know building.  And so I sort of aimed my career along those, those lines.  But yeah you want to--if you're ambitious.  Some people don't want to.  Some people are quite happy doing visas all their life.  I was not,  I wanted to sort of get to the top and as quickly as possible so I sort of geared my career in those directions.  So when you get to be Deputy Chief of Mission, that's a logical progression to, to the top.  I had lots of management jobs along the way, lots of experience with dealing with people.  So I had you know what was necessary in order to be considered.
Speaker 1: So did you feel like I'm, I'm close to getting an ambassadorship but down that horizon after the three years in Tanzania?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Well I worked--well even before, even before Tanzania, I went to Tanzania, I saw that as a stepping stone as, and the next logical hurdle would be my own mission or a, a same job at a bigger mission.
Speaker 1: And so you were, you stayed in Tanzania from 1986 to 1989 and then came back to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And from 1989 until finally in 1980--1993 when you got your ambassadorship.  So, well actually let's talk a little bit about what you did from 1989 to 1992 in the Office of Human Resources.
Speaker 2: Well I was working in the senior assignments division handling senior officers, career counseling assignments, that sort of thing and that's when I met the young lady you were referring to earlier.
Speaker 1: Ambassador Ruth Davis.
Speaker 2: Ambassador Ruth Davis.  Yeah, I was--we sort of advised officers on jobs that were available, how to get them into those jobs and also had a very important part in putting together a list of personnel of ambassadors to consider as their DCM [Deputy Chief of Mission], as a plenipotentiary officer, that sort of thing.  So we had to make up lists and recommend them to the various committees on the seventh floor people who were suitable for jobs as consul general, or as special officer in Nice or as consul general in Johannesburg [South Africa] or you know Deputy Chief of Mission in, in London [England], that sort of thing, putting these lists together and making certain that people were, were considered.
Story_ID: 19813
Speaker 1: So Ambassador, finally in 1993 you get your ambassadorship to Cape Verde.  Can you tell us a little bit about what led to that?
Speaker 2: Well the--after my assignment in personnel I went to the senior seminar which is about an academic year of, of training, travel, working at issues confronting America, looking at defense issues, political issues, economic issues.  About thirty-five people, thirty-six people are selected annually to participate in the senior seminar.  Half of us are senior State Department people, the other half is made up of senior military officers, colonels and above, members, officers from Department of Agriculture, treasury, the CIA, FBI and we spend a year together talking about issues, traveling, looking at issues.  Our--we went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to look at the school system, the blight of the poor neighborhoods.  We went to Alaska to study the problem with the Eskimos, social problems with Eskimos.  We went to Mexico to look at issues confronting Mexico.  We went to Canada to discuss US-Canadian relations, Florida to look at drug trafficking and how that's being combated, state of Washington to look at our nuclear submarine forces, just sort of all over the, the map.  During that period your, your next assignments and then several of us including Ambassador [Ruth] Davis in that same class were, were named ambassadors.  We had put in our list earlier and it's, it's filtered through the system and, and then these selections are made.  I didn't have Cape Verde on my list.  I had several other places but because of the trading, the jockeying etc., etc. that goes on I got that job.  And, and the director general calls you and says, "Joseph Segars, we want you to be our next ambassador to, to [the Republic of] Cape Verde, what do you think?"  Well you could say "Mr. Director General thank you but no thank you.  I want to go to Paris."  And he will say "thank you kindly."
Speaker 1: Go down to the next person on the list.
Speaker 2: And go to the next person.  So you can say no and some people have indeed said no but it, it's risky.  It's risky and not unless you're one of those people who walk on water and don't get their feet wet, you know.  You might be able to get away with it, but I didn't feel so inclined so I, I gladly accepted and so the process started including our language training because I needed Portuguese in order to be you know effective and be able to function.
Story_ID: 19814
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about your experiences there from 1993 to 1996?
Speaker 2: [The Republic of] Cape Verde was a very interesting place.  I didn't know much about the history until I got involved.  I discovered there was a large community of Cape Verde Americans living in New England for the most part but now they're beginning to filter throughout America.  They came to America on whaling ships a long time ago and many of them stayed.  They began to work in cranberry bogs and factories and things of that sort, gradually working their way up the, the social ladder.  And there are more Cape Verde Americans than there are people actually living in Cape Verde now.  It's amazing so there's a long tradition, culturally, historically between our two countries.  As a matter of fact many people think that the first American mission in Africa was in Liberia.  That's not true, it was in Cape Verde a few years before the situation in, in Liberia opened.  So it was a long history of back and forth between our two peoples and a large community of people living there.  Cape Verde is a former Portuguese colony, became independent in 1975, but as the Portuguese did elsewhere in Africa, they left country sort of a scorched earth mentality, nothing, they left nothing behind not even a hospital bed.  So the independent Cape Verde was the poorest of the five former colonies, but now it is head and shoulders above the others in terms of development because of the, you know the determination of the people. They want to make, make, had limited resources though because of the lack of rainfall.  So now they're beginning to make water, drink the potable water from, from the sea.  The process is becoming less expensive.  And as they further refine it they're able to do it you know and, and then the economy will take off even more so than it has now.  But it was a wonderful experience for me.  I was new, had not done this before.  It was an island nation like Jamaica was.  But Cape Verde is spread over several, of several islands.  I think there are eight islands that are inhabited and I had the chance to visit all eight of them, it was quite interesting.  Relationships at--when I first arrived at Cape Verde was a member of the [U.N.] Security Council.  There was a lot of business going on because we're seeking their support for this Security Council issue or that so I spent a lot of time in the foreign ministry and making (unclear) so I got to know my, my--my counterparts very well.  Diplomatically at the time I was there, there were six other missions.  The community was small and not an awful lot to do so you have to sort of make your own, your own way.  Watching the country grow economically and to have a second election, change of governments without any hostilities or anything was just amazing.  So politically it was very stable, economically it was just coming along quite nicely and will do well I think with the right circumstances.
Speaker 1: A lot different than Nigeria when you--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Interesting too speaking of Nigeria and Africa in general, the Cape Verdeans see themselves as African, you know.  And unlike Portugal, which sees it still as a sort of hanging onto (unclear) they're very much involved in the African Diaspora and they see themselves as a West African nation and not a Portuguese nation.  They see themselves as inextricably linked to the United States, culturally as well as from an economic point of view.  They feel their, their best chances are with the U.S. and not with Portugal or Europe so they're aiming in that direction.  They've even made English the mandatory second language now, replacing French which was the mandatory second language for, for a long time.  So they, they're moving in that direction.  And as Cape Verde Americans become more involved in the process it's going to you know advance it along quite nicely.  One of the nice things about being there too was the abundance of water and we had a sailboat which was quite nice and so I spent a lot of time sailing.  I never done it before until I got there but it was a lot of fun, had a really enjoyable time there.
Story_ID: 19815
Speaker 1: And so after that assignment you retired from the, the, the government, from the State Department.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But continued to work as a consultant on several related issues.
Speaker 2: Well we, we, we used the term 'WAE', which means 'When Actually Employed'.  We're called Foreign Service Annuitants.  And after adjusting to retirement I decided to go back to work and do some things. First job I had as a WAE was in the Freedom of Information Office which was sort of boring.  I didn't like that so, I didn't last very long.  But I did something that was very exciting after that.  That was to work on the 50th NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Summit, preparations for that which was held here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about what you did specifically with the NATO Summit?
Speaker 2: I was site officer for one of the, the--the, the event was scheduled to be held was planned for the Mellon Auditorium which is just down on Constitution Avenue.  The Mellon Auditorium is a part of a renovation project involving the Mellon Auditorium, the old Commerce Building and the old, I can't think of the name of the building, but the part of the federal triangle being renovated, being restored and will be rented out to other government agencies.  Well, President [William J.] Clinton decided, for historical reasons, that he wanted to have the 50th anniversary which was commemorative, in the same auditorium where the first one was held, 1949.  Well, so you're involved in negotiating with GSA [General Services Administration] who were in the middle of construction and they were going to lose a lot of money because they'll be penalities involved if they don't do the work on time and the Environmental Protection Agency can't move in on time.  So we were wrestling with them trying to convince them, that they had to do this and do it right away.  Well where is the money coming from because this is not something that's been budgeted for.  So the State Department finally convinced GSA that the President wanted the building and it had to be there so they had to make, make it happen, so we had to make it happen.  But the building had to be fully restored.  It was in the middle of renovations, no heating or air conditioning, very little lighting, all kinds of things and, and dressed up for this, this summit which would last three days.  And after three days it was all going to be torn down, taken away, put in artificial floors yo really dec--that a, a table that all the members would agree to sit around.  And the one, and the, the one that was sort of pentagon shaped, five sided, had to order hairs and furniture and make restaurants, get the elevators working, polish up the old brass and all kinds of things and for a three-day event.  And then after the three days it was all torn out and rendered asunder again but it was a lot of fun doing that.  It was a lot of administrative work, contracting and type, sort of thing which I had not done before so a learning curve but we got through it and we got it done on time.
Story_ID: 19816
Speaker 1: You did some more work in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the project you worked on?
Speaker 2: I initially went to Nigeria in June of 19--of 2001.  Ambassador [Howard F.] Jeter is a very good friend of mine and I said 'If you need somebody to come out and help you out during a critical stage I'll, I'm available.  So, he asked me to come out and I went out in June, stayed for three months doing various odd jobs you know sort of putting out fires here and there, working in the ambassador self-help program setting up several other committees at the embassy.  The embassy was in transition between Lagos and Abujua.  And Ambassador Jeter wanted as many resources moved out of Lagos into Abujua as possible.  Abujua was sort of a temporary building and so we had to do a lot of revising and renovating and doing stuff like that to accommodate all the people so there were a lot of little things that needed to be done but there was just nobody there to do so I worked on that for three months.
Speaker 1: And it had been you know some time since you had been back to Nigeria since 1986.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What were some of the noticeable changes and differences?
Speaker 2: Well by this time the capital had been relocated to Abujua.  Abujua was sort of quiet, laid back in comparison to Lagos which was busy, busy, busy.  It was quiet, very little traffic and, and people were different.  But then there's nothing like the excitement of Lagos because I got a chance to go down to Lagos during that time and it was busy and noisy as it had ever been before.  But people, people enjoyed that sort of stuff, they get a charge out of that.
Speaker 1: Was it less corruption and crime and, or, or had that gotten worse?
Speaker 2: In Abujua?  Not at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Or just in the, the differences in time of the, like the more than ten year difference?  Had you noticed that the, that the corruption had decreased some?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately not.  It's, it's--corruption in Nigeria is endemic and everybody recognizes that.  But--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: You think it's more, it's more accepting there?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately yes because people who have nothing look at people who have something and you know they, well they did it that way.  Corruption, Nigeria has corruption at the grassroots level and from there it rises to the top.  And everybody from the president on down understands that but don't have the wherewithal to do anything about it.  For example we were, I was there the last time, we were talking about illegal bunkering of fuel.  And the country loses millions and millions of dollars a year on illegal bunkering.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of explain what illegal bunkering of fuel means?
Speaker 2: Yeah,a, a--a tramp steamer or a tanker comes along the coast of say Port Harcourt or Calabar, the oil region and somebody working for the gas company will sell that person fuel.  The, the person who sells it and, not the oil company necessarily, but somebody who has access to pipelines, they fill up a tanker, eight, nine thousand barrels and they, they go off and the government doesn't benefit from the sale at all, nor does the company that owns it.  The, they, they send out the navy to sort of try to control it and the navy is coopted because the, the guys running the ship are not paid on a regular basis and they have families to feed and clothing to buy and stuff like that.  So the guys who are involved in the illegal oil sales pay them off.  And because they're paid off, and they're not arguing about their pay, they're not going on strike. it, it's--it's allowed to happen but that's just a small example of what goes on there.  And the project we're working on, we, we could have easily been coopted by somebody wanting to have a, a--a sight and they're willing to pay us off but of course we don't do stuff like that.  But it's so endemic and, and people are so out with it you know it's a fact of life.  We were walking in the airport, you're coming from, from--from Italy and you are in the shoe business and you, you have ten suitcases full of shoes.  Well customs may say you're only allowed to bring in three bags of shoes.  And the guy--you know it, and the guy in customs knows it.  But you know if you're going to give him some shoes, give him a few naira he waves you on through so it's, it's--that's how people survive in that, that atmosphere.
Story_ID: 19817
Speaker 1: So after you worked on the Nigeria project that was in, until September of 2001.  What did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well there was an out, there was an offshoot of that because one of the things I did in, in, while I was there that first three months was to work on the EDDI program--(simultaneously).
Speaker 1: Would you--?
Speaker 2: Education for Democracy and Development Initiative [EDDI] which is a, a--a, a byproduct of [President William J.] Bill Clinton's trip to Africa in the late 1990s.  He said that he wanted to help out to address one of Africa's concerns regarding education and money was set aside for education, education development.  EDDI was an outgrowth of that trip.  EDDI was first of all an agency group composing, consisting of State Department USAID [U.S. Agency for International Development], Department of Education, [Department of] Commerce I believe and the Peace Corps.  And so projects were identified and funds made available to, to assist with their development.  One of the projects and, and under EDDI umbrella in Nigeria was among, among other educational programs was this educational initiative to establish community resource centers.  Six, six of them were in each of Nigeria's geo--geopolitical zones and it had sort, sort of been moribund when I got through to Abuja because there was nobody to do it.  So one of the things I did was to get the, the program going and to set up a committee which is made up of people in public diplomacy and USAID and we got the program off the ground and got the site selected and picked out people to work with at the state and local level to get it going.  So Dr. Sarah [E.] Moten who was running the program out of USAID was reasonably impressed and asked me if I would continue working for her on a contractual basis to, to oversee the, the location of other sites and to get them going.  So I spent from January of 2002 until December of 2003 working on that, that initiative and getting the sites selected and set up.
Speaker 1: And what are community resource centers?  What--how do they benefit the people of Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Basically they, they, they are internet labs.  It's based on the internet, information technology.  A typical center, the one in Abujua for example, you had two training rooms with computers that people could use then for training, individual training or class instruction. You had a VSAT [video sattelite], you have videoconferencing; you had a business center, you have a, a center that's set up for handicapped; Braille computers, Braille printing machines and things of that sort and they're open to the public.  And in Abujua the one that we set up there was the, the contractors come and they put in all their information, all the equipment, generators, satellite; they hire staff, train staff.  The staff eventually takes over and they move on to another site.  The Women's Ministry in Abujua was our partner in Abujua but at--in the other centers, Bauchi, Kaduna, Ogun State, (unclear) State, Cross River State, the local state governments are our partners so they, they come in and make a site available because we felt that if people had a stake in it they would be more interested in most of our projects.  So we lobbied the governors in each of those states and we actually lobbied lots of governors.  But those are the ones that were, were coming and we felt would lend greater support to the location.  And we also--centrality was very important you know where in the region would it, would it serve the greatest good.  So we surveyed that and made those selections on this basis.  And we got very good support from all the governors we dealt with in those states.
Story_ID: 19818
Speaker 1: Ambassador, as someone who is very, very involved in African affairs and that kind of thing. what are some of your thoughts about the connection between African Americans and Africa?  Do you think that the connection is great enough or that it still needs some work?
Speaker 2: Needs, needs work.  We have lots of misconceptions.  Well I shouldn't say we.  I, had lots of misconceptions about Africa as a child.  I was you know I had my typical African stereotypes based on what I read, what history was printing.  And so my, my--my misconceptions were, were all the wrong ones because of what I had been you know led to believe.  A lot of people still operate under those same misconceptions about Africa and about Africans.  People say well, "what do you think about Africa or Africans?"  Well you know you're talking about 44 countries and 44 different nationalities.  Who are you talking about when you say African?  You know there are a whole lot of different people out there.
Speaker 1: And is that the biggest misconception that all Africans are the same?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, and, and so yeah we, we--we have a learning curve here.  We have a lot to learn about the place and we're make, we're making headway.  I think institutions--Ali Mazuri [political scientist] and people like that who are involved are trying to portray Africa in a very different light, informative light, are very, very useful in this process.  But no, my sister came to visit us in, in [the Republic of] Cape Verde.  My brother and sister, my brother-in-law and sister-in-law came to visit us in Tanzania.  But my--Tanzania was interesting because my, my brother-in-law who was sort of a skeptic, he's an older guy and was skeptical about you know us being there and then more or less about him coming.  So we said, "You come to Tanzania and I guarantee you'll have a good time."  They came over the Christmas holidays.  But because of his skepticism he bought a two week ticket, ticket good for two weeks.  He got here and regretted right away that he didn't have much longer to stay because he had a great time.  My sister went to--came to visit us in Cape Verde, enjoyed it immensely.  She went to Dakar while she was there and, and Dakar is famous for, for [film] "Glory".  And I said, "Don't be surprised now because they're going to look at you and know right away that you're not a Senegalese,"  you know.  She said, "Well how can they tell?"  "They'll know."  So that was a very useful experience for her.  My nephew, her son, also came and he was very, very impressed.  So we're making efforts to travel.  Have very dear friends who just come back from Ghana and if you bear in mind that you're, you're in, in--in Accra, that you're in Dakar, that you're in Lagos, you're not in Washington, D.C., things are going to be different.  And you have to accept the fact that things are going to be different and, and get on and enjoy it and you know take whatever it offers you because it has a lot to offer, lot to offer, yeah.  So I, I think that, that we're getting better but we still got a lot to learn about--people don't know where Africa is.  They don't, they're not concerned with African issues.  You take the Sudan for example and despite all the publicity recently and despite all the suffering going on and despite the experience of Rwanda, people aren't focused on, on, on African issues. I was doing my research in Indiana and I talked about black Americans and a constituency for Africa and that one day this would have to happen if we were going to have a way to connect with, with the continent and be able to support African nations more than what we're doing today is that we're going to need that constituency here pushing that envelope to get more done.  But sadly it's not happened as quickly or as forcefully as I thought it might happen.  Sudan is a great example you know of it and there are not many people--now you're having protests at the embassy, people are going out.  But for the most part they're not really focused or concerned that--well one reason you have so many issues of their own to, to contend with.
Story_ID: 19819
Speaker 1: By the way, I just finished working on the Sudan desk you know, the program so I, I know what's, you know, the devastation that's going on there.
Speaker 2: And tell us a little bit about that project.
Speaker 1: In, in--seven years ago the, the administration decided to establish a separate office to deal specifically with Sudan.  It was called the Sudan Pilgrim Group which is normally a part of, of the East African Office but now it's a separate entity.  And they sit to advise the president on steps to take in Sudan, special envoy named [US] Senator [John] Danforth who was our special envoy worked on that and, and with the Sudan director in the department.  And I was working with them on issues and helping to put together the, the Sudan Peace Act Report which is an annual requirement for the department of state and for the President [George W. Bush] to certify that the two sides, the government and the Sudan Peoples' Liberation Movement were negotiating in good faith and that sort of thing.  But that--peace is at hand we think although the final groups had not been settled.  But then on the other hand you had the terrible situation in Darfur.
Story_ID: 19820
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your thoughts of the number of blacks in the Foreign Service. Would you like to see that number increase?
Speaker 2: Most definitely.  We've been talking about this and talking about it and nothing's happened.  When I came into the Foreign Service in 1970, we were about 3.5 percent of the total number of, of Foreign Service officers who are minority.  I think the number is about 3.7 percent now which means it's, it's negative growth, you know which is retrogression  in my, my--my view.  And then not only attracting minorities but retaining them, that's a big problem because they come in without proper mentoring.  Oftentimes they don't make it.  So getting them in and keeping them in is also very important.  But we've been working on this, this is a problem.  This is something that my association is seized with, the Black Ambassadors' Association, and we're looking at ways at how we can have it not addressed but something done.  I mean everybody has been addressing the problem.  But what are you, what actions do you take to remedy it?  I think the recruitment of minorities is way up, the number taking the exam is way up and the number passing is also up.  My wife, before she retired, worked in the office that was responsible for bringing, for recruiting, bringing them in and processing them through a system and the classes were larger more recently so their intake was greater.  And also I worked briefly with the Board of Examiners and had the good fortune to, to interview some of the people who passed the written exam, very impressed with their credentials and their enthusiasm to the service.
Story_ID: 19821
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered Ambassador?
Speaker 2: You mean as a professional?
Speaker 1: Or just in general, as a person how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, as someone who's, who's kind and caring, responsible and, and, and with a concern for, for people.
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy is or what would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well when I was coming along in the Foreign Service I, I was considered a very tough guy.  I was very hard on my junior officers but with a purpose.  And Ambassador [Joseph] Huggins who has just gone off to Botswana was a civil servant walking the hallways of the department and decided, using me as a role model, that he wanted to become a Foreign Service officer, became one and is a successful one.  And his swearing in speech thanked me for all the efforts I put into that.  And so this makes me feel, feel good.  I have others you know who recall my toughness but remembered firmly you know what impact it had on, had on them.  I've had recently several officers who worked with me as junior officers who have become ambassadors or accepted other you know, very important jobs and it makes me feel good because I think that I had an impact on, on their lives.
