Story_ID: 13634
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Allen Stringfellow, A-L-L-E-N, S-T-R-I-N-G-F-E-L-L-O-W.
Speaker 1: Okay and could I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July the ninth, 1923 [July 9, 1923].
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date and where we are.
Speaker 2: January the eigth, ninteen--2001 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation.
Speaker 2: Artist.
Story_ID: 13635
Speaker 1: The first question is what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess I'd have to say chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Most people I have to guess. I wouldn't have to guess with you. Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime I guess is the best although I do like all seasons.  I like for 'em to change.
Speaker 1: Your favorite place to go on vacation?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying is "God is good to me for a long time."
Story_ID: 13636
Speaker 1: I knew you were born in Champaign, Illinois and I found that sort of interesting because I was wondering, you know, if you could talk about just sort of growing up and I'd like to know--I'd like you to start out by talking about your father and give us his name.
Speaker 2: I was born in Champaign.  My father was Elmer Stringfellow and he's--as far as--I didn't live with my father but as far as I know he always was a musician, an entertainer.
Speaker 1: So you didn't really know that much about him.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We were close.
Speaker 1: Okay well can you talk a little bit about him?
Speaker 2: I know he was the first person on television and that was in 1932 or '33 [1933] at the World's Fair in Chicago [Illinois] was when they first showed television--it didn't come out then.  And he was a radio entertainer for years Wesley Long (unclear) of the radio.  He was Wesley Long which is the name he uses all the time and his partner was a very tall musician. He was a (unclear) the radio.  He's always lived in Chicago.  Always managed night clubs and things and I guess he biggest management job was Club DeLisa in Chicago and he was very short.  He was shorter than me, very dapped and particular and always kept you--although I didn't live with him--he always kept you doing the right things but not strictly doing it.  I'll say back in the--I just remember back in the zoot suit days, he always made sure, he said, "Don't overdo it," you know, you're young, you want to have the long hair and the big hat but he always wanted you to tone it down just a little bit which turned out to be quite well.  You still looked as good as everybody but not outlandish.
Speaker 1: Did you know much about--did he ever talk about growing up or anything about his family?  Was he from Chicago or was he from Champaign [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: He was born I believe in Champaign but he didn't talk much about it.  In fact I was of some age when he finally got connected back with his mother because I knew his mother, Grandma Neely long before he was connected with her, and I'll just say it like it was, he thought that Grandma Neely was too dark back then in those days. And she had given him up as a baby to the Stringfellows.  Basically my name would have been Allen Vestenburg. But after we got connected back to Champaign, you know, coming back to Champaign, Grandma Neely was part of the family then.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting.  Did he--so you knew Grandma Neely before?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Champaign?
Speaker 2: In Champaign--I didn't live with Grandma Neely.  I lived with my mother's grandmother, Grandmother Briggs.
Story_ID: 13637
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your mother. What was her name and, you know, what was she like?
Speaker 2: Her name was Hazel Briggs and I guess she was born oddly in Tennessee and her grandmother--her mother died when she was born, so her grandmother took her out of Tennessee right away and came to Champaign [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And did she talk at all about any of her youth or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she was--I guess what you'd call a flapper.  She had strict uncles and things that kept her from flapping (laughs) but my mother was gorgeous--doubly gorgeous. And she was still gorgeous and glamor years, years, years, later after she died.  We didn't live with her but we had them--we had mother and father all the time because from Chicago [Illinois] to Champaign was very close and they were always--it wasn't like we were like some kids say they were separated from their parents but they weren't--we weren't. We lived with Mother Briggs.  We were on the other side of the tracks, very, very poor, but we didn't know it.
Story_ID: 13638
Speaker 1: How many sisters and brothers did you have--did you have, and where did you fit in?
Speaker 2: I had six.  Julia was the oldest, Sylvia was the next, who is still living.  The only sibling that's still living.  Then my brother, Elmer was an Army man and then me and then there was another brother that I didn't meet until--when I met him he had six children.  So that was a long time ago.  He was stolen when he was a baby.  Taken by the--his keepers.  Then I had a younger sister and one half sister, but everyone's dead.
Story_ID: 13639
Speaker 1: How long did you live in Champaign [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I stayed in Champaign until maybe I was fourteen because I grew up early.  I left Champaign at fourteen and went to a school in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to the art institute in Milwaukee [Milwaukee Art Institute] and then I came back to Champaign again and went for a very short while to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign].
Speaker 1: I want to go back to the Champaign times.  You know, from one to fourteen.  Can you share with us just memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up?  Yeah, like I said we were very poor and on the wrong side of the tracks, but my grandmother, Mother Briggs insisted on us going to Marquette School which was on the other side of the tracks for white children because we had a school, Willard School. And I remember she telling me that they told her, "Well, the kids have to go to Willard," but she told them "No, I want them to go to Marquette," and that was it.  It wasn't like no incident where nobody--they made an incident out of it.  I just went to Marquette. And in the grade school I met one teacher that really was my inspiration for keeping the art going.  She saw that I had art materials to work with and she's the one that got me into the art class at the University of Illinois, Miss Shaw.  A very young little art teacher and incidentally I met her just in '99 [1999], we got in contact again.  She found me, read about it in the paper or something and we got together.  So she's still living. The little art teacher, Miss Helen Shaw.  And I went through school and high school.  I went through very fast, not learning what I should have been, what I wished I had, I went through on my art.  For instance for French, I did a mural in the French room and that got me through art and then seemed like at school--when I was going through grade school there was something to do with art all the time about not drinking, safety, and the posters and made all the advertisements for the school plays.  We couldn't be in 'em, but I did all the advertisements and that's really how I got through the lower grades.  Now I wish I had learned, you know, had studied.
Story_ID: 13640
Speaker 1: At what age--I mean--you said Miss Shaw [junior high school art teacher]--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Shaw
Speaker 1: --as the one who first introduced you or encouraged you.  What age were you at that point?
Speaker 2: It's bad for me to say ages.  I was in the seventh grade, but I was the youngest person in the seventh grade, because I really advanced very fast because of my art.
Speaker 1: Now what appealed to you, I mean, at what point did you know that this was something that you were interested in being an artist?  I mean at what point were you drawing when you were five or four?  Do you remember when you first?
Speaker 2: Don't know the--I guess about eight and it was a struggle because, like I said, we didn't have nothing to work with.  She saw that I had materials to work with.
Speaker 1: And is this something that, is it Momma Briggs?  Briggs, your grandma.
Speaker 2: Mother Briggs.
Speaker 1: Mother Briggs.  Is this something that she encouraged or she saw or would you just sit and doodle?
Speaker 2: Just do it--I don't think Mother Briggs just, ever encouraged me but she never discouraged it.  I was always--bragging on myself, I was always the perfect kid and whatever Allen did was all right.
Story_ID: 13641
Speaker 1: Are there other things you can give me in terms of just family life and sort of growing up?  You know, how time was spent in Champaign [Illinois] at that time?  Did you go to church?
Speaker 2: We went to church, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Could you talk about--?
Speaker 2: We went to church.  We went to church--church was Sunday school, church, night school, prayer meeting and that was really all of the black's entertainment or life in Champaign.  It was all centered around the church.  Although I never felt anything about segregation or anything.  It was very much--but church was--Saturday was the day of your own.  During the week was school and Sunday was church but I also went to church on Saturday to another church.  Basically I went because they had big feasts.  They had church all day and then you had a big feast in the afternoon.  It was a different type of church that even black people from Methodists and Baptists were segregated like against them.  Black people were very segregated theirself too in the style you're either--I guess you say back then in being poor you was either upper poor or lower poor.  So it was always church and we enjoyed it because you went--on Sunday night you went back to church the WPY, and WBUI--U, [Baptist Young Peoples Union, BYPU] but it was part of our life.
Speaker 1: Now was this the Baptist church?
Speaker 2: I went to a Baptist church.  My mother and the sisters went to a Methodist church, but we were still all together because we had a very strong influence from the Methodist church with my aunt and uncle.  They helped Mother Briggs raise us.
Story_ID: 13642
Speaker 1: Can you just describe what Champaign [Illinois] was like growing up then.  How large a town was it and how large a black population was it?
Speaker 2: It wasn't large.  I don't know the population but all the black people lived north of the railroad tracks or out to the round house where the trains came in.  They came up when they came up from the South they generally went to work in the round house and then they would venture out into Champaign.  Now my part was very good because Uncle Charles and Aunt Jeannette were uppity up on the black side, the black community. But like I said I never felt any segregation and I never felt like we were poor but we were.  I can remember times when Mother Briggs would send [brother] Elmer to the store maybe with a quarter to get something and, of course, we grew everything in the yard.
Speaker 1: It was more rural then.
Speaker 2: It was rural then.  In our part it was rural but it seemed like it was more sophisticated--a little better on the other side of the tracks downtown.  Of course, I guess it was rural then or not because when I go back to Champaign now all of that is changed too.
Speaker 1: And was the university [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign]--there wasn't a university town at that time?
Speaker 2: The university was in Urbana [Illinois].
Story_ID: 13643
Speaker 1: Did you have a lighter side of the family and a darker side of the family or what, because you're obviously on the lighter side.
Speaker 2: I'm on the lighter side.  There was two of us, Sylvia--the older sister and myself and my other brothers and sisters were brown, but there was no difference in us.  We had--I was fortunate to have a fabulous family coming up with brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Now did you think--you basically seem--your mother was more of a, you know, you say a flapper.  Your father was this, you know, musician.  Did you have a sense that you were part of an artistic family at that time, or it was just that it was, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we thought so.  We thought daddy was this fabulous--we probably thought he was much bigger than what he was in Chicago [Illinois] but he was very big in that circle right up to the last time. And my mother was just always--I say glamorous, just beautiful.
Speaker 1: And who would you say, you know, would you say with your parents which one are you most like and sort of why?  Or what do you have of each one of them?
Speaker 2: I sort of have the combination, because both my parents were on the light side and I was very interested in looks--in looks.  And we were the type that people looked at.  I've always been interested even up until now in--I probably put too much emphasis on how people look.
Story_ID: 13644
Speaker 1: Can you describe the young Allen Stringfellow?  I mean, you know, kids were--you said you were well behaved and you were Mother Briggs's favorite--I think mentioned being her favorite maybe.  But I'm just wondering what were you like as a child?
Speaker 2: Well I was--right now I look at it I was a more grown up child.  I never played.  My best friends and playmates went to do anything--the two ladies that ran the Douglas Center--art center and from time one, I think most of my time was spent at the--I guess it was--it might have been a WPA [Works Progress Administration].  That was before WPA but it was a community art center for the blacks. And I would go there, learn how to make rugs, to weave rugs.  We did all sorts of--worked in clay, making papier mache masks and things for all the big or little parades that we had in Champaign [Illinois]--lanterns for the old parades, but my time was spent with Miss Williams and Miss--I can't think of her name now--but that's where I spent my time.  I didn't play.  I don't remember playing with [brother] Elmer and my sisters.  They played hide and go seek or things like that but I always spent my time in the center learning how to sew.  I think I learned how to sew when I was about seven because I wanted--it was always the look.  My grandmother would take me--we'd go to the secondhand store or whatever to buy--maybe I'd buy draperies or something to make shirts out of--make my clothes out of.
Speaker 1: Okay then were there any dreams or aspirations you had.  You know, kids always want to be something, what were you--when you were young, what did you want to be?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I didn't have any aspirations or dreams that I would be this great artist or--it was just that I would always look the best (laughs).  I had this obsession with looking.
Story_ID: 13645
Speaker 1: You said at fourteen that you went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: I think it was around fourteen.  I left Champaign [Illinois] and went to Milwaukee.  My mother lived in Milwaukee at that time and I went to Milwaukee to school for a while.
Speaker 1: And you said that you went where?  You said you went to the--what was the--?
Speaker 2: The Milwaukee Art Institute.  I think it's been broken up.  It's been changed.  They still have an institution [Milwaukee Art Museum].  The school part I went to is not there anymore.
Speaker 1: What was that school experience like?  Was it focused on the arts or was it just called that?
Speaker 2: No, it was focused on arts and photography.  Probably had drama in it. Because when I was in Milwaukee--one thing before I left what I did I was wrote this play--I'm trying to remember the time.  It seemed like we were fighting the Japanese at that time.  That was the name of the play, 'We're Going to Have to Fight the Dirty Little Japs, and Uncle Sam's the One that Can Do It.'
Speaker 1: (Laughs).  Okay, so anyway so the play got you to go to Milwaukee or--
Speaker 2: No, I did that after I got there.
Speaker 1: Oh, you got there, okay.  So what kind of program--what were the--there are not that many art places around so was this just, you know, around the time that it was--it was during the 1930s, right?
Speaker 2: The end of the '30s [1930s] I guess because I left Milwaukee, I guess in '41 [1941]. The had a center for--the blacks were separated in Milwaukee too at that time.  We lived on 8th Street.  I think we were still poor. We went every morning to the natatorium to bathe, I know that.
Speaker 1: What's a natatorium?
Speaker 2: Public bath house.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay. So who was up there with your mother?  Was it you and-
Speaker 2: Just me at first and then I think my oldest sister moved there later.
Speaker 1: Now how did you end up going, being the one who went with your mother?
Speaker 2: I just wanted to--I felt I was--Champaign was too little.  It wasn't--living on the north side of the railroad tracks.  I just wanted to--thought I would be moving to a better city.  By that time my mother had married Mr. Turley.  He was a big cigar maker and that look like a big something to me.  He made cigars and he was influential in the starting of the [Harlem] Globetrotters.  They started in Milwaukee and Chicago [Illinois].  I don't know if they were the Harlem Globetrotters then.  That all seemed exciting.  Something big to be a part of.
Speaker 1: You know they just had their reunion this weekend, the Globetrotters.
Speaker 2: That is about the right time because that was about sixty years ago or something.
Speaker 1: And I was surprised 'cause I--I had heard that they started here in Chicago.  I was sort of surprised.
Speaker 2: At that time Mr. Bob Turley was in Chicago and he made cigars I think on 47th Street in the window.  People could watch him make them by hand.
Speaker 1: So was your mother's life--was there a lot of night life involved, you know, because you talk about this--was that, or were you exposed to that or--
Speaker 2: Not with--I was exposed to night life with Daddy, but from mother talking she was a good girl that liked that flapper (laughs).
Speaker 1: So was there anything about the Milwaukee experience that was significant, you think in your development as a person or an  artist?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long were you in Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: That I can't tell you.  It seemed like--
Speaker 1: You said you left around '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: I must've come back to Chicago in '40 [1940], '41 [1940].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how old you were at that point?
Speaker 2: Seventeen or eighteen because I joined--I tried to get on the WPA [Works Progress Administration]--I got on the WPA but when the found out that I really wasn't old enough to be on the art program they put me on the NYA [National Youth Administration], teaching silkscreen because I had learned silkscreen in Milwaukee.
Story_ID: 13646
Speaker 1: Describe for us what the WPA [Works Progress Administration] was and, you know, I didn't know--I never knew people had to get on--I mean, on with it.  How was the process handled?
Speaker 2: You had to sign up.  You had to be poor, and it was just a blessing especially to the artists. It was a blessing because before that time you never had proper things to work with.  You never had made any money doing it.  I don't know what we made on NYA [National Youth Administration] or something like that but it was big then.  It was a salary that you got more than the other people.
Speaker 1: And now, what was the NYA?
Speaker 2: The NYA was the younger ones.  If you weren't--you had to be twenty, I think to get on the easel program or something in WPA.  Of course I said I was twenty when I got on, but then when they found out I wasn't twenty--I must have been eighteen--but they still kept me in the NYA because I knew how to do silkscreening and I was teaching silkscreening.
Speaker 1: And how--do you know what NYA stood for?
Speaker 2: National--
Speaker 1: Youth?
Speaker 2: Youth.
Speaker 1: Administratoin?
Speaker 2: Administration or something like that.
Speaker 1: That's the first time I heard that. Now--so what was that?  Was this something you worked at daily?  And so--I'm just trying to understand, you hear so much about the WPA.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you worked daily, and you got paid, and that was the biggest part then, you got paid.  But you were doing--I was doing something that I like and I guess most of the artists that I knew, William Carter and Charles White and what not--they were getting paid.
Story_ID: 13647
Speaker 1: It's basically 1941 and you leave Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Leave Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: And you come to Chicago [Illinois]  but it's not like you've not had contact, you know, there, right in Chicago during that period of time.
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't.  My older sister lived in Chicago.  She had a kitchenette in Chicago, then I came and my mother came and somebody else came.
Speaker 1: We all had the same kitchenettes.
Speaker 2: You know these kitchenettes were they just--what were--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  At the beginning the kitchenette was an apartment that mostly Jewish people had moved out of on the South Side and you moved in and had a room--and everything else was there. Dishes, linens, everything was in a kitchenette when you first moved in, but then when people moved out they took everything out so eventually kitchenettes became just--each one had a room.
Speaker 2: So people who were the kitchenette kings or queens they just owned a lot of these things.
Speaker 1: They owned and they were sold and they were all on the South Side mansions--they were sold when the whites moved to--first they moved to like 20th Street or 26th Street or 21st Street or something like that.  Then eventually they moved from there to the North side.
Story_ID: 13648
Speaker 1: You come to Chicago [Illinois] and you hear about--are you sort of checking things out or you know--?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, how did I get connected with the [South Side Community] Art Center?  I guess different entertainers or something like that might have knew about the Center because the Center, Art Center was the social, black social function.  Even Katherine Dunham was part of the Center at that time and the biggest social function was the artists and models ball and things like that.  So it was a big part of Bronzeville, Chicago.
Speaker 1: And now who held the artists and models ball? Wasn't that a society?
Speaker 2: The South Side Community Art Center.
Speaker 1: And they commissioned artists would do these wonderful posters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [William] McBride especially which a lot of these things are still in existence--thanks to McBride--that when the WPA [Works Progress Administration] project closed and the government changed from [President Franklin D.] Roosevelt--Roosevelt was like our God. They wanted to destroy everything that Roosevelt had his hand in, so--and I think the Art Center was the only one that stayed.
Speaker 2: Now at the Art Center can you just describe even your first time going there what your impression was?
Speaker 1: My impression it was fabulous.  It was an old Swiss family.  I think it was Swiss and it was a big mansion that the WPA rented.  I remember [First Lady] Eleanor Roosevelt was there I think the first year that I came there.  She was a big part of black Chicago and they had everything.  We could do everything.  We could do ceramics, we do photography, and were just like you weren't black.
Story_ID: 13649
Speaker 1: Tell me some of the people that were--were there instructors there?  Do you remember any of the people?
Speaker 2: Well George Neal was an instructor.  I think Gordon Parks was an instructor in photography.  William Carter was an instructor in art.  Can't think of the other names.
Speaker 1: Sebree?
Speaker 2: Charles Sebree was an instructor there, and the head of the [South Side Community] Art Center then was--what was his name?  He was white, but he was an artist that worked with the blacks.  I don't remember his name.
Speaker 1: What about Margaret Burroughs, was she there?
Speaker 2: Margaret Burroughs was--like I said, Margaret Burroughs was never considered WPA [Works Progress Administration] because she was more top, but really a big organizer.
Speaker 1: Elizabeth Catlett.
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Catlett was there but I think Margaret introduced Elizabeth Catlett to Charles White. (pause)
Speaker 1: McBride.
Speaker 2: McBride--McBride was instigating in that there's so much valuable art from the WPA period that's still floating around now, very valuable art because when they closed, like I said they wanted to destroy everything so he got on the destroying--he got on the job on the thing to destroy so he kept working for a while but he saved everything that he could and everybody thought that was stupid they didn't want to--
Speaker 1: --And what what was his first name?
Speaker 2: William McBride.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay sure.  Now why don't we talk about some of these individual artists.  Let's talk about Charles White.  He was a student at the time, right.
Speaker 2: Well he was more of a teacher.
Speaker 1: He was more, okay and can you just talk about him as a person or, you know, at that time.
Speaker 2: No, not too much.  I knew Charles White after he had gotten more famous, not at the center.  I was a little snobbish, which I'm sorry to--you know how I was then.  I was a little snobbish because I didn't want to be --all those Charles White and [Charles] Sebree  and William Carter and everybody were very proud and definite to be a black artist.  So when Lockhardt  maybe you know, who wrote the first books on black artists--
Speaker 1: Alain Locke--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he came to do the first book, well I just distanced myself from that because it was called 'Black Artists' and I just wanted to be an artist.  Sorry I did that now because those books and things are very important to it but when I came here around that time I was a bit sheltered from that with my father being in entertainment and stuff like that, thatI thought I was not better but I didn't have to be different.  My mother had married Mr. Anderson and he was one of the top, top policy kings.  In fact he was the last one of them like that, that I separated myself from the other artists; all but William Carter.
Speaker 1: Now William Carter what was he like and why did you separate yourself?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  If you've ever known William Carter he was a jolly, real likable person, extremely good artist until he died when he was eighty-six and from that day on we were good friends forever but he was the only one.  Later I became in contact with Margaret Burrows and different ones but at that time I didn't want to.  When it was the time to be when they were doing those documents on them like that.  I remember Fern Gaten (ph.)
Speaker 1: What about Irene Clark?
Speaker 2: Irene Clark I remember from the Art Center; I met Irene Clark on the North Side.  Irene Clark had moved to the North Side, North Wells [Street].  It was an old mansion and she had that.  In fact Irene Clark was really the first one to start the Old Town, the Old Town movement in Chicago, North Wells.
Speaker 1: Old Town Arts?
Speaker 2: The Old Town, just call it Old Town.
Speaker 1: Now I want to--okay so the period that you were at the Art Center that it was from '41 [1941] until what period?
Speaker 2: Well I might have dropped out a little while but I never left the Art Center when I really got interested I guess in the '50's [1950s], '60's [1960s], I became a part of the Art Center up until the '80's [1980s], the last of the '80's [1980s] and '90's [1990s] I was on the administrating board of the Art Center.
Story_ID: 13650
Speaker 1: When did the WPA [Works Progress Administration] get disbanded or whatever, when was that?
Speaker 2: I think in '45, [1945] maybe it was '45  [1945] , something around that time.  It was around the '40's [1940s] and like that was when the [South Side Community] Art Center started because I remember Miss [Eleanor] Roosevelt came to dedicate it.
Speaker 1: And you were--what were you basically doing with this?  Where you doing silk screening still at that time?
Speaker 2: I did silk screening at that time because [William] McBride taught silk screening at the Art Center but then I did mostly water colors.
Speaker 1: And why did you choose watercolors as a form?
Speaker 2: To me water coloring was more exciting, more exacting.  Maybe I choose it because it was less expensive than doing oils.  I don't know what to say, probably was less expensive.
Speaker 1: But what was the subject matter at that--that's what I'm also wondering?  What were you drawing, were you drawing trees and birds or were you drawing--
Speaker 2: No, my subject matter has always been what I saw, like jazz, church, more so what the middle class people were doing.  Things that we did at the time, I never got into the--it was easy to get into the political art of the time.  You know, sort of a gruesome and that put you on top better if a gallery downtown or something they wanted that fist raised and we didn't have 'Black Powe'r then but it was more gruesome.  Like I always liked the nicer things, I guess the prettier  things, you know, lady--a tea party or a social event or jazz.
Speaker 1: So were you always from the very beginning with your work trying to tell stories and capturing or reporting events or things you saw happening?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mostly telling stories of what I knew about like I say, jazz, although jazz and church.  Those are things that I knew about people like that.  The social functions that we had then most of them extend from the church.
Story_ID: 13651
Speaker 1: You had really sort of  migrated.  You refer to yourself as middle class so because of your father's role and managing the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] and your mother married to the policy king.
Speaker 2: Mr. Anderson.
Speaker 1: Then, you know, you were a prominent family.  Okay, especially in entertainment.
Speaker 2: And I really wasn't from a family that's people see it, you know, living with the family but I felt that way.
Story_ID: 13652
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about that period artistically do you have any of those water colors?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't.
Speaker 2: From the time that I was at the [South Side Community] Art Center that was just about the same time that when we were allowed in some art fairs put on the street.  I remember a big art fair for the Negro Exposition or something where they had a big thing for black artists all over.
Speaker 1: I know who that is because just recently--oh, it was called a pageant.  Are you talking about the pageant thing?  There was a [Timuel] Tim Black just gave me something and it was brought--was it downtown.
Speaker 2: It was downtown.  I don't know where it was.
Speaker 1: And it was called--it's a real strange name like the 'National Pageantry' or something or other.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name but you could see all your--and people bought your things.  So I don't have anything old because from the very first time that I went to art fairs and went to those things I sold everything or gave it away.  It was probably very inexpensive but I always sold everything.  So I don't have anything old.
Story_ID: 13653
Speaker 1: Now how were you--after the WPA ended, you know, how were people making their living, you know, everyone has sport of been on a public trough at that point.  Now what happened to those artists with that program.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess they drifted.  When I had the WP--NYA project I worked out of a big printing--one of our biggest printing places on 22nd Street or 21st Street. What was the name of that--great big printing  company, their buildings are still there,
Speaker 1: [R.R.] Donnelley.
Speaker 2: Was that Donnelley?  Donnelley seemed more over east.  Anyway, they kept me on there because at the time they were taking over silk screen decals for airplanes for the government.  Great big stars and stuff like that. They went on airplanes.  So I stayed there.
Speaker 1: Then you actually then were employed by a printer for a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for a long time in decals and I left there always working.  Always had managed to get work in sort of the field that I like to do.  Of course, I didn't say in between that time from [Club] DeLisa and [South Side Community] Art Center I made ladies hats back what was it in the 50's [1950s] or late 40's [1940s] when ladies always wore hats.  So, I did that for a long time. And then through my father, in recording for a record company I got a job at Decca Records. One of the first ones that Chicago was getting to be very important for recording. But Decca records was one of the first records that actually made a job out of black music.  It was called race records.  So I worked there for a long time which was good because my father got me into that.
Speaker 1: Now what year are we talking about?  Do you think it was the 50's [1950s] or--
Speaker 2: When I worked, let me see--how old was I in the 50's [1950s].
Speaker 1: You would have been thirty.
Speaker 2: Well that's when I was working at the record company.
Speaker 1: Now these race records, what were they?
Speaker 2: They were the records by black musicians.  There was a collection for I remember one of them was Count Basie--all the black artists we on a section of records and Decca it was called 'race records'.
Speaker 1: And at this time are you working at the record company or are you still at the printing company?
Speaker 2: No, I was just at the record company.  I was still doing my art.  Going to art fairs. We were allowed in art fairs.  They had little art fairs everywhere, every weekend.  I think 57th Street [in Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] was the first one and it took a while to get into that art fair but--little local art fair, but I always get in and I always sold everything.
Story_ID: 13654
Speaker 1: Now the 57th Street Art Fair [in Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] is one of the oldest art fairs in the country.  You must have been a very early black in that show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was never over two or three.
Speaker 1: Who else was there with you?
Speaker 2: I know his name just as well.  It won't come out. One was a photographer, Britain. I think Britain was in there and that was the next art fair that came up was Old Town and we couldn't get in that one at all and eventually they would leave one black in there.  I think his name was--I can't think of his name.  He stayed a long time.
Speaker 1: Now this whole thing, art fairs were held just like they're held now, at the same time of year, in the summer.
Speaker 2: In the summer.  But they weren't as well organized like they are now.
Speaker 1: And how did you first find out about these.  You know was it just that you were sort of in the mix or--because a lot of black artists--I'm just trying--they wouldn't necessarily but I was just trying to figure out how you found out about them then.
Speaker 2: I guess they used a stepping point from the [South Side Community] Arts Center to recruit because we don't know about it.  Margaret Burroughs was the instigator good in a place like that because she was more outgoing.
Speaker 1: And this was--what did Margaret Burroughs start?  DuSable, her first, I mean the first version of [the] DuSable [Museum, Chicago, Illinois] start about this time?
Speaker 2: Maybe later than that but she started in her house.
Speaker 1: Wasn't that around--,
Speaker 2: She was around that time too, I think.  I have to go by how old I was (laughs).
Story_ID: 13655
Speaker 1: See what I find interesting is your subject matter is black, but at the same time you didn't want to be too identified--
Speaker 2: I didn't want to be--I thought that would hurt by being identified by I always did black subjects.  I was proud of my black subjects but I knew through the [stepfather] Edgar Anderson and Daddy and [Club] DeLisa, I always knew what we called our upper class South Side then.
Speaker 1: Now how about people like Archibald Motley?
Speaker 2: Archibald, I don't think Archibald was every connected with the Art Center. I met Archie after he was older and got in contact in good with his son but Archibald was more like me.  Archibald Motley wasn't as you would say, he wasn't black enough but he did black subjects too.  A lot of Mexican subjects but he ventured out more than me.  I wouldn't venture out to leave my nest in Chicago.  So of the kids, artists, went to Mexico.  They were very accepted there.  I ventured out to New York.
Speaker 1: Isn't that when [Elizabeth] Catlett went to Mexico.
Speaker 2: That's when Catlett went to Mexico and Tyler.  Margaret went to Mexico and they stayed.  They made it very easy for artists to stay.  I guess they stayed in communities like art colonies or communities.
Speaker 1: What was the connection to Mexico?  The murals?
Speaker 2: The murals and the art--and they were accepted as artists.  I didn't have that much adventure.  I didn't want to leave my security as I thought it.
Story_ID: 13656
Speaker 1: Who were your inspirations.  Was William Carter still in the picture?
Speaker 2: William Carter and [Romare] Bearden and he just died.  Jacob Lawrence because I liked what they did and they were able to get good  connection.  Somebody truly interested in them way back then.  The way I say way back, I guess it wasn't way back.  And they were progressing better.  William Carter was just a good artist.  All of them were good artists.
Speaker 1: Now William Carter, you talked about how he encouraged you.  Was that encouragement going on at this point in time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are some lessons you learned from him, you know, as an artist?
Speaker 2: To keep doing my art because I was more, not more interested, but I was interested in doing things for the money to come in too so that sort of puts a damper on your art.  You know like they say a poor struggling artist.  I didn't want to be a poor struggling artist.  I wanted to do my art but I did other things.  Like I told you I made ladies hats and then the printing and then I went from there into a picture frame business with one of the top picture framers back then in Chicago and I went into that to, what was it Armand Lee.  Now at that time Armand Lee was a type of an artist, I guess you call it passing or whatever, and that's what made his business flourish because it was years and years before people recognized Armand, Mr. Lee as being a black person.
Speaker 1: So Armand Lee, so that was his name Armand Lee?
Speaker 2: Armand Lee.
Speaker 1: And he was a framer, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: With all the top white decorators and everything that's how he got famous.
Speaker 1: Let me go back to William Carter a little bit.  What else do you remember him in terms of his art or what type of person and all.  Any other anecdotes or stories you could tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Well, we was--the best way I can describe William Carter, he should have been born aristocrat.  He like the opera.  He liked the top music and he loved his art and he loved beautiful things.  The painting at the Art Institute and opera and things like that.  He always like that in his work.
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: He always would say when I would start letting the art go, especially when I was in the picture frame or something like tha,t because I was doing things--I was making a name in that for making money but he would always say, have you painted anything today?  I can always remember Carter always saying did you paint anything today?
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet [Romare] Bearden?
Speaker 2: Bearden, oh yeah.  A few years before he died I was, in fact that's how my New York connection came because I started--I met Essie Green and she was a Bearden promoter.  She had been one to start from Bearden from the beginning.  Because Bearden started in the WPA too but in New York.  But he was much more adventurous than me in leaving the country.  You had to leave the country and do things.  I just wasn't adventurous but I loved Bearden's work.  He was so encouraging.  He taught me a lot of things that I use now about the right materials to use for a collage that last through the years.
Story_ID: 13657
Speaker 1: When did you first become aware--oops sorry--aware of Jacob Lawrence?
Speaker 2: After I joined up with Essie Green's gallery in [Harlem] New York, the person that did Jacob's silkscreening from his originals and things, Essie knew--and I met them, I visited them through there.  That's where I met Jacob.  Of course, [William] Carter knew Jacob Lawrence.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to, I want to go back to--Armand Lee because here you are you are--well I think I want to go back to Armand Lee but I need to ask about the fairs. Now when did you start--I'm just trying to get a chronologically the right thing.  You participated in the Old Town Fair, but you also started the street--you had the shop.  Was that later, was that in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s]I think I had the shop.  I opened a shop with the help of a Jewish couple.  Doctor--anyway I don't have to say the name--Dr. Joffe and his wife opened a shop for me in Old Town [Chicago, Illinois] and it was from there that I really started the first Wells Street Art Fair.  I got permission from all the proprietors, could I set an artist up front of their store? And that's how Wells Street Art Fair got started. And then I think we started one on--me and another artist started one on Burton Place, which doesn't exist anymore, but the Wells Street Art Fair grew--it's a city event now.
Speaker 1: That's pretty impressive. That whole thing happened after working with Armand Lee right?
Speaker 2: Well doing it--and I was still with Armand Lee.  I started--I was with Armand Lee maybe not as big.  I stayed with Armand Lee--I stayed with Armand Lee really because I retired.  I was the manager.  I finally worked up to be the manager of Armand Lee Company but there I did work with all the big decorators, all the top decorators in Chicago and restored--I was still doing my artwork because I was restoring art and paintings.
Speaker 1: Now can you spell Armand Lee for me.
Speaker 2: A-R-M-A-N-D L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you, this--so when did you start working with Armand Lee?
Speaker 2: These dates and things might mix up, but I'm sure I was working with Armand Lee all during the '60s [1960s] but just a little worker and gradually worked up to take over management, take over different things that I did to restoring the paintings and pictures and I did a lot of interesting things at Armand Lee.
Speaker 1: Well can you--okay the this is before you started your own.
Speaker 2: I started my own art fair, my own shop while I was working at Armand Lee.  I still worked at Armand Lee while I had my shop because Old Town was a night--was a Chicago night function, and I hired my sisters and my brother I think were in the shop in the day and I would be there at night.
Speaker 1: Now, one thing I was just curious about--and you said Armand Lee passed, you know, passed for white.
Speaker 2: For years, he was passing then.
Speaker 1: Did you know that he was passing?
Speaker 2: Not at the time.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you weren't even aware that he was--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: And how does that ever come out?
Speaker 2: Well I guess as you get older and you get better, more established, he was the finest picture framer in the country. He didn't have to anymore.  Not that he put up a banner but it just didn't matter anymore.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk to you about that or--
Speaker 2: It was just commonly known.
Speaker 1: After.
Speaker 2: Afterwards--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 13658
Speaker 1: What kinds of things you learned; what kind of experiences did you have, you know, during that time.  You know, you're in a frameshop for people bringing in art work.  Was that an enriching experience for you?  Did you see others, get exposed to things that you wouldn't otherwise--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You learned that framing a picture is just as important as making it for people that's going to spend, spend money for it. And at the time he was the top decorator, framer for decorators.  So I got to know--I can't recall their names.  Most of them are dead now anyway.
Speaker 1: Are there other things you learned or ways that that experience exposed you because up until that point your experiences primarily are on the South Side, right?  Where was Armand Lee located?
Speaker 2: On the, not very far from here.
Speaker 1: Was that Erie Street?
Speaker 2: Maybe it was Erie and--
Speaker 1: Erie and Orleans [Street].
Speaker 2: Yeah but before that we were on Wells [Street], around the corner on Wells.  It's part of Moody Bible [Institute, Chicago, Illinois] property.
Speaker 1: I was asking what things did you sort of, you know, experience or learn, you know or any anecdotes you'd like to tell during that time because you were there a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Learned about restoring paintings.  I learned how to curse (laughs).  That was one of the greatest experiences.  I pulled down a window blind and all of the years of dirt and stuff fell and I can remember that being the first time I ever cursed.
Speaker 1: What about looking some of the art that came in?
Speaker 2: Oh the art was just fabulous.  It had the best.  At one time I even changed the color on a original [Pablo] Picasso because the decorator wanted a color to go with her color scheme or something.  I've restored many Leroy Neiman pictures, and you'd be surprised what happens to them when something happens to a painting, what's on it.  Now historians or somebody can tell if that picture ever was going to a museum, they could tell when something else was added. In fact, that was my first time overseas when I was at Armand Lee, because I had an oriental silkscreen, very, very oldv that was somebody had placed holes in it or something and it almost looked like impossible to patch. And that's when I went to Italy looking for old--something old, silk, something like that to patch it with, to fix it with. I remember in later years I had to take it all off when this--whoever finally wound up with it wanted it for a museum or something like that and everything that had been added on had to come off.
Speaker 1: And so what about the holes?
Speaker 2: They wanted the holes.  Didn't want anything foreign on it.  I know I went to all sorts of little basement shops and things, looking for something that I could use.  I thought it was going to be fine if we found a old tapestry that maybe had flowers and you could take those out and incorporate them in the screen but I had to take them off years later.
Speaker 1: So, any other anecdotes to share with us 'cause that's a whole different world that people, you know, a lot of your fellow artists like William Carter and things weren't really exposed to.
Speaker 2: Into that--no I was exposed to a lot of things mainly coming from Armand Lee's, I think.
Speaker 1: Did you have any collectors for that who collected your work during that period?
Speaker 2: No, my collectors started later in New York.  Essie Green, the gallery that I went with that was handling [Romare] Bearden's work, that was her main purpose was to put collections together, and I think that's where really people started collecting and I got into a lot of collections.  Percy Sutton was--he never was the mayor of New York, but he was big in New York. And naturally Oprah [Winfrey] when she was just becoming--because when she started collecting. she wasn't 'Mrs. Fabulous' that she is now,  money-wise anyway.
Story_ID: 13659
Speaker 1: That's when I first learned about museum quality [while working with framer Armand Lee] and that's something we artists from the [South Side Community Art] Center [Chicago, Illinois] and what not--we didn't know about that--about using the right quality papers and the right qualities gluing things down or something. For a collector you can't do that.
Speaker 2: Because of your medium, you had to use the right materials.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I learned the right materials I learned from [Romare] Bearden.
Speaker 2: So now this is--okay I'm just trying to put things in chronological form.  I'm still in--I'm personally in the '60s [1960s].  I hope you're with me. But you're working at Armand Lee. You're doing the fairs. And even during the '60s [1960s] started the Wells Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: The Wells Street Art Fair, yeah.
Speaker 2: The art fair--and are you still connected at this point on the South Side? I mean are you still--is there a community of artists.  Are you associated with them anymore then you were before or are you just growing more, you know, on the North Side and doing the restoration and framing and that type of thing?
Speaker 1: No, I'm still connected with the Art Center.  I don't think I ever truly left the Art Center. It was pretty much where we got down and there was nothing really happening. But--and I stayed connected because of William Carter.  William Carter was a South Side artist, Chicago artist as you say.
Speaker 2: And did you--because you outside of--so Armand Lee really served the place of let's say like going to art school and onto college in some respects for you.
Speaker 1: Yeah I learned a lot, a lot at Armand Lee's when you're dealing with real people's valuable painting, collectors' valuable paintings. I remember one time I was, I had to cradle a very expensive painting and I guess I was leaning more to myself with what I was going to do so I was going to apply it onto another piece of canvas and I put it down, put it under pressure; when I came back the whole painting--the canvas it was on applied but the painting came off. I tried a lot of experience trying to get it back together.  I finally took it to, at that time, Chicago Conservative [sic].  They were young people too and they just started then.  I think they're big now for restoring.
Speaker 2: Chicago Conservation.
Speaker 1: And they couldn't do anything with it.  So what I did-- that's the second time I went to Italy to find a comparable painting. For that I was always interested in doing the right thing for the person.  Pardon me.  I settled that that way but that was quite an experience to come in and this whole painting--all the oil painting left the canvas.
Speaker 2: It left the canvas and went where?
Speaker 1: The canvas--it just came off in little pieces.  And there was this young guy at the Conservative at the Chicago Conservation, they were starting and they couldn't do it either.  So that was one of the things from Armand Lee.
Speaker 2: So did Armand Lee get sued?
Speaker 1: No, I had a way--I was--had a very good rapport with decorators and all the people. In fact, when they came to Armand Lee they didn't want no one to wait on them but me.  And so there was suit or anything.  I satisfied them with something.  I don't remember what it was.  I think I got a religious piece--at that time they were restoring Italy all over--and from one of the restorers I got a religious piece that was the backdrop for--all the buildings in Italy, they have an altar on the outside or something and the painting that was in that altar he sold me.  It probably wasn't the right thing to do for him to sell it but he was sure that at this late--at the time that he was restoring the building he could put another painting--that was just--and I bought that back.
Story_ID: 13660
Speaker 1: I know you started out with watercolors so at what point in time--what was the transition after watercolors and what is your work coming to be in this--the subject matter still the same.
Speaker 2: The subject matter's the same.  I changed the collage after I met Essie Green, after I met [Romare] Bearden I really changed to collage.  I used to combine them.  I did my type of collaging with painting and water color after I met Essie Green.
Speaker 1: Now when did you meet Essie Green?
Speaker 2: I met Essie Green, I guess in the '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s], I just really don't know.
Speaker 1: So you're saying--this whole period are you still going--we were in the '60s [1960s] are they--your work is still watercolor at that point.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I used--always I guess you call is mixed medium.  I always experimented a lot.
Speaker 1: And so tell me what you were experimenting with at that point.
Speaker 2: With the different material, different way of doing it not the straight painting I use--(pause)--I would paste things up onto my collages and my watercolors.
Speaker 1: Now as an artist what were you trying to do?  I mean I know your subjects.  I'm going to get that in more detail, you know, with some of the themes and everything like that but what were you, you know, art is a way of expressing oneself in some ways--I'm just wondering, you know, were you--what--why did you choose the medium you chose--I mean, I know you said that you could get more detailed with the watercolor and you were sort of experimenting you know, with other, you know, using other materials but I guess what I'm trying to understand is what were you trying to do through your art?
Speaker 2: I think that mine was a combination of expressing myself the way I wanted to but, be sure it's going to please someone else that they would want it.  I was always concerned not about getting a stockpile of things to just please me. I wanted pleasant things; I wanted things that would make people happy pleasing as they would want it. I always wanted to sell it.  And there's so many like--[William] Carter, Carter wanted to sell--but so many artists they would do exactly only if you didn't like it--so I guess I had a combination of wanting to please, make people happy, and sell it.
Story_ID: 13661
Speaker 1: So but what were people telling you about your art when they would see it?  Would they say, "Oh, that's nice or," you know and who were the--your because people were buying this, you know, it mean sounds like whatever you were giving it away or selling it but who was actually--
Speaker 2: Well, people always thought my art was colorful and happy, I guess the word would be happy, make you pleasing because truly at the beginning of art--black artists this time it was not beautiful, it was good, but it wasn't always, always--make you sad or frown, you know--
Speaker 1: You mean a lot of the other work would make you sad or frown--trying to make (unclear).
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The ones that were--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And do you think you had found your way sort of then--I mean do you think it took you to the '80s [1980s] to really try to find your way and your form.  You know, I'm just wondering the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], what was that whole period like?  Were you, you know producing--how many pieces a year?  How many were you selling? What were you--?
Speaker 2: Could you sit up? You're kind of leaning there.
Speaker 1: It was--I called it 'doing pretty'.  'Pretty art' instead of 'art art' and back then people weren't as sophisticated, especially our people weren't as sophisticated about art and it was pretty art and they liked it.
Speaker 2: So who were the people who were buying from you?
Speaker 1: Jewish people, all my old stuff.  In fact I met--heard from a few of them that bought things even back when I was at the 57th Art Fair [held in Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] that needed something done to it or remembered buying it.  I remember when--when did [President John F.] Kennedy get killed?
Speaker 2: '63 [November 22, 1963], I think.
Speaker 1: Well the day Kennedy got killed, a Jewish fellow came in that was doing--I don't know what he said he was doing around the building, but he bought everything that I had.  He was at Hyde Park, like people want to say, "What were you doing the day Kennedy got killed," and I remember that.
Speaker 2: So black people weren't buying your art.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, see that's all I'm saying--okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I think the black people came after Essie influence basically.
Speaker 2: And the Jewish people didn't have any issues with the dark images you know, or anything like that the brown images, there were no issues about that?
Speaker 1: No I don't think they were actually black images then, but they were images with no faces.  I've always did faces--no faces.
Story_ID: 13662
Speaker 1: I want to get into some of, you know this--exploring more of this jazz and church. And one of the statements you made and one of the things that I read, you know, they were saying how you became, you were--somehow it indicated that you became disillusioned with the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had read that two times--I guess I was misinterpreted.  I didn't mean I was disillusioned with the church, but comparing jazz entertainers and church people, the ones on the jazz side seemed to be more real people toward people.  Church people were, well, hypocritical I guess.  They were good to good people, but they shunned (pause) people.  You know, we were--black churches used to be very prejudiced.  If you weren't dressed right they didn't want you in the church.  That's what I meant by that. I think my feeling is loving people.
Speaker 1: Now and even at this point when you are painting faceless, you know, I mean they weren't necessarily brown, your still focus was on jazz--
Speaker 2: And church--and those were the things I knew best.
Speaker 1: And so then okay let's go this whole thing you're--and--was there a lot of growth, you didn't have a lot of growth in your work between the '60s [1960s] and the '80s [1980s] is what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay so tell me what was happening.
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s] like I said it was more pretty and what should I say (pause) more street scene-ish.  What people were doing--what the people were doing wasn't an important part of the picture, they were just there as part of the composition. And then I think it grew to where church scenes were actually the church scene or jazz scene was actually the jazz scenes with people dancing and people actually playing the instruments and things. (pause)  It was a lot different.
Speaker 1: And then what after that?
Speaker 2: Well for a while it--it got more definite, you know, when you just--you could be in the club.  You could see the club with the activities going on actually in the club.  Activities going on after--actually in the church.  Like one of my main church scenes is a baptism and that's from when I was--things that I knew about because we had baptisms out in the park.  But it got a little bit more--actually knowing what's happening.
Story_ID: 13663
Speaker 1: How did you come to have this New York [New York] connection in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: I met Essie Green.  How I met Essie Green was at an auction for--what's the big auction house?
Speaker 1: Sotheby's?
Speaker 2: Yeah they had a big auction and I was taking work from William Carter there--for the auction and someone that knew me was at the auction and told--'cause Essie was interested in William Carter's work, but they told her she should really see Stringfellow's work, that's what you really should get interested in. That's how I met Essie.  So she came to Chicago [Illinois] and grabbed up a lot of the work and then from then on we were--I was just like [Romare] Bearden in her gallery [Essie Green Gallery, Harlem, New York, New York].  That's who she really featured was Stringfellow and Bearden.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, you said you were, you were taking William Carter's work to Sotheby's.
Speaker 2: To the auction, yeah.
Speaker 1: To be auctioned off?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Had he passed? No? No--
Speaker 2: He was still living.
Speaker 1: So but what how did that even occur?
Speaker 2: Well, Carter in his later years he wasn't moveable a lot. He got moveable again after he got ready to die but he wasn't moveable a lot.  It got to a point where I took Carter everywhere in a wheelchair or I drove him everywhere.
Speaker 1: So you took it there--how did she come to hear about you?  That's what I'm trying, because--
Speaker 2: I guess she was discussing the work, whoever she was talking with about Carter, they knew me and knew my work and they're the ones that told her and when she came and saw it, she grabbed it up and put it on her bandwagon.
Story_ID: 13664
Speaker 1: Essie [Green] took you, you know, she took you on and you became part of her stable.  Have your images changed to brown face by then?
Speaker 2: No, I was doing brown face then.  Doing more brown face than black face.  They're not--started just doing a black image and that I did because the images could be anybody.  Of course, it's a quite popular thing to do now, you see.  But Jacob Lawrence did a lot of that with no faces.  Of course he did if for silkscreen purposes I'm sure.
Speaker 1: And, but you're--did Jacob Lawrence and Romare Bearden did they influence you before you met them?  I mean that's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Not Jacob Lawrence.
Speaker 1: Okay good.
Speaker 2: But Bearden did, I always was--
Speaker 1: You were impressed with his work.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he was basically we thought he was our one black artist that was--at the top--more so than Charles White and the others.
Speaker 1: And when did you think it was okay--when did you decide to be more of a black artist?  Is what I'm trying to understand in this whole, you know in the whole part because you remember what you were saying that--
Speaker 2: Well I guess in the early '90s [1990s] or the '80s [1980s], you know I--I guess when it got to be okay--I can remember being so extremely happy when blacks started buying my work and then more happy than that when young collectors and things started buying the work.
Story_ID: 13665
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first piece a black person bought of yours?
Speaker 2: Oh, anything significant would have been maybe Percy Sutton. (pause) Wasn't Percy Sutton connected with the yeah, with the black radio and stuff like that, that was most significant because all their offices were--my work was all over.  Essie [Green] put my work all over them.  He's the one that did the Regal [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], I think.
Speaker 1: The Apollo [Theater, Harlem, New York].
Speaker 2: The Apollo.
Speaker 1: So how does that make you feel then, I guess?
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: Okay, why?
Speaker 2: Because, I guess inwardly I always wanted it to be for my own people, for black people.  I always--and that's when the subjects really got really good and what I really like of the church and baptism and things.  Jazz was always part of everybody.
Story_ID: 13666
Speaker 1: It says here that your signature piece is the 'Red Umbrella Down by Riverside,' would you agree with that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And why would you?
Speaker 2: Because ever since I've done 'Red Umbrella Down By The River[side]', I guess that's the biggest piece of art that I've done.  Not big in size as far as selling and going into collectors.  Anyone that generally has collected my work, they want--and every show everybody wants that piece.  In fact I could give a show on 'Red Umbrella Down By The Riverside' but none of them are alike.
Speaker 1: So what made you incorporate the red umbrella, was it just--?
Speaker 2: Well that's a childhood memory even from Champaign [Illinois]. That was a big affair in Champaign.  Go to Crystal Lake for a big baptism and I was even a child when I was into that because after the baptism they had the big picnic.  All churches went together, the union picnic they called it.  So if you wanted to get baptized to go to the picnic you would get baptized (laughs). And I don't know, for some reason it was always a red umbrella that they held over the preacher--well, it didn't have to be--not for the rain they did it for the sun and I remember that very well.  I ran into that same thing again in New Orleans [Louisiana], they did that same thing and I always like the flow of that painting and it was always--it's still a painting, any show that I have it's always a version of that painting.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what--you know, when you first did that piece and what sort of motivated you or what, you know, to do it?  Was it just sort of an inspiration?
Speaker 2: An inspiration because I always--that's when I thought--most of the paintings I got my subject matter from was from things that were vivid, very meaningful to me and my growing up all the time and that was church--church and that was all connected with church.
Story_ID: 13667
Speaker 1: What about 'Ladies Day'?
Speaker 2: 'Ladies Day' well that's part of church but what I liked about 'Ladies Day' was--from all I remember, that was the day ladies wore fabulous hats, always associated fabulous hats with black ladies--they were colored ladies then--but they always wore hats and like I told you once before I had a business of making hats.
Speaker 1: Were you successful with that business?
Speaker 2: I was successful with--I started to do that with my mother.  She helped me with that but I didn't take it no further than Chicago [Illinois] and in the night life.  Everybody in the night life in the night clubs and owners of the night clubs they always had to--and show girls almost every week they wanted a new Stringfellow hat.
Speaker 1: Oh, they were called Stringfellow hats?  So could you describe your favorite hat or one of your favorites?
Speaker 2: My favorite hat I made for my mother.  It was made like a red velvet wedding cake, I call it that, with fringe on it and when she wore it tilted to the front and the fringe would move. And she was going to an affair with Rex Harris, I remember that. And that's when I made her that hat.  Never been able to do that again to where it would come out just right.
Story_ID: 13668
Speaker 1: What about the piece--your piece called 'The Gallery'?
Speaker 2: 'The Gallery' interested me--there was a very famous painting.  I don't know what gallery it's in, in Italy I think, this man sitting down looking at a gallery of paintings on the wall.  I'm sure you've seen that. And that's what gave me the idea to start with 'The Gallery', but of course mine turned out to be actually galleries, and see how many individual collages I could get into one painting.  In fact I'm working on one now for my next show.
Speaker 1: They were all Stringfellow paintings in--?
Speaker 2: All Stringfellow paintings hanging in a gallery.
Speaker 1: And how many did you get in it at that point?
Speaker 2: Well it depends on the size.  I've had a gallery painting maybe it'd be getting nine collages in one picture.
Story_ID: 13669
Speaker 1: And then what about 'All That Jazz'?
Speaker 2: 'All That Jazz', that's from [Club] DeLisa.  The jazz scenes are really from old--early Chicago [Illinois] or that's were we lived at night and slept by day.  Rhumboogie Club, Joe's Deluxe Club, DeLisa, and all up and down State Street there was little clubs.  All kinds of little jazz clubs and they ran from 31st to 55th [Streets, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So do you have a favorite artist, I mean a jazz artist?  Do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You don't, okay. With things like you know 'All That Jazz', all those really good--depict the night life.
Speaker 2: Depict the night life.  And after I got connected in New York [New York] then I start--had more but mostly it was from--memory I wasn't there when the Cotton Club [Harlem, New York] was there but--What's the name of the institute? Schomburg?
Speaker 1: The Schomburg.
Speaker 2: --from the Schomburg [Center For Research In Black Culture, New York], so I studied a lot in there.  I have a lot of paintings there too and about the Cotton Club and Smalls's [Paradise] and different clubs, you know.
Story_ID: 13670
Speaker 1: I particularly like 'Going to Lay Down--', that's one of my--
Speaker 2: 'Gonna Lay Down My Sword and Shield'.
Speaker 1: Mainly because I love that song, you know, and I like the whole flow of this piece here.
Speaker 2: I got a lot of subject matter from songs.  My favorite was that 'Gonna to Lay Down My Sword and Shield' and 'When the Saints Go Marching In' and--a lot of imagination in those but I still have the religious feeling. I just feel good and religious.  I feel that God has blessed me from very young and little, when I didn't even know it because I don't remember any bad times.
Story_ID: 13671
Speaker 1: Was there any point in your life that you felt like artistic drought like you were just not going anyplace or, you know, you really weren't producing what you thought you should or would or--
Speaker 2: Well that's the part--that's where Carter comes in.  I guess there might have been some times like that if I hadn't known William Carter for fifty years.  He kept pushing me to do--he was just an inspiring person.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering, what kind of discussion would you and he have?  I mean you know you paint him as sort of a person who was, you know, always the voice behind you in many ways but I'm sure the two of you, you know, shared stories or you know, or I mean times and I was wondering if you could share any of those?
Speaker 2: Well he had more connections with the earlier--with the artists from the WPA [Works Progress Administration] and I learned more really from him than actually being a part of it because he remembered, he remembered everything from about it from his childhood, from his childhood days and he kept me so inspired he was so--he was a different level. Where I listened to blues he listened to Tchaikovsky's [Pytor Ilyich Tchaikovsky] First and Second and things like that.  It was a contrast of the, of our bringing--he was--I would say he really should have been born in Renaissance.  He like everything excellent like an old king in food and everything else.
Speaker 1: So what were your conversations?  You know, what would they revolve around?  Would you talk about events of the day or you got together and just said--
Speaker 2: Well he would talk about different ones like George Neal, he'd get that whole thing how George Neal started the art classes in his house and where he'd go and Charles White and his wife--he gave 'em all what we'd call the gossip.  We'd just gossip about what--good gossip about the old times, about the [South Side Community Art] Center because he remembered everything.
Speaker 1: Now you talked about [William] McBride having a lot of the collection from the WPA artists.  Didn't William Carter also, wasn't he a collector too?
Speaker 2: William was a collector of all the artists but not the old stuff from the WPA but he would--his collection came from McBride. When McBride needed another dollar or something he would bring it down to this well kept piece of artwork from Irene Clark or anybody, bring it down and William would buy it.
Speaker 1: Now did you--was there ever a discussion--would he ever get, you know, despondent as a black artist--would there ever be those discussions like, you know, what he was doing this for, or were black people buying his work at the time?
Speaker 2: That's the only people that he sold to and he was always able to sell himself.  He would tell me sometime he'd go to the Kitchenette Queen and she'll buy the painting and he's have to wash the windows and clean the house and get a bowl of soup, but he always sold to blacks.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk, did you ever talk about frustration about how it was to be a black artist?  Was there any of that discussion?
Speaker 2: No Carter never was--he would tell me about his early days in St. Louis [Missouri] that he couldn't get in any black schools so he mother took the last little money that he had and made he come to Chicago.  He had won the scholarship but the couldn't go in St. Louis.  That's how he got in the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois].  And then he had another--he would talk about when he first came to Chicago he liked the finer things.  Drexel was still fine mansions and things where whites lived and he would just like to go over there and walk around and look at the fine houses and he'd say one time he was walking and squad cars came from nowhere all around him.  You know, what was this black guy doing over on Drexel.  They probably thought he was doing something wrong.  Those were the kind of things that he remembered.  Never--he was never a depressing artist.
Story_ID: 13672
Speaker 1: I was--like I said, I was so happy after getting connected with Essie [Green] that young black lawyers and doctors and things like that began to collect. And these were young people in their--twenty-five and up like that.  That I admit I liked very well.  And she basically put art in all the big black firms and everything, that was nice.  That's how I got those good connections out of New York.  In New York--the artist in red, they think it's somebody.
Speaker 2: I would like to talk about the red.  Okay did it start with 'The Red Umbrella' or did people ever call you Red or I mean I'm just trying--
Speaker 1: I don't--I always tried to do something theme-ish and different.
Speaker 2: Your microphone fell-- (pause)
Speaker 1: You know the color that identifies you, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always, like I said, back in school when I remember when I was talkin' about from Champaign [Illinois] I wanted to be known for the pretty boy because one time in early Chicago time I wore only black and white to be distinguished and I don't know--I guess in the '90s [1990s], in the beginning of the '90s [1990s], I wanted to identify myself because I have very strange name, Stringfellow.  So we said I'd just wear all one color, so I picked red because red is more vibrating, more noticed.  Something that people would ask, just like you say, why do you wear red?  To be noticed. And it just got to be a habit.  I think of sometime changing but--too old to change.
Story_ID: 13673
Speaker 1: Are you actively painting?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and what, what do you want your career, you know, your career came, your success came later in your life. And so I'm wondering what you want to see in terms of your success from this point on?  What do you, what would be sort of your dream?
Speaker 2: Well, I think really my success is to have a very large cocktail book which is in my mind very much, but mostly painting, not a lot of writing, which will come this year.
Speaker 1: And what--a lot of--you know, when you look at your work there's a lot of movement in there and what I find interesting you knnow, between the church--you talk about rhythm as an important, rhythm--what is rhythm, you know, what is that whole process because, you know, you see, you see activity even though it's a still image you see activity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you look at the painting--and that's what collage would do.  The different textures, different shades of color, different material, you get, to me, you get more feeling, more movement than you do out of a painting.  Now, if I attempt to do a painting it's sort of flat, but other artist's it's--don't be that flat--but I can get more movement and enjoyment.  At this age you want to especially have an influence and make money but you want to enjoy it.  When I sit down to do a painting in collage I enjoy it.  It's just enjoyable to see something and know what you can do with it.
Speaker 1: So do you get a happy feeling?
Speaker 2: I get a happy feeling. I go in that room and I can really--because I guess I'm not happy all the time but when I get started doing a painting especially in collage, it's a happy feeling.
Speaker 1: And what do you think your life would have been like had you not been an artist would you have been, I mean, you could have been making hats, you could have been framing, you could have--but what do you think?  But that's not even how you first started out I'm wondering at what point in your life--
Speaker 2: I can't see it just doing something that I'm not actually happy with.  Of course, I've been fortunate enough, except for the little extra parts to do but I didn't want them to go on forever.  I was very glad to leave Armand Lee's [framing business].  Although I enjoyed it immensely while I was there, but I wouldn't be glad to leave my art.  When I had my accident the only thing I was hoping that you didn't hit this side that I can think of that some way if I couldn't use that arm.
Speaker 1: So then that's why I asked the question so you say you would not want to leave your art, is there something about the process of creating that makes life--
Speaker 2: Makes life more interesting.  Makes you a more interesting person that's just to think now I'm going nine to five to one place and doing what I'm told.  Just wouldn't cut it.
Speaker 1: And you're making a living off your art.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know, making a living off my art.
Speaker 1: So how does that feel?
Speaker 2: That feels wonderful.  Absolutely fabulous.  I came a long, long way.  Thank you, Jesus (laughs).  A long way.
Story_ID: 13674
Speaker 1: What do you want your position to be sort of within the art world, or the black art world, do you have an views on that?  I mean how you sort of been used or--
Speaker 2: No, just to be appreciated which I am, even by the artists you truly want to be--have a nice position with your fellow artists that they feel right about you.
Speaker 1: And remember when people were collecting you at the beginning they said that, you know, it made them happy.  Are people, you know, the black collectors or your collectors now, do they give you feedback about the work--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah they do.
Speaker 1: I was wondering what were some of them.
Speaker 2: I even get letters and they feel--they just feel good about--they still think that it makes happy--I still get letters.  Just recently I donated about seven paintings to different churches, black churches in Chicago and I got a lovely response from them.  I didn't even send them to the church in a way that they could even respond because I didn't want people to think I was doing this for other reasons.  I just felt good. I just felt like I wanted to give something back like that.  I gave to seven churches.  I got really nice letters back.
Speaker 1: That's a nice thing to do. So you just wanted to give back to the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are very large collages.  When I was young I did--in Champaign [Illinois]--that's going way back--I did a lot of painting in churches, but those churches are all torn down.
Story_ID: 13675
Speaker 1: For young people coming along now who want to be, you know, artists, you know, black artists. This area has been one that's been very underappreciated for a long time, but do you have any advice for them?
Speaker 2: To continue your work.  Naturally you have to do something to sustain yourself but to keep doing your--don't ever get discouraged about your artwork not even if you're--so many of them have parents that don't encourage because they still look at art as not being a doctor.  But even if you're going to be a doctor, keep up your artwork and it's good for your soul, it's good for yourself.  It may not blossom out to be big, but it still--it's something you should keep up if you have the talent.  We have so much talent.
Story_ID: 13676
Speaker 1: If there were no art in society what would that, what would that, what do you think that would do?
Speaker 2: That would be just--I can't even imagine it that there would be no art.  And art is one way we can carry our history on, our thoughts whether art that I call not pretty or whatever it's still carries our history.  Jacob Lawrence did that well.  It keeps something for people to come along to see that was well and good.  We have a way of remembering the bad but it's a way of  keeping our history going.
Speaker 1: And what do you as an artist or as a person--you know--what the person that influenced you most was--as an artist was?
Speaker 2: William Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 13677
Speaker 1: What you want your legacy as an artist to be?
Speaker 2: That was the artist that I knew that was always happy and successful but mainly happy without the downtrodden part of it 'cause I never had that.  And I think I do that pretty good.  I don't think I ever had an enemy if that helps.  I've always met fabulous people.  I want them to remember that Stringfellow was really a good guy.  Even if--he didn't necessarily had to be a good artist, a good person.
Story_ID: 13678
Speaker 1: Your parents never saw your success, right as an artist?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And Mama [Mother] Briggs never saw it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So what do you think--
Speaker 2: My stepmother has seen it.  She still sees it.  She's eighty-nine.  So she still sees it.
Speaker 1: Okay well how does she feel about it and then I'll go on and ask about them.
Speaker 2: She thinks it's just wonderful.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Mother Camille.  She was a second mother, even when my mother was living, she was always Mother Camille.  And I still look after her.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother, you father or, you know, Mother Briggs, what do you think they would say?
Speaker 2: I think they would be ecstatic.  They would--well they always thought that Allen was, "Oh, Allen"--and I think--I wish that they were here to see the success part.  I have one sister that still enjoys the success of it so (pause) I'm able to do anything for them.  So that's--that's what I like.
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: I'm glad for this opportunity.  This is--it's still--I won't say odd, but to me that people would--like I say you have four artists that I would be one of 'em, it's a good feeling.
Speaker 1: To be acknowledged.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Good feeling.
Story_ID: 13679
Speaker 1: This was my daishiki period I think I was a little bit connected to the West Side of Chicago.  This was in a hotel.  I was a very--uneasy.
Speaker 2: You know how old you were or about what year it might have been?
Speaker 1: I was between twenty-five and thirty, between twenty-five and thirty-five I think.
Speaker 2: Okay so this is when you were working at--
Speaker 1: I was working at Armand Lee's [framing business]--
Speaker 2: You were okay but that was after you worked with your father at the--I thought thirty was around the time you were working--
Speaker 1: Maybe this is--I can't tell you. I know it was on the West Side.  I had moved to the West Side because I had a little poodle and where I lived on the South Side they didn't like my dog.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow in his dashiki period on the West Side of Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13680
Speaker 1: This is not too far ago.  I'm trying to think--.  This was when I lived on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] here before I moved here.  I used to give--I lived in a senior citizen building and I gave theme parties for them all the time big--and that's what this was for I don't know which party, but I gave big parties because I didn't have--I never had other things to do like I didn't squander stuff on night life and stuff after I got grown.  I just gave the parties and that's when the red, wearing red I know that.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow in his signature red clothing on the North Side of Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13681
Speaker 1: That was in Florida and this was the first time I attempted to do paper mache figures.  I did jazz figures of paper mache figures.  I think I did a group of fifty.  I never was able to do them again and as I was doing them Wally Quick was taking pictures of it.  Wally is my Italian brother-in-law.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow attempts papier mache figures in Florida, not dated, from the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13682
Speaker 1: This was in Florida.  This is part of the Italian family.  He's dead.  Not my brother-in-law, but just a friend of us in Florida.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, it had to be--I get these '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] mixed up.  If it was '80s [1980s], it had to be early, very early '90s [1990s].  This was a time during the--I don't know, I'm trying to get the time together if it was during Max Robertson's time, I don't know.
Speaker 2: This your dog?
Speaker 1: No, my little poodle was a little white poodle.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow with an Italian friend in Florida, ca. late 80s, early 90s [1980s] [1990s]. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13683
Speaker 1: This was in Paris [France] in an outdoor cafe.  I was in Paris that time promoting myself to different art galleries.  A very good reception, but this particular gallery he'd told me that he liked the work but he was sort of skeptical of having black artists where he had to deal with a black art gallery.
Speaker 2: You know what year it was? Was this maybe in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: This was in early '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 2: Early '90s?
Speaker 1: Middle '90s.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow at an outdoor cafe, Paris France, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13684
Speaker 1: Armand Lee is on the end with the bow tie and suspenders.  Most of those people, a lot of them are gone.  Al Brown, the little Japanese boy in front, the girl with the apron on was Teefah (ph.) a deaf and dumb [mute] girl but I don't where she is.  A lot of them aren't living anymore.  That was made in the back workroom.
Speaker 2: And what year was this?  Where you on Orleans [Street, Chicago, Illinois] at that point?
Speaker 1: No we were on Wells [Street].  That was very early.  But I can't tell you the year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: That had to be in the early '80s [1980s]. I was still youthful.
Speaker 1: [Allen Stringfellow with co-workers, including Armand Lee, Chicago, Illinois, ca. early 1980s. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13685
Speaker 1: I believe this is a party on Sugar Hill [Brooklyn, New York].  Just a social function on Sugar Hill and that was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Was this drawn from your imagination or was this a particularly vivid memory that you had of some particular place?
Speaker 1: Imagination and memory.
Speaker 2: And memory?
Speaker 1: Remember things that probably the couple in the front probably wasn't--might not have been at this function.
Speaker 2: Was the chandelier there?
Speaker 1: Chandeliers are in every fabulous mansion in New York especially.  A lot of those brownstones are still there.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow presents a painting of a Sugar Hill, Brooklyn, New York, mansion, not dated, from the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13686
Speaker 1: This is '[Red Umbrella] Down By The Riverside' not--I call it 'Red Umbrella' because this is in Crystal Lake Park [Champaign, Illinois].  It's a lot of imagination too because we didn't get baptized in all white robes.  We wore mostly I can remember having your clothes on.  Something on that we couldn't see through.  The people in the front are waiting for the picnic to start.  These I really enjoyed the movement.  I loved to do--
Speaker 2: That's what I--they have very nice movement in them.
Speaker 1: [Allen Stringfellow presents his painting  'Red Umbrella Down By The Riverside,' 1996. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13687
Speaker 1: This is sort of a takeoff--not actually but memory from--we had so many storefront churches in Chicago [Illinois] along State Street and Wabash [Avenue].  This is sort of a takeoff from that. But the women always dressed to go to church.  I don't care how much you didn't have--what happened? Your status in life if you didn't have--you always had a pretty hat and dress to go to church.  Always had dressed up to go to church even after other congregations not dressed up for church.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow presents his painting of a Chicago, Illinois church, not dated, from the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13688
Speaker 1: 'Ladies Day' sort of a collage of a painting in doing several different things.  The ladies singing. There's the choir, sitting out front waiting to get in.  It's really a collage of a collage.
Speaker 2: What's the emphasis of having the circles over different--?
Speaker 1: Just to add--tone, color.  This one's got my famous little girl in it.  That little girl, she's in a lot of my collages.
Speaker 2: Where is she?  Is she between these women in red?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's sort of a takeoff from a niece that I have that lives in Tennessee.  When we used to go to family reunions she always looked like that, so cute.  I've used her a lot.  I use different people over again.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow presents his collage, 'Ladies Day,'  1999. From the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13689
Speaker 1: Talley Beatty used to be with the Katherine Dunham [Dance Ensemble] group and then when I go to Chicago [Illinois] I would go to his rehearsal and all I can remember is that I was thinking that oh, not cruel but he worked those dancers so hard at a rehearsal or at his studio.  It looked like their feet were going to fall off.  But he was one of Katherine Dunham's main dancers.  He was from Chicago originally.  Katherine was really from Chicago originally when she started to dance.  I love the dances because you still get a lot of movement, that's the--a lot of flying movement.
Speaker 2: [Allen Stringfellow presents a painting of a dance troupe, not dated, from the collection of Allen Stringfellow]
Story_ID: 13690
Speaker 1: Nicole [Smith representative], she's my angel. She is the most, this isn't about art, but she's the most fabulous spiritual, loving being and I went to Nicole through [William] Carter.  I guess Carter went first, so that must have been in the end of '89 [1989] or the '90s [1990s], and she's really the fabulous source of promoting my work. She loves it for one thing, and she had fabulous customers both white and black, mostly white and she really promotes my work. I have a whole gallery there and one thing--I'm really dedicated to my galleries.  I was dedicated to Essie [Green], still am because Sherman is still running the gallery, and dedicated to Nicole, don't sell anything from my home or on the side.  That was one reason I didn't get into Japan art scene because they said black artists would sell their work, their self, you know, not out of their galleries
Speaker 2: So what is important to you when someone's representing you I mean you can choose to who--sometimes you choose and sometimes--?
Speaker 1: Well I choose.  You have to be somebody that I like.  We have to have a rapport. We have to--it just clicks.  It's the same way you know when you meet your husband, you knew it because it clicks, just clicked and she's good for me and I'm certainly loyal and good with her.  If it's just somebody just this quick. She's such a spiritual person and with me it is spiritual, it's just so much of the successful and loving what you do.
Speaker 2: Now I just want to make sure she started representing you in 1989--I know you met here through Carter.  But when did she start  representing you?
Speaker 1: I guess in the 90s [1990s].  Near the same time that I met Essie because I had to make sure that the two of them were in agreement to do this thing because I had met Essie first and if she wasn't--didn't like the idea I wouldn't have done it but they clicked.
Speaker 2: What made you seek out representation at that point.
Speaker 1: They sought me out. But it was fine, I agreed with them.  Like I said, I was just there to help with Carter's exhibit with her just the same way I met Essie.  I was there with Carter exhibit and I had a choice between Essie Green and Neal, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Isabelle.
Speaker 1: Isabelle. And I figure Essie was better for me, for my type of work.  I loved Isabelle but I thought my work would do better in Essie's gallery and it was a good choice.
Speaker 2: But Essie's in New York.
Speaker 1: Nicole, I mean Nicole.
Story_ID: 13691
Speaker 1: Is there anything else since I've got you in  front of the cameras that you want to say?  Anything else about--
Speaker 2: No, I'm just, I feel so wonderful to be here though.  I think it's your spirit, the way that you feel--I think your art is your spirit, truly. And mine is good, loving and kind.  I don't think I could do a hanging scene.  It's all good.  It makes me feel good.
Speaker 1: You know I have one other question, you talk a lot about, you know, belief in God and spirit and I was wondering how you see that sort of being shown through your work, you know, your love of spirit and God and I was just wondering?
Speaker 2: Well I think it shows through--before I start doing a piece I tell Him what I'm going to do or how--give me your guidance in this. Make it come out right.  I have a big feeling on counting on God to guide me in whatever I'm doing.  And more so as I grow older I grow better in God.  And he gets all the glory and all the thanks.  Without him I could do nothing and that's the bottom line.
