Story_ID: 658200
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee Satcher, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert Satcher, Jr.]. R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, S-A-T-C-H-E-R.  Everybody calls me Bobby, though.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 22, 1965; Hampton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Presently?  (Laughter) I'm assistant professor of surgical oncology at MD Anderson Cancer Center [University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: And you are known for?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mission specialist astronaut, recently retired from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 3, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 658201
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: How about unsalted peanuts (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Unsalted, okay.  All right. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably not, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I use so many.
Story_ID: 658202
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Satcher, Sr.] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Marian Satcher [Marian Hanna Satcher].  Her maiden name is Hanna.  So, and it's M-A-R-I-A-N, Hanna is spelled H-A-N-N-A.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what's her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It is May 23, 1939.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, or correction 1942, sorry.  She was born in Hobson City, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay. Where's Hobson City in relation to--
Speaker 2: It's in Anniston [Alabama], basically.
Speaker 1: Anniston, okay.
Speaker 2: There's a constellation of little cities and towns.
Speaker 1: Anniston is the place where the bus burning took place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Freedom Riders.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, there isn't a lot.  It's, I know that my grandfather [L.T. Hanna, Sr.] was a butcher and my grandmother [Annie Lou Hanna] was a homemaker primarily, but she also worked as a domestic worker.  They had nine kids.  My mother was, I think, fourth or fifth, but my grandfather also served in the [U.S.] military.  He was in the [U.S.] Army during World War II [WWII], and not a whole lot, I know that on both sides of their families they can trace it back to my grandfather's grandparents and my grandmother's grandparents.  They all were former slaves that were from that area, so they were in the Anniston area, but not a lot of details in terms of, you know, what came before then, what plantations they were on.  Not many details at all, and nobody really has formally gone and done that, so it's something that remains to be done and, but, so what I know really just goes back to my great-grandmother, who also lived in that area and, you know, and I had, we actually knew her and did get to spend some time with her before she died, and they lived out in an area that was not far from where my grandmother lived, a place called Choccolocco, Alabama, so, and again, it was, really with my grandparents, there was the beginning of this emphasis on education, and all of their kids went to college, so that really kind of marked, I would say, the beginning of at least a commitment and opportunity being available, the alignment of the those two things that you know, that allowed us to change and to become educated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, is the family associated with any particular college in Alabama, like Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Most of my aunts and uncles went to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Alabama State, okay.  All right.  Now did your family own land in Alabama?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side they just had, they had the house.  On my father's side, they did own some land.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well your mother, right now, so they lived in a town, or did they--
Speaker 2: They lived in Oxford, Alabama, which it was really right there next to Anniston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it's--it's, so it's really part of the Anniston area.
Speaker 1: So semi-rural and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, semi-rural.
Story_ID: 658203
Speaker 1: Is there any stories, passed down about emancipation or what life was like before the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Plenty of what it was like before the Civil Rights Movement, yeah, and what it was like going through that in Alabama, because I had a lot of relatives who were involved with the Civil Rights Movement, the activism, they were all college--my parents who were college students at the time and, of course, they were the ones who got involved with the boycotts and the sit-ins and, of course, the Freedom Riders bus that came through, they weren't on that but that was a big event in Anniston [Alabama] history and in the nation's history, of course.  But, yeah.  They had the opportunity to, of course, hear the major leaders from the Civil Rights Movement, including you know, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and participated in the Selma march [Selma to Montgomery March], both on my mother's side and my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: So, it was really, it was a very generational thing and they were kind of in to ground zero, or one of the ground zeroes for the movement, and so they all got involved.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marian Hanna Satcher] have any specific stories about her, what she saw during those days or did?
Speaker 2: I, you know, the interesting thing is I hear more specific stories from my father [Robert Satcher, Sr.] than my mother.
Speaker 1: We're gonna get to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: We're gonna do your mother first.
Speaker 2: And I never really, now that you're sitting here asking me, I never really put her on the spot and tried to get that kind of feedback from her.  Maybe we're gonna have to circle back to that because--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that's something that I can, you know, communicate with her about and see what she can relate.
Story_ID: 658204
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she was number four of nine, right, you said, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think she was number five (laughter).
Speaker 1: Number five, okay.
Speaker 2: Now that I think about it.
Speaker 1: But her--the, the siblings that preceded her had gone to college.
Speaker 2: They did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So she was the--the expectation was that she would go too.
Speaker 2: Correct.  The expectation really came from her parents, my grandparents [Annie Lou Hanna and L.T. Hanna, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And, their education level was what?
Speaker 2: They did not go to college.  They were high school educated; but, my grandfather was always a huge proponent of education.  He was in the [U.S.] Army and then he became a butcher, but he, not only I think that in many ways they were ahead of their time because the whole issue of skin color and what your expectations were, which was a much more challenging issue to deal with because of the Jim Crow laws and the open discrimination and impression at the time, but he, you know, was thinking ahead and I always encouraged them to not allow themselves to be constrained by whatever the mindset of white Americans and white people in particular were at the time.  And that also cut across not only racial boundaries but he had a lot of daughters.  They had two sons out of that seven.  The rest were daughters and he encouraged his daughters the same way, you know, that they could go on and be whatever they wanted to be.  They should be educated, they should, you know, have means of independence that didn't depend on a marriage and, so I think he was really very progressive in the way that he thought.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you think (unclear) that created his mindset or did he--
Speaker 2: Quite possibly.  I mean, unfortunately he died when I was probably seven or eight years old, something like that, and I never really got to know him as well as, if I could have scripted it, I would have. He had a lot of medical issues too towards the end of his life, diabetes.  He was, he actually lost his eyesight and was pretty much bound to the house and that's, you know, when I ultimately--all of my memories of him were of him being fairly feeble and housebound and depending on others to take care of him, and so that didn't really provide a lot of opportunity to really get to know him as well as was possible.
Speaker 1: Did you know him in Alabama or--
Speaker 2: In Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, what I learned from him, a lot of that comes from my aunts and uncles and what they tell me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's down in, near Anniston [Alabama], near--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, okay, so your mother [Marian Hanna Satcher], oh, what was the high school, was there like, I imagine there were black schools there that probably had been there a while, I guess.
Speaker 2: In Anniston, yes.
Speaker 1: Is that where she went to school?
Speaker 2: It is, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: The reason I ask is a lot of these schools were named for some important black person that--
Speaker 2: And theirs was, too, and I don't want to tell you the wrong name.
Speaker 1: That's okay (laughter). I just--you know. But it's the one.  She went to that one in Anniston.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. I feel like--I feel like I'm failing my homework assignment here (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You'll be able to pass.  You've gone past enough, don't worry.
Story_ID: 658205
Speaker 1: So she [Satcher's mother, Marian Hanna Satcher] went on to Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: She went on to Alabama State, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, all right. And what--what was her major?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, okay, so did she have any stories about school?
Speaker 2: You know, she first met my dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.] when they were in, actually when she was in high school, but she actually met my father's brother, who is David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], because they were the same year in high school, or in school, so she actually knew him better than she knew my dad initially, and then, of course, met my dad.  They were, I believe, it was either three or four years apart.  They were, it must have been three years, because I believe he was a senior when she was a freshman at Alabama State and so, so yeah, she mostly talks about that and about just how during that time the way that she was courted--that's what they called it back then, (laughter)--by my dad and she talks about when they were growing up in high school and in their younger years and what it was like.  You know, when they were coming up, of course, with nine kids, you basically are being raised, to some extent, by your older siblings and the hierarchy that's maintained is very important because who can control, you know, nine kids without basically having some sort of structure.  So, her parents were very clear about that, and, you know, they basically almost saw their older brothers and sisters almost as being almost like adults, and they all had their assignments and assigned tasks to do every day, your assigned chores.  They had a, their house was actually, essentially almost like a middle class African American house, and, you know my grandfather [L.T. Hanna, Sr.] and grandmother [Annie Lou Hanna] made enough, you know, of a living that way to be able to afford that, and they wanted the best for their kids and that comes across too.  You know, they actually tried to provide them with whatever they could as they were coming up; that included learning how to drive, buying a car, so they got all of that as they were growing up and, I think the people in the community kind of looked up to them in a lot of ways, not only because of, you know, their economic wellbeing, but also because of their dedication to education.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandfather get his butcher's credentials in the service?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I guess there is some licensing procedure or certification that you have to get in the store or someplace, however you get that, and enables you to use it in the profession.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My impression was always that that was separate from his [U.S.] military career in that I think it predated his military career.  I think he was a butcher before he went into the [U.S.] Army, so.
Speaker 1: I know often people are barbers or something before they go.  They don't have any license to do it (laughter) until they get out and then they go to trade school and get a, you know a license to do it.  But, I don't know, but, but-- well any rate, let's go to your father's side, and--and your father's name is exactly like yours, except he's senior, right?
Speaker 2: Yup.
Story_ID: 658206
Speaker 1: All right.  Robert Lee Sat- Satcher, Sr. [Robert Satcher, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 18, 1939, and he was born in Anniston, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now once again, how far back can you trace your dad's side?
Speaker 2: Again, it's to their, it's my dad's, my grandparents' grandparents.  And they were freed slaves also from the Anniston area.
Speaker 1: Were they free when everybody else was free in emancipation?
Speaker 2: Yup, yup.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--
Speaker 2: We don't know the origin of our name, although we know Europeans with the same name.  The assumption has always been that, you know, perhaps there were Satchers who were owners in the area, although that hasn't been verified.
Speaker 1: Is that a common name in Anniston?  Satcher?
Speaker 2: They're all related (laughter) in the Anniston area.
Speaker 1: So, there's a white Satcher there as well?
Speaker 2: There are a few white Satchers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Chances are there is probably some relationship.  Like you said, nobody verified it.
Speaker 2: We haven't verified it.  So.
Speaker 1: So, well, any stories from, I guess there aren't too many--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, well mostly of them growing up and also we know of, in fact there are some Satchers in Ohio, in fact, and some Currys who were from my grandmother's [Anna Curry Satcher] side.  So, the main story that we hear about in terms of how that happened was that it was my, I guess my grandmother's, it was my grandmother's father, who during the time he had, I'm not sure how many kids he had, but it was, again, he was encouraging education in them and this was, you know, back in the early 1900s, so the townspeople or whoever was in the area took offense to that and it was under the threat of violence that he decided to flee the Anniston area and go to Ohio and the story goes that he actually walked from Anniston and how much of that is true, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: What part of Ohio?
Speaker 2: Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Cleveland is an Alabama city, and Detroit [Michigan], largely populated by people from Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, that's how we wound up having a lot of relatives in Cleveland, but he left my grandmother behind and she completed up until high school, but didn't go beyond that.  My grandfather [Wilmer Satcher] completed through junior high school, but actually was a very bright individual.  If opportunities and circumstances had've been different, he certainly would have you know been able to go to college and, and do all those things (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 658207
Speaker 1: Did they own land?
Speaker 2: They did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Satchers? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so he's a farmer.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they got it?
Speaker 2: I think it was just passed down, so I don't know who--
Speaker 1: Now when you come out of slavery you don't have anything for the most part, unless somebody (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know. So it was part of the land grant.  It's just, as much as I understand.  But, yeah, he [Satcher's paternal grandfather, Wilmer Satcher] was a farmer and they had nine kids also and, again, a huge commitment to education and I think that was partly borne out of the fact that they were unable to fulfill their desires for education, so they wanted their kids to do it, and all their children went to college.  A lot of them went on to get advanced degrees also, but as they were coming up, you know, they were out near a place called Central City in Alabama, so a lot of stories surrounding that because that was, apparently there was a lot of underground activity (laughter).  It used to be running the numbers was sort of the non-legalized form of gambling that a lot of people made money off of and Central City, I guess, was a hub for that and so a lot of the stories are almost like the wild west in Central City; people, you know, getting in altercations, getting shot, and killed or stabbed or whatever, and that wasn't far from where they lived, so, but their upbringing really was that of coming up on a farm and they had livestock, crops, a lot of work to do, being up early in the morning, having to, you know, do their chores and then also having to go to school and do all that was associated with that, with a very strong emphasis on schooling and not letting that slip because of their work, so.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a, I think I guess it's, I know it's on your father's [Robert Satcher, Sr.] side, but I don't know if it's on your mother's [Marian Hanna Satcher] side or not, but the Episcopal church plays a big role in your father's story, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, that actually was a choice that they made and it was really after, because they came up Baptists on both sides, came up Baptists and really it was after they got married and we moved to Hampton, Virginia.  That's where I was born, and there was an Episcopal Church there, St. Cyprian's [St. Cyprian's Episcopal Church].  That was right near the college campus [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], that they decided to start attending and it's one of the ones where it's basically a black Episcopal Church and it's historically black, so they got involved with, and started attending that church and, you know, we came up that way, so we didn't know any other way.
Speaker 1: But before, during college [at Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] they were Baptists, okay so--I thought it might have been a root that was deeper than that, but I guess not. (Unclear) (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, the Episcopal church itself, obviously has some deep roots in the African American community with the, with the three colleges and et cetera.
Story_ID: 658208
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll get to that, in a minute.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I wanted to see if that was a factor.  So, but now this is remarkable.  Both sides of the family and nine siblings all of them go to college, this is you know--so was there, was Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] the school of choice for your father's side too, I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Most of the siblings went there?
Speaker 2: Most of the siblings went to Alabama State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they went to some others too.  My uncle went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], one went to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], but most went to Alabama State.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what did your dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.] major in, in school?
Speaker 2: He's chemistry and he went on to graduate school, of course, initially getting his Ph.D. in chemistry, so.
Speaker 1: Where did he get his Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Oregon State [Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon].
Speaker 1: Hm.  Okay.  So, your mother [Marian Hanna Satcher] and your father, did they get together at Alabama State?
Speaker 2: They knew each other; you know, he would come back from college and make these visits to my mother and, you know, basically trying to, I guess he became, fell in love with her when he was at college and she was still in high school, and her parents [Annie Lou Hanna and L.T. Hanna, Sr.] thought that she was too young, of course, to be dealing with a young man who was in college, and so he would come to visit, they basically would be watched very closely (laughter), and he persisted.  She eventually went to the same school and I think that's when, you know, they really got to know each other and they didn't get married until they both finished college, or until she finished college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Until she finished undergraduate school.  There's only like a three year difference, right?
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: They thought he was too old (laughter).  Wow, this is a family that obviously takes a lot of, you know, interest in the children's upbringing with all of them going to college and all.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this is closely watched and supervised.  In those days, the black colleges [HBCUs] did the same thing.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Yeah, they, they basically took a very active role not only in your education but also in your socialization, and yeah it was a different time.
Story_ID: 658209
Speaker 1: You've got your parents now is there--you said they're well--your mo- your mother [Marian Hanna Satcher] knew David [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] first.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your uncle.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They're about the same age, and then she met your father [Robert Satcher, Sr.].  Is there a story about how they met or how they, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, there is (laughter).  I don't wanna be historically incorrect, but my dad was, by common terminology, he was a geek, I guess, when he was back in high school and they prided themselves on that.  He would play these games when they were working in the fields.  Here's a story.  When they were working in the fields, they would, you know, swap with my Uncle David, who was also very bright, of course.  Just problems.  They would talk about words that they learned and see who knew the definition of those words.  They would go over math problems and science problems when they were working, so this was a way that they combined work with education.
Speaker 1: This is work--working in the field, growing--what were they growing?
Speaker 2: They grew a number of crops, so, you know and they were mostly edible things, as I remember, corn and squash and greens.  I'm not sure what their main cash crop was, but it was a mixture of things.
Speaker 1: That's interesting; so, instead of singing, it sounds like they're doing a chant or just working silently.  They were playing science games and swapping vocabulary (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They read the dictionary, so you know, at night they would actually get back and read the dictionary.  I think their parents [Anna Curry Satcher and Wilmer Satcher] also bought them a set of encyclopedias, and so they would go through that and then talk about it.  So, that was, you know, when they were in school, they were competitive about being smart and so my dad prided himself on being what they called a bookworm.  "Yeah, I was a bookworm," you know.  I guess there was some teasing and whatnot that came with it, but they prided themselves on that.  So, apparently, initially when he was trying to talk to my mother, he was pretty stiff and pretty awkward.  Now, as time went, went he went off to college [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and he came back, I guess he acquired some social skills.  He pledged, you know, a fraternity and so, you know, you have this image of this guy who is kind of this awkward academic guy going off to college, and that's a big deal in the black community and then, of course, his brother kind of knowing this young lady who he is interested in, and, of course, I'm sure they were talking back and forth and he was talking to my younger uncle, Uncle David, about what was going on with my mom, et cetera, and, of course, my uncle David was doing just as well, becoming the leader that he eventually became, but that really did start, you know, when he was back in high school too.  But at any rate, you have the specter of my dad coming back, you know, and now all of a sudden he's pledged in a fraternity and he's coming and visiting my mom, who's still in high school, you know.  Nobody trusted, you know, their daughters with a fraternity guy even back then, you know (laughter).  So, you know, my mother's brother often tells the story about him coming back and what he did was actually was hid, either behind the doorway or somewhere where he could hear what was going on because, again, he was older than my mom and, you know, they kind of took responsibility almost like they were surrogate parents, you know, the older siblings, so he, you know, often tells the story about how he hid so he could hear, you know, what my dad was saying to my mom when he came courting one time and he also wanted to know because he was like, you know, okay this guy was really awkward before he went off to school.  You know, they'd sit there and not say much for like, you know, like an entire hour just kind of sit there and just, you know, awkwardly, you know, because they knew they were being watched kind of thing, but also, you know, it was just a different time.  People didn't talk as much and all of that.  So, he was like okay, this guy must have learned something going off to college, and then he tells, you know, of how he actually did talk more when he came back and he kind of, you know, told my mom that he thought that she was really beautiful and all these sorts of things and, you know, he kind of jokingly tells it, he's like, "Yeah, I started taking notes and I was like, wow, this guy really picked up some things in college."  You know, "I need to go and--and learn the same things too so that I can back and talk to women like that," so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, he became a lot smoother when he--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A lot smoother, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see. What--what frat did he pledge?
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Story_ID: 658210
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Then he--he [Satcher's father, Robert Satcher, Sr.] goes off to Oregon State [Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon], right? And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he went, first he went to Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] for his master's [degree], and then Oregon State for his Ph.D.  I was actually, he came to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] prior to going off to Oregon State for his Ph.D., so that's when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So Hampton first.  He taught at Hampton first.
Speaker 2: He taught at Hampton first, so he had a master's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, dispositions--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how they walk, talk--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm told I look like my mother [Marian Hanna Satcher] and I think personality wise, it's kind of a combination of both, probably a little more like my dad in terms of, for most of my life just because I've always not been one to do a whole lot of talking.  My mother was much more of the communicator, at least for most of our upbringing.  She was the one who really, you know, talked to us and kind of was in our heads that way.  My dad, of course, you know, he had this career and he was working really hard and, you know, he was more of the, kind of the traditional, he was more the disciplinarian and, you know, kind of pushing us that way but also emphasizing the things that we really needed to focus on.  They were great parents; just, you know, and they worked well together but, yeah, my mom was more the day to day, "Hey, what's going on?" And talking to us and connecting with us emotionally and all that sort of thing but, you know, when I think about how I, you know, the way that I was coming up through school and college and everything, I think I was more like my dad and, but, in recent years, I'd say I'm probably becoming more like my mom.
Story_ID: 658211
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in Hampton, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now, do you have any siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, I have an older sister and two younger brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you name everybody in the order of their birth and tell what they do.
Speaker 2: My sister is the oldest.  She was born a year and a half before me, born in Montgomery, Alabama, and she is a physician also.  She's both internal medicine and rehab medicine.  She currently lives in Washington, D.C. and, you know, we were the closest of all the siblings that I have.  I was closest with her because, you know, we were just close together in age and we came up together and kind of did all the same things together, have a lot of similar memories and, you know, our relationship too, because we, you know, both kind of--you always have a little bit of competition between siblings, but our competition was more in the academic area too.  She had similar interests in science and math and all that stuff, and so, you know we always wound up trying to do well in school similarly and we're thinking about oh, what are the grades we're gonna get and trying to study hard and then we had fun in the same kind of social circles too, in elementary school and junior high school.  We came up on Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], really through most of elementary school, and so back in that time they would--
Speaker 1: Well I just wanted to--that was when, your parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.] had gotten married when your mother finished Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University], right?
Speaker 2: A little after that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there was, she was still living in Montgomery, is that right?
Speaker 2: They were in Montgomery, Alabama, yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 1: That's where Alabama State is, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they start off there and your sister's born there and they move to Hampton?
Speaker 2: They moved to Hampton, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he starts teaching at Hampton.  He had already been to Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] at this point.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  And so you're at Hampton for, you said about most of elementary school.
Speaker 2: Most of elementary school, yeah.  My, the next sibling, which is, he's three years younger than I am, was actually born in Oregon, at Oregon State [Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon].  So I was, you know, born in Hampton, so we there for a three or four year stint when I was born.  Then we went out to Oregon, and then we actually came back to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.  You basically started school in Oregon, is that right?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Continue with the siblings, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, then that's Levi.  His first name is Rodney Levi [Rodney Satcher].  We call him by both names.  He was born out in Oregon.  He was the youngest for many years, until the last sibling came along, Robin [Robin Satcher], who is, he's ten years younger than I am, and he was born in Hampton also, 1975.  So, and he really, you know, there is kind of the three of us, Rodney, myself, and Serena [Serena Satcher] kind of came up a lot together, because we weren't that far apart in ages.  My youngest brother, of course, was to some extent on his own because, even though we kind of helped to raise him in a certain way.  He was always seen as being the baby.  We actually, I actually helped change his diapers and things like that, so he wasn't the same as being with my older brother and next youngest, or my older sister and next youngest brother.  And then, of course, his, his friends and stuff were much younger than we were and so.
Story_ID: 658212
Speaker 1: Ten years makes a big difference.
Speaker 2: It does make a big difference, yeah.  So, he almost came up, you know, almost in certain ways just separately from us.  Also, my parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.], I think, we had worn them down by the time he came along (laughter) so his upbringing by them was a lot different too, you know.  I mean, with us they were much more strict and rules were much harder and, you know, there was no leeway in these rules, and then we'd see him come up and they'd be allowing him to do things and we're like, "Where is this coming from?"  You know, we never got to do that.  And, so you realize, yeah.  They, you know.
Speaker 1: Are all the siblings involved in science?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a nutritionist, so he actually, my youngest brother [Robin Satcher], so his major was in science also but Rodney [Rodney Satcher], actually, was the artist of the group and, you know, he's a musician.  He actually, only does that part time now, but he's a musician and he actually pursued a career in music for many years.
Speaker 1: What did he play?  Classical or jazz?
Speaker 2: It was rock and R and B. So.
Speaker 1: What did he play?
Speaker 2: He was on the guitar and keyboards.
Story_ID: 658213
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can--probably the, the earliest ones go back to just some very rough stuff and sketchy stuff from Virginia prior to moving to Oregon, just playing with my parents.  I just remember this one particular day where my dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.] was carrying me around on his shoulders.  We were out, Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] is right on the water, it's a peninsula, and so we were in the college housing, faculty housing there, and he was carrying me around on his shoulders, it was out, I could see the water.  I don't even remember what we were doing outside of that, and then, I mostly, after that I just remember from Oregon being in kindergarten and playing in the neighborhood there.  There weren't many black kids in Oregon.  (Laughter) But I remember there was a bike that my parents bought for me and I used to like to just go as fast as I could, you know, riding the bike around our block in our neighborhood, so, and the other thing I remember is my sister [Serena Satcher] having a bike and chasing her, trying to, always trying to beat her, you know, going around the block, so.
Speaker 1: So that was all about the University of Oregon [sic.]?
Speaker 2: It's at Oregon State University.
Speaker 1: Oregon State's in--where, where in--?
Speaker 2: Corvallis; Corvallis, Oregon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now do you, I'm gonna ask this question anyway but you were only four when the men landed on the moon in '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: July 20th.
Speaker 2: I can remember looking at, you know, the television, the black and white television with the grainy images and, Neil Armstrong bouncing out there and--and everybody just being transfixed by it that the--yeah, and myself included, so.
Story_ID: 658214
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, a lot of it was from the house.  That's what I remember, because my mom [Marian Hanna Satcher] was a very good cook and we didn't believe that when we were kids, of course, because she'd be making stuff like collard greens and then, you know, and all these traditional southern things, catfish, collard greens, cornbread, you know, and the cornbread that's in the black pan kind of thing; chitterlings, 'cause my dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.] wanted that kind of stuff and you know, as a kid you're always like saying, "Yuck," you know, "I'm not eating that." And all these other people coming over and raving about how good it was.  So, I remember how all that stuff smelled and some of my favorites growing up, I always was partial to like fried chicken, and then my mom would make these chocolate chip cookies with raisins in them.  I don't know, I've never seen anybody else make 'em like that, but I loved those things and some of the other foods she made, too.  Just some of the things she did like catfish.  That was another one that I really liked when she did that, and macaroni and cheese and sweet potatoes, which still remain some of my favorites to this day.  But, I can remember, you know, just the house always smelling of food and we'd go out and play all day long and then we'd have to back at the mealtimes for dinner and for lunch, and always getting close to the house and having that smell coming from the house.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was in Virginia, of course, the main thing I remember was the ocean [Atlantic Ocean] and the smells of the ocean, because we'd go out and we'd just be roaming around campus and playing by the water and all that and the things that you could catch were lots of crabs and then there were fish that you could catch also, but we would just take, like, chicken, raw chicken legs and put them in a box to trap crabs, and so, you know, just the sights and smells of the sea with the seagulls and all the sounds that they make watching the ships going in and out, and you know, just how the shoreline smells and how the sea smells with the sea salt, and all that, and so you know, that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what really comes to mind.
Story_ID: 658215
Speaker 1: And you all were in Hampton [Virginia] until when?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we were in Hampton up until I was in junior high, or just finishing junior high.  I finished eighth grade and then we moved to South Carolina; Denmark, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Which was much different than Hampton.
Speaker 1: Well, let me go through now, you started school in Oregon right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Was it associated with the university [Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon]?
Speaker 2: I think it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Like a lab school or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I'll just put lab school, maybe.
Speaker 2: Maybe.  I definitely went to a lab school in Hampton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had a lab school, so I went to that up through the rest of elementary school and then went to Spratley Junior High School [C. Vernon Spratley Junior High School] in Hampton, which was a public school.
Speaker 1: You were, let's see, you were in Oregon until what, second or third grade?
Speaker 2: It must have been second grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then Hampton from second grade to junior high school?
Speaker 2: To junior high school; yup, 'til eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you went to school in Denmark, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: High school Denmark, South Carolina, so ninth through twelfth [at Denmark-Olar High School].  I finished a year early, though, so I graduated a year early.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were like seventeen?
Speaker 2: Sixteen, I finished.
Speaker 1: That's right, because your birthday's in September.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, well, tell us something about school.  Now, your father's [Robert Satcher, Sr.] a chemist and one is tempted to think that that influenced your--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The science part definitely did.  There's no question.  He would, you know, just always be talking very fondly about science and education and then he also tried to teach us stuff.  He would bring us over to his lab and show us experiments that they were doing, really became enthusiastic anytime we were doing anything scientifically related at school and would, you know, basically involve himself with us and help us with projects we were doing.  When I was in junior high, we did this, you know, project for a science fair that looked at the carbon dioxide that comes from germinating plants and capturing that and measuring that, and, you know, he helped me with that.  It went very well.  Actually, it went all the way to like national science fair and I went to the national science fair with it, but just going in the lab and him teaching myself and my sister [Serena Satcher] at the time just how to do chemistry in the lab, we started off just going in and cleaning stuff in the lab, cleaning glassware, you know, just to get familiar with being in the lab and being around that sort of stuff, and then the next step, or course, was learning about the experiments and doing experiments.  So, and then during the summers, even when I was in junior high and back in Hampton, he would always want us to be involved with something educational, so we would start off doing certain summer enrichment programs at the college and then eventually I actually took some courses at the college.  I can't remember what they were, but I took some courses at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] during the summer and, of course, he helped me with that and, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had, often the case is people don't follow in their father's footsteps, these days especially.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in this case, you did.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: You had an aptitude for chemistry yourself.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I didn't become a chemist, of course, but, and I think the thing that I realize was a difference was I liked math and physics probably a little bit more than he did.  That's what sort of drew me towards engineering because that kind of combines all of those things together, so, so yeah.
Speaker 1: You basically went from chemistry to material science, is that what--
Speaker 2: No, no.  I majored in chemical engineering.
Speaker 1: Chemical engineering.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 658216
Speaker 1: So, now, in--at the elementary school level were there any particularly good teachers or mentors that you could remember?
Speaker 2: Well there were several at the lab school, but probably the one I remember the most was Mrs. Austin [ph.], and she took, she just took a particular interest in what I was doing and what they did was--oh, the other one was Mrs. Williams [ph.]--I think I had Mrs. Williams in third grade and Mrs. Austin in fourth.  But, and they both really took an interest in my learning and development and they were obviously working closely with my parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.] too, to allow me to do, you know, whatever I was capable of doing, so it was, I think a very individualized and enlightened approach.  I didn't realize that back then, of course.  It just seemed like, "Oh, okay, I want to do this." And it was like, "Oh, okay.  Well, why don't you do that and why don't you, you know, we'll give you a little bit of extra assignment that way and if you really want to dive in to that."  I always got into reading a little bit more and doing a little bit more about things I was interested in.  I remember in those grades, I really liked reading about, you know, ships and aircraft and in the, just wherever I could get my hands on encyclopedias, going to the library at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], getting books there about those and just reading about that stuff really was interesting to me, so, and I know I did a number of little projects and things of that sort, you know, that third and fourth graders do (laughter).
Speaker 1: What specific projects did you do?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, when there was opportunity to basically build a model or something like that, and do a report on, you know, a topic like that of interest, that's what I would focus on and really get into that, just trying to get as much detail and understanding that I could.
Speaker 1: They were there at Hampton, right?  You could see them.
Speaker 2: You could see them, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And airplanes too.
Speaker 2: And the airplanes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this was a huge base [Fort Monroe; Fort Monroe National Monument] at Hampton [Virginia].
Speaker 2: There were several military bases.  There was a naval base [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia] there, and then, you know, there was Langley Air Force Base [Virginia] and, of course NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is there too, at Langley [Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: You could see them even if you weren't interest in them, you could see them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I was interested in them and--
Speaker 1: What aspect of them interested you the most?  I mean, the design of the ships, the way they were powered, or what--
Speaker 2: It's magic to a kid to see anything that big do what they do, and so initially before you understand it's always magic, and then, as you go through and learn about it, that demystifies it.  But also if there is an aptitude or interest for it, that's what really gets you hooked into it.  So, airplanes even more so, because just when we would go and we'd have people come to visit, the way, there's Patrick Henry Airport [Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport - Patrick Henry Field] there in Hampton, and so we'd have to drive--it was about ten miles or something like that from we lived--and at the time the way that it was configured you could go and park in front of the runway and so we'd go and do that, and you know you could sit there and watch the planes, you know, come in and land as we were waiting for whoever it was to arrive, and that would, that really just got me hooked and fascinated with how does that work.  You know, you see this gigantic thing coming in and, and, and landing but just the fact that it could, you know, fly was, it was just fascinating.
Story_ID: 658217
Speaker 1: So, by the time, now you're fascinated, you said, with planes and ships (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, hey, planes and ships; really planes fascinated me all the more just because of this phenomena of being able to fly.  That really got me hooked in and I wanted to know how planes worked.  Also I just liked the fact that they go fast and ships, it's just this whole notion of, we were in the Tidewater area in Virginia and that's where Jamestown [Virginia] is and the first settlements at the time, the first documented settlements in the U.S. from explorers from Europe.  Of course, it's been updated since that time but, nonetheless, we would take field trips there every year and, you know, you saw these pictures of what ships looked like hundreds of years before and then looking out and the modern day ships have some similarities, but, of course, much different too and much larger in size.  And so, I'd make little model ships and little model planes at home and I got into model making for a certain time during my childhood and it really was just based on that, just my fascination with both of those types of craft.  But always, again, my real, the number one love if you made me choose one or the other was airplanes.  It's just because they could go so fast, you know.  That was during the heyday when there were all these supersonic planes and all this research being done creating those kinds of planes and I would just sit there and think about what that must be like to be able to travel at those speeds.
Speaker 1: Did you want to be a pilot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did want to be a pilot.  I didn't completely, it wasn't completely crystalized in my mind at the time, and I didn't really know, it's just because of my parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.] not really running in circles where there were pilots or [U.S.] military folk, so I never really knew of any pilots.  There was one friend of mine whose dad was a helicopter pilot.  He was a helicopter pilot in Vietnam and so, you know, he was a buddy for a couple years back in elementary school.  I saw some of the memorabilia from his dad, and met his dad and all that sort of stuff.  But he was a helicopter pilot.  I was always fascinated with the jets, you know, and what was like being able to fly a plane.  So, I never really met jet pilots until really after college [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], et cetera.  But, you know, looking back on it, if, if I had met some jet pilots back when I was a kid, that, that might have, I might have chosen to try to do that, you know, coming up through the years.
Story_ID: 658218
Speaker 1: See--so, you go to high school in Denmark, South Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the home of Voorhees College.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: Is your father [Robert Satcher, Sr.] teaching there at this point, or was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in the administration.  He actually wasn't teaching there.  He was vice president of academic affairs, I believe, if I got the title right.  Denmark was much different than Hampton [Virginia], of course.  It's a rural town in Lowcountry in South Carolina, and, you know, the college, when they were in session, they kind of double the population of the town, so, and the kids that were going to college, they were different than the ones that go to Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Voorhees.  A lot of these were folks who had nobody in their families who ever went to college, so it's first generation kids going to college, as opposed to Hampton, where you know, you have these folks of generations--at least two or three in a lot of cases--have gone to college and so it definitely shapes the type of communities that you get in terms of the, you know, the student population and, I would say that the student population at Hampton was more sophisticated in certain ways, just because of that kind of a background generally, and also because of the requirements that were set for students to go to Hampton University.
Speaker 1: I was asking, I was just thinking about the wheels in my head are turning.  This is Olar High School [Denmark-Olar High School] right here in Denmark, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Olar [South Carolina] is another small town near Denmark.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's Denmark Olar.
Speaker 2: Hyphen Olar.
Speaker 1: Hyphen Olar, High School, okay.  I'm just wondering about the name Denmark.  Now, this is in the Lowcountry.  Is this the Gullah Geechee kind of?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's not on the coast like that.  So, this was near Orangeburg, South Carolina if you know where that is, and there were some Scandinavians who settled in this area; hence, the name Denmark.  There is also a Norway [South Carolina] in the area, so there are a couple of towns with Scandinavian names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And Voorhees College is the central, from what I understand here, the racial makeup of the place is 85 percent African American.
Speaker 2: If not more, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it's basically a high school that serves a college town, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I think the population of the town was around three thousand or something like that with the college in session (laughter).  So, in the high school that we went to there, it's interesting.  There were not a lot of high expectations.  Public school, a lot of kids there just came through and that was it for them.  They were just gonna go to high school and that was it.  I had a number of classmates who got married, you know, and that was their plan.  Get married coming out of high school, start a family, and work in the area.  Now this wasn't in a place where there was a whole lot of opportunity in Denmark in that area.  There weren't a lot of industries, it was mostly agricultural and then some folks would go into the [U.S.] military.  There were very few that went off to college and, so the expectations were not there, so it was interesting, you know, in that contrast coming from Hampton where there were clearly all of these high expectations from everybody, you know, on up through high school.  That, "Oh okay.  You go to the best school.  You possibly, you're definitely going to college, best school you possibly can go to."
Story_ID: 658219
Speaker 1: I would just guess, though, that your parents, being as education oriented as they are, probably, I mean, I'm thinking this high school had to cater--must have catered, I guess, to the sons and daughters of the black staff at Voorhees [Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina], too, in addition to the population so I guess the college prep courses were high level for them.
Speaker 2: Well, there weren't a whole lot of other kids who had parents that were faculty at Voorhees.  There were a few, and we knew all of them and, of course, our parents were the ones that set the expectation.  That was first and foremost in our mind, so going there really didn't affect how I thought about what I needed to do.  It was interesting seeing a contrast more than anything else, and but still, I knew, yeah, I am going to college.
Speaker 1: But were y'all tracked?
Speaker 2: And it really motivated me in a lot of ways 'cause, you know, there was not much to do in Denmark, South Carolina, and I wound up going on and finished high school a year early, just because I wanted to leave, you know.
Speaker 1: But were you all tracked in terms of all the college prep students are put together--
Speaker 2: They did have a couple college prep classes at the high school [Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina], and couple of the teachers were very good too.  The science teacher and the math teacher there were actually, were very good.  But there were also some teachers that weren't very good.  I was told, I remember one guy who was a counselor when I went to talk to him and he was telling me whether or not, 'cause I was thinking about applying at all these Ivy League schools and all this kind of stuff, and he wasn't sure that I should be applying for college.  You know, I of course, had great grades and all this sort of stuff.  He's like, "Well, you know, you should think about a career in the [U.S.] military." And all this sort of thing.  And I'm sitting there looking at him like, you know, to me it was interesting 'cause I had never heard that from anybody else throughout, you know, so obviously that wasn't, it didn't hit because there were so many voices to the contrary that it didn't matter for me.
Speaker 1: I take it this man did not understand your father [Robert Satcher, Sr.] is a chemist, or your mother [Marian Hanna Satcher]--
Speaker 2: I have no idea what he understood or didn't understand, but obviously he wasn't used to seeing a kid like me applying to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], et cetera.  I just wasn't in his set of experiences or expectations (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, did you have calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: I did not, no. I think we went as far as pre-calculus.
Speaker 1: And, I'm sure your grades were good.
Speaker 2: I'm not even sure that was in high school.  Because I took some colleges over at Voorhees; I mean, I took some courses over at Voorhees.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.  I'm thinking that your father would have known that's probably something that you should have.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But, you know I went to MIT for undergraduate and that was a major concern because I hadn't had calculus and I was wondering whether or not I was going to be able to compete, you know, with other kids who were coming in and they had already had, you know, a couple years of calculus or whatever, you know.  So, and I remember that very clearly, you know I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--what--
Speaker 2: --I was really worried about that.
Story_ID: 658220
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us a little about the, the process of going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Now, you selected MIT or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did.  It was kind of just how things worked out.  I applied to a whole bunch of schools.  You know, I probably applied to ten or twelve schools, something like that.  Some of them in South Carolina, I applied to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], a couple other, I think I applied to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], also university, and then I applied to Ivy League schools, Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], MIT, a couple other places, but I knew I liked engineering and what had kind of moved that along was during my last couple years of high school [Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina], I got a summer job with DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company].  They have this big plant [DuPont May Plant] in Camden, South Carolina, so I got a summer internship job there and got to go up there with the engineers there.  They basically produced nylon at this plant and, the guy I was working with and I don't remember him very well, a guy named Larry Robinson [ph.], but he, you know, was just one of the staff engineers and we were doing things, tweaking the way that the nylon was processed, it was, you know, what engineers do.  They tweak the process, they model what's going on, figure out how to do it more efficiently and effectively, so that really got me and kind of cemented my interest in doing engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I knew, you know, that I wanted to major in engineering and so it really came down to me, for me, what was the best place to go and do that, and what also helped was I got a couple of scholarships that would fund, you know, if I decided to major in engineering, so it was incentivized for me that way too.
Speaker 1: Where were they from?
Speaker 2: One was from DuPont, and then like a National Merit Scholarship [National Merit Scholarship Program], and then see, there was one other and I'm blocking on the name of it, so I got it, but there was that financial incentive, too, but it aligned with what I wanted to do, so--my parents were just telling me, "Just go wherever you want to go and we'll support you."  But, I got into MIT and I knew that was one of the best if not the best engineering school out there and so when I got in there, I said, "Hey, that's where I want to go."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did you visit MIT first?  Had you ever been there?
Speaker 2: I had never been there (laughter).  Cold turkey.
Speaker 1: Did your dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.] know anybody there?
Speaker 2: He knew one person there; this guy who was in the administration, a guy named Clarence Williams, so that was it.
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: And fortunately I had some relatives that lived up in Massachusetts, out in the western part of Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There was an aunt on my mother's [Marian Hanna Satcher] side and her husband [Robert T. Jackson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Were they useful to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They were, it was my mother's younger sister, and she was a twin.  Her name is Peggy Hanna, now Peggy Jackson [Peggy Hanna Jackson], but they were, a couple of the, her and her sister on my mom's side were a couple of the aunts that we were actually closest to when we were growing up, because my parents would go on these trips and I, they'd go because they had a meeting wherever, and they'd go.  And so, there were a couple of times where they actually came and watched us when we were growing up and they were, you know, a little bit closer in age.  They were, their whole culture when they were coming up wasn't the 1960s; it was the 1970s.  So, they had the big Afros, dashikis, black power, all this kind of stuff, you know, which we thought, you know, was cool, was really interesting, really cool, and we looked at our parents as kind of being dinosaurs, but they were much more contemporary.  They liked the music that we liked and so, you know, we basically kind of related to them that way, as preteens and teenagers, you know, just so, it was just a very good coincidence that she happened to move up there at the same time that I was going off to college and it gave me some place to go, you know, just on weekends and stuff and a lot of times my buddies from school would go with me out there, and always go out there and she'd just really just roll out the--as the saying goes--roll out the red carpet.  I'd just go over there and there's all this food.  You know, you're starving when you're a college student and she'd always be making sure I was well fed and well taken care of, so it was a great escape, and then she would you know keep my, my parents informed.  They were really worried when I went off, of course, because I was just sixteen years old when I went off to school (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so this is in '81 [1981] when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I went to college, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 658221
Speaker 1: So 1982 is high school graduation [from Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina] and then you go off to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Now what--what did you do over the summer between--
Speaker 2: I worked at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company]. And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So that was the summer you worked at DuPont.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then you really, you're on the engineering track then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so at--now, at MIT, we've interviewed a lot of people at MIT.  I've walked the, what is it they called, the--
Speaker 2: Infinite Corridor.
Speaker 1: Infinite Corridor, that's right.  And we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Wesley Harris last year.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we talked a lot about the black student union [MIT Black Students' Union].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that, from what I read here, you know, it was like culture shock, to think--going to MIT.
Speaker 2: It's a much different place, because it's a lot different than a lot of universities and colleges.  But it had a pretty strong African American community student wise when I was there.  I think there were forty coming in, which, you know, the undergraduate population is about five thousand; same for the graduate population, so in each class a little more than one thousand.  There were forty something of us.  We all knew each other, you know.  That's just the nature of it when there is that few of you, and the black student union played a big role as a support system.  They had a tutorial there that they ran, which was quite good and the way that you really made it at MIT, there were some kids that came, you know, you get kids of all different backgrounds.  Talent wise, talent only or what you bring to the table there only gets you so far, and then you really have to change the way that you approach it and so that all kind of happens.  That process really happens pretty rapidly at MIT, and that's what's a little different, I think, than a lot of places.  You can't skate that long, you know, because they rapidly get behind what you might have brought to the table there, you know, so it's really important that you get that figured out and figure out how you need to study and figure out what you need to do and the tutorials play a huge role in that, or some kind of tutorial, either official or unofficial, and everybody does it in different ways.  You know, there's unofficial tutorials, there are some living groups or whatever, and they have like these, their own almost separate libraries, you know, but the black student union, they had a tutorial where it's old homework problem sets and just a body of learning materials and then, you know, upperclassmen, seniors, juniors, to kind of give you pointers on, you know, "Look this is how you need to study for a test.  This is the way you need to go about learning."  So, you know, when I went there, I was worried anyway, because I said it was like, "Geez, I haven't been to all of these super prep academies, private schools, all this kind of stuff."  I just went to public high school in Denmark, South Carolina, you know.  So, am I going to be able to compete with the rest of these kids who have had, you know, that kind of benefit and, but I think it was actually an advantage because I went there worried and scared and really worked hard, and took full advantage of, of these tutorials and so I just, almost just camped out at these places during my first couple semesters there and learned, just kind of relearned how to learn and how to approach the work there, and so that was very beneficial.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the pace of the activity was really important, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's really, at MIT you really, your first couple years and, really I think the most important year is your first year, you do just have to spend a lot of time working.  You can kind of ease up, you know, as you go along and you learn your way around the system, but when you first get there, yeah, you really need to focus and--and work and that's what I did.  So, you know the--the people who do that, you know, are the ones who, you know, actually did well during--during the, the undergraduate years.
Story_ID: 658222
Speaker 1: So, you're in--are you in like large, you know, classes in the beginning, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You are, yeah.  Some of the classes were hundreds of students and, you know, they had a number of weed--of weed out classes to see whether or not you could make it in a certain major and, you know, for chemical engineering those were, organic chemistry.  That was a huge one and if you wanted to, you know, do chemical engineering, you needed to show some aptitude for organic chemistry, and that's one of our freshman classes, 541 and 542.  They all have numbers at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So, yeah, that was one of the weed out classes.
Speaker 1: Was that the toughest one for you?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it actually (laughter).  I loved it.  So, it was like okay, clearly, you know, things are matched up here.  It's not like I'm hating this class.  I loved it, you know.
Speaker 1: So, were your grades pretty good your freshman year?
Speaker 2: They started off kind of, you know, in the, you had like hidden grades essentially as a freshman, and I think the first semester, I'm trying to remember did I get a C?  I might have gotten a C during my first semester there, but that was the last time I got a C, you know, so the next semester now, it was just all A's and Bs and while they were still hidden, and then once I, sophomore year, mostly A's and, with rare Bs here and there.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other black students over there with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, you want me to name names?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is oral history, so I want you to name names, but I don't expect you to name everybody, but just maybe some significant.
Speaker 2: There was, you know, there was, I lived in a dorm called MacGregor [MacGregor House] and had, there were about four or five, it was an all-male dorm.  There were four or five guys, African American guys who lived there.  We all just decided to be there together.  A guy named Ron Duncan, good buddy, another guy named Randall Nelson, another good friend, and a guy named Eric Connelly [ph.], he was here from Houston [Texas], a guy named Craig Smith, he was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and yeah.  So, we were all in that, in this one floor together, and then there was another dorm that was right next door that got, their floor was called Chocolate City, so obviously lots of black students lived there.  Then, the all-female dorm was McCormick Hall, which was about a block or so.  A lot of the black women students lived there and, yeah, it's just, I can name more names but, you know--
Speaker 1: Was Shirley Jackson [HistoryMaker Shirley Ann Jackson] on campus yet?
Speaker 2: Not at the time, no.  She was a little bit before me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she, of course, got her undergraduate and graduate from MIT also, physics went on, you know, did phenomenally well too.  Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], of course, another astronaut, of course died in the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] tragedy.
Speaker 1: He was there ahead of you.
Speaker 2: He was ahead of me also.  They were kind of in the pioneering group of black students kind of that came out of the late '60s [1960s] that, that went to MIT.
Story_ID: 658223
Speaker 1: The group that formed the black student union [MIT Black Students' Union] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Established the black student union, yeah.  So, you know, we kind of looked at them at the time as being dinosaurs also, you know, because we were, we came along in the '80s [1980s], and so that first generation, it kind of knocked down a lot of the barriers that were there and, of course, established the black student union that served as a nice focal point and anchor point for your socialization as well as just resource, you know, so it was kind of your mother, your father, all that kind of stuff, plus your academic tutor, and served as a central gathering point.  We really, there's Whitaker [Whitaker Building], is it the Whitaker, no, Memorial [Walker Memorial Hall].  Memorial building right on the water where the black student union office was [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  This was a really nice space.  So, you know, we'd have meetings there and it's a place where you could go and hang out.  The tutorial was near the, it wasn't the black student union, but there was an office of minority affairs and they would have the, the tutorials there, so we'd go there for you know, for the tutorials.
Story_ID: 658224
Speaker 1: You touched on culture shock in Boston [Massachusetts] (laughter).  Obviously there were--you know, coming from the South it's a real culture shock just, you know, in terms of and this was really speaking to the larger culture there, why it's just to be, because I mean Boston has a very unique culture in itself, the accents, the way the people talk.  We all know about that; you know, (adopts accent) park the car and all that kind of thing, so, and just the pace there in public is much faster.  You know, in the South you're used to everybody saying hello, people sitting on porches, all that kind of thing, you know, and I go up there and I really hadn't spent any time in the Northeast prior, so yeah, getting there and everybody's walking fast, talking fast, and that all took some getting used to, especially since I hadn't spent any time there.  My parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.] basically just drove me up there and we went and checked in the dorm and when they left, you know, I was just, that was it.  My aunt [Peggy Hanna Jackson] and uncle [Robert T. Jackson, Jr.] were there too to let me know, "Hey, whenever you need to come out, you can come out." And this sort of thing but I was on my own from that point on, and I got there maybe about a week before classes started.  The other aspect, you know, just in terms of how you drive in Boston was totally different than anything I had ever seen.  It's, you know, kind of an ordered chaos is the best way of describing it.  It's just move fast and fill whatever open space is there (laughter) as opposed to, you know, in the South where everything is okay, you know, give people space, be polite, that sort of thing.  And, quite honestly too, it was the first time I had ever been, or outside the brief time that I had been in Oregon, where I had been in a community that was predominantly white as opposed to being predominantly black.  So that was a big change for me also.  You know, things like where do you, as Chris Rock put it, but you know, finding hair care products.  Where do you get your hair cut, you know.  I didn't know where to go that done when I initially got up there.  I didn't know where to find the black community in Boston, so that I could, you know, ask those sort of things.  It actually took a little while.  The way I eventually got there, of course, as you always do, through the church.  You know, there was a church that was near the campus and it was an A.M.E. Church, an African Methodist Episcopal Church, so I went there and kind of got some things figured out from there, and then just food.  Grits, at that time, was just like a foreign food in Boston (laughter).  You couldn't find it on MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] anywhere.  You couldn't find things like grits.  So, obviously in Boston there are some soul food restaurants where, again, that kind of took me a little while to eventually figure out where those were, so my focus when I got there and initial connection was with the students, you know, who were coming there, other black students from all over the country, a lot of them from New York, and we from the South, there wasn't a huge number of us but, you know, I kind of connected initially more with some guys who are from the Midwest.  They talked about the same pace (laughter) as I did and maybe that was the basis, but eventually those friendships wound up standing the test of time too, but yeah, it just culturally was very interesting and, of course, Boston has, you know, again its own very checkered past in terms of race relations, you know.  I never got openly called the N word until I was in Boston.  I came up with the high school in South Carolina [Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina], spent all this time in Alabama and Georgia and places like that, and you know, so it was always curious to me coming up there, and you hear like all of the people come with all of these perceptions that are kind of ground in various things, but interacting with the other African Americans from other places, you know, they sort of looked at us coming from the South like we had just escaped from the South with our lives (laughter).  During the time the only thing that they had to reference what went on in the South because a lot of them had never visited where, like Alex Haley's 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'] and things like that, so, you know, they're thinking that that's how we're living every day in South Carolina, Alabama, and Virginia, et cetera.  So, so you know, it was actually very interesting; you know, the kinds of conversations you would have and you know, just saying, "Well no it's actually not exactly like that."
Story_ID: 658225
Speaker 1: That's basically yeah, the history is there but we're aware of that history, yada, yada, yada, you know.  And, then like I said, never really being openly insulted like that until walking around in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: What happened?  What's the story on this one?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just walking with some folks through Cambridge [Massachusetts] down the street, guys going by in a car, yeah, they're never gonna slow down (laughter).  It's always a very cowardly act, as usual.  But, you know, yeah going by in a car.
Speaker 2: That's recreation for them.
Speaker 1: Recreation.  Was like like, "Okay?  Yeah, you know.  Why don't you get out of the car and call me that?"  You know (laughter).  See what happens.  But any rate, yeah.  So, you know, it but, like I said, the more interesting thing to me was, you know, talking with the other black students who were from Northeast and places like that, and what their impressions were of us, you know, so, you learn from each other that way too, and, you know, obviously it made for a lot of spirited interaction and, because I didn't really know much about the North and what it was like coming up on places like New York [New York].  I had some assumptions myself about what that must be like, and it's curious how, you know, the history within the African American community, there's a lot of problems with that being disseminated, you know, even across regions and that's why you would kind of run into that.  I think it still happens today, too.  You know, I always remember like when I was coming up on Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], there were students that came there from the North and they had their little, you know, cliques and I was always wondering why they were so, you know, concerned about identifying the fact that they were from New York, or from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or whatever, you know, and, and you know that--that kind of, you know seeing the reverse side of that going, going up north was interesting, so, so yeah.
Story_ID: 658226
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now were there any African American instructors at, at--
Speaker 2: I had one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Actually, no.  I had three during my whole time that I was there, and that was one of the things that, you know, was also very striking to me 'cause obviously I come up around all these colleges where almost all the instructors were African American, and then all the professionals too; you know, all the doctors, the support people, the lawyers, the, et cetera, the police (laughter).  We're African American and coming up in an environment like that and then going there, you know, where hardly anybody is African American, and that was just shocking and not really getting, you know, why things, initially not really understanding why things were that way and in contrasting that with folks from the North who, that's how it always was for them, you know, and not knowing what it was like to be in a situation where, you know, the majority was African American, so very interesting contrast.  But yeah, I got there and I wondered if I would ever have an instructor that was African American.  The first one I had was this guy, a brilliant guy, who was a junior faculty member there named [HistoryMaker] Philip Phillips.  He eventually wound up leaving.  He was, he taught me quantum chemistry, and that was one of the most difficult classes, again, in that, which you didn't have to take but I actually took it because he was there, and enjoyed it.  It, another one of these things that was getting off into all this esoteric theory that had its roots in quantum physics and so, you know--
Speaker 1: Was it like a computational chemistry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was one of the areas that, I think, led to computational chemistry.  One of the underlying areas that formed the basis for it, but yeah, he was a very interesting guy, because he was this young guy, you know, and was just, I think he had, I think he did most of his training out at Cal Tech [sic. University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  He was like this young guy, energetic, teaching this course and, for me, I said that was our first time.  I had an African American professor and so it was just nice for me.  I took the course specifically, and a lot of people avoided the course because it was a hard course.  Yeah, so he was one and then I had an instructor in humanities and I'm blocking on her name right now.  I just took her course too just to get another African American instructor and then the final one was this guy named [HistoryMaker] Willard Johnson who was in political science at MIT, and that was a fun course to take.  It was in political science.  I think I took it during my junior year or something like that, but he was very active during this whole anti-apartheid movement.  He was making trips back and forth and he was involved in a couple organizations and so he teaches this course which wasn't on apartheid, it was actually on U.S., Soviet relations, of all things.  So, but I took it, you know, again, just because you know, hey, here's an African American instructor and what I wound up becoming much more informed about was the South African stuff and that was just through casual interaction with him, you know and learning about it and there were some things going on in Boston [Massachusetts] at the time, some demonstrations and stuff, and I actually got involved with it you know, as--and it really had to do with getting to know him and from getting to know him learning about what was going on in South Africa and I got involved with that as a result of it, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was during the big push for the (unclear) to disinvest in South Africa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, yeah.  It was--yeah--to disinvest. And they also targeted a few companies like Shell Oil [Shell Oil Company] and a few like that, that, yeah so.
Story_ID: 658227
Speaker 1: Now, in '83 [1983], I guess you'd have been, your sophomore year, Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford]--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --was the first African American to fly in space.
Speaker 2: Yup, that's right.
Speaker 1: Did that have special significance for you then?  I mean, you know, we can look back now and say everything you did led to you becoming an astronaut, but did that really?
Speaker 2: Well, of course.  I mean, I think we really didn't think about space as a career because you didn't see anybody who actually, you know, did it.  Not that you absolutely need that but it certainly helps a lot to see somebody that's doing it to at least make it a possibility in your mind.  I was always fascinated with space and space travel but didn't really know ultimately what I was going to do.  I was thinking more I was going to be an engineer or maybe a doctor or a physician and so seeing Guy Bluford, Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], and Charlie Bolden [HistoryMaker General Charles Bolden, Jr.], you know, seeing them and seeing that they were there and then Guy Bluford going into space, you know.
Speaker 1: So was Guy Bluford actually at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] before you? I mean did you meet him before he went into space?
Speaker 2: I didn't meet him before he went into space, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I met him, you know, obviously in subsequent--
Speaker 1: You met Ron McNair, though, right?
Speaker 2: I met him one time when he came to MIT to speak.  He was just there speaking and I had the chance to meet him, so.
Speaker 1: Now Charlie Bolden, did you, I mean Charles Bolden, did you, he's the head of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] today.
Speaker 2: I didn't meet him until many years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the curious thing is Bolden and McNair are from South Carolina, so very strong connection to South Carolina for whatever reason.  And within the state there, they are very well known.  So, but McNair was, again, he was at MIT.  He did his graduate degree there.  Everybody knew of him and having been there and so, you know, it cast a long shadow and he was one of their famous alumni, so when he came there to give a talk, yeah, you know, fascinating stories about training and he was all into getting outside of his academic work.  He was a black belt in karate and a musician and just a Renaissance man, you know, and also just when he came and talked he really had a way of commanding a room the way that he talked and everything and just a fascinating guy.  So, you know, and for me it was exciting to meet this guy, exciting to meet a guy also from South Carolina.  He came from South Carolina and he was doing all of this.  So that definitely, even though I didn't, I didn't decide that I was gonna do it back then but it--it you know, I realized that, "Hey, maybe this is something that I actually could do if I set my mind to it."
Story_ID: 658228
Speaker 1: Even as you were getting your bachelor's degree in chemical engineering [from Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I guess you were thinking about medicine.
Speaker 2: I was thinking about medicine, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did that enter into you're--the discussion? Because you--you, you're--
Speaker 2: Medicine?
Speaker 1: --in high school [Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina], you were looking at big ships and planes and that sort of thing and then, you know, how did medicine--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know it was a little just stumbling around but, you know, I had my uncle [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], you know, who is a doctor and--
Speaker 1: He becomes the surgeon general later on--
Speaker 2: But, you know, even prior to then, you know, he was doing very well.  And, of course, in the black community generally one held in highest esteem was doctors, but I wasn't sure that that was right for me and I actually truly didn't know.  Again, I was more thinking I'm gonna be an engineer.  That's what I think makes sense because I have all this interest in, you know, quantitative stuff, physics and, you know, hard sciences, yada, yada, yada, in addition to chemistry but I really get into the chemistry too, so, that's why I said it was, well, I think it will be engineering--at that point, with medicine kind of in the background if, for whatever reason, you know, engineering doesn't play out maybe medicine is the right thing to do.
Speaker 1: Were you inspired by any, well, your uncle of course.
Speaker 2: And in denial about space, I guess, because even though everything--you know, when I look back, it's like geez, you know yeah, that should have been obvious but it wasn't obvious to me back then.
Story_ID: 658229
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as you approach graduation, now you graduated in '86 [1986], right?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so what were--what were your thoughts for graduate school then?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I went, I had decided to go to medical school at that point.  Yeah.  And I really decided around junior year to go to medical school and the thing that, the two things that made me decide was I actually went and spent some time down at a, doing hospital stuff during a summer.  Yeah.  I can't remember which summer it was.  It was either after my, I think it was after my sophomore year or sometime around then because, oh, the other thing that influenced it was my sister [Serena Satcher] going to medical school.  She had decided okay, she's going to medical school and kind of vicariously living through her and seeing what she was doing, she has started medical school.  She went to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] where my uncle [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] was president, so, you know going back home during the summer, seeing what she was doing, seeing my uncle, all of this was kind of influencing me and I said maybe I should be thinking about medical school.  Maybe I would, you know, really get into it.  I had been more on the shy side, not really an extrovert and I think as a physician, even though it's not required it certainly helps, and you know, so I was more introverted, more on the shy side.  Engineering culture is more like that.  That was also why I was thinking oh, maybe I fit better as an engineer than as a physician.  But then I went for the summer, hung out with a bunch of physicians, residents, and had a great time.
Speaker 1: Is this at Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts] or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  This was at Medical College of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Medical College of Georgia.  Okay.  This is (unclear).
Speaker 2: In the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not Atlanta [Georgia].  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it's in Augusta, Georgia.  So, that's what really influenced me and I went to that one.  The reason why I went to that one is because it was a predominantly African American, a lot of African American students that were there for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but I really had a good time and really enjoyed it and said, you know, I think this is right.  And then, the engineering, even though at that point I really enjoyed intellectually what we were doing engineering wise, it was, you know, you wind up, and I went up to, another summer I went up to Wilmington, Delaware, to headquarters to spend a summer up there.  It was just okay, you know.  You're always like kind of in sort of a semi-isolated (laughter) place and you're working, you know, on an esoteric problem that maybe one or two other people care about, you know, and it's kind of hard to see the impact of what you're doing, how it's actually helping people, individuals.  That became much more important to me all of a sudden, you know, and so that, my decision turned on that and so I said, well, you know, I think it's probably medicine.  Let me go on and apply.  So, junior year is when I made that decision and I did it.
Speaker 1: You applied to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] and--
Speaker 2: I applied to Harvard and numerous others and got accepted there and numerous others, also.  But, at that point I had decided well, you know, if I, if I get into Harvard I'm gonna stay here because I know I wanna do research.  That was kind of the compromise I had in my own head, that I wasn't gonna give up engineering totally.  I'm gonna, you know, use it to, to do research in medicine and, and so I want to stay here because I know of you know of some of the research that's here at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that I wanna be involved with, so.
Story_ID: 658230
Speaker 1: So you're going into medical school first.  And now, you've got two terminal degrees, but you started working on the M.D. degree first, right?
Speaker 2: I started working on the M.D. degree first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so you enter in 1986, I guess?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986], went for two years of medical school during which I had to, of course, apply for graduate school at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then I took off after the second year of medical school and went to graduate school, MIT for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you manage to work that?  I know they have a dual degree program and that sort of thing, and you were, I was asking you about that before the interview, so kind of explain how you were able to do both.
Speaker 2: Really, you do them separately.  You know.  It's two years of medical school, and Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] is a fun place to go.  They, again, it was just kind of another place there was very diverse student population.  They had the Black Health Organization, and when I was going around and visiting the different medical schools to decide where I wanted to go, one of the biggest factors is always, you know, what's the student body like?  What's the student population like?  And, I met some of the most impressive people, you know, impressive students that I had met up until that time when I went over there to visit.
Story_ID: 658231
Speaker 1: Who was there?
Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me that (laughter).
Speaker 1: You can name a couple or just tell us what they were doing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, the faculty that were famous there, of course, was like Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] and he really played a large role in interacting with the students there.  Another lady named Nancy Oriol [Nancy E. Oriol], who was there, but Dr. Poussaint was, you know, just fantastic of course, and he was doing 'The Cosby Show' and all that kind of thing, and just, you know, as a person he was just a wonderful person to talk to and interact with.
Speaker 1: Was he close to your uncle [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher]?  I was wondering--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Of course he knew him.
Speaker 1: I remember the, when I heard your uncle speak at St. Edmund's [St. Edmund's Episcopal Church] in Chicago [Illinois], he talked about mental health.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that was his message that day, was the black people needing to, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of the things in his report, in the surgeon general's report, I guess it was Healthy People 2010 [Healthy People 2010: Understanding and Improving Health], I think it was, that he emphasized because there was a stigma, of course, dealing with mental health, especially in our communities.  So, I think we're seeing kind of the downstream effects, the de-stigmatization of it and you know, people being willing to seek help.  I mean, I remember when I was coming through (unclear) school where, yeah, the approach was always the same.  There were people who need to be in lockup and then on the outside of that, you do have a lot of people in the community who had issues; you know, clearly had issues.  But, you know, how did you get help?  I mean, it was, it just was not something that was accepted, even within the medical community.  The challenge, getting people appropriately taken care of.  So--
Speaker 1: There's always a story of somebody having an uncle that lives upstairs or in the basement or some place and is a war vet [veteran].
Speaker 2: Crazy uncle.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  It's almost like a script now.  You know, if you wrote a script about a black family there'd be an uncle someplace.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He would have some issue.
Speaker 2: And a lot of depression, untreated depression and, you know, that was out there, so yeah, but Dr. Poussaint was great.  He was involved with the black health organization.  You know, some of the, again a lot of good friends from medical school, a guy named B.K. Edmond [Byron K. Edmond], Dexter [ph.], what was Dexter's last name?  I'm blocking it out right now, but B.K., a great friend of mine.  I had met him like when I was in high school [Denmark-Olar High School, Denmark, South Carolina], I think.  Yeah, we both went to the science summer thing at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and this was when I was in either the summer of my ninth or tenth grade, so, you know, and then he winds up, he went to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and he winds up being in the same class with me at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].  Another guy who lived right next door to me in the dorm, Daveed Frazier, who also became an orthopedic surgeon, and then there's Walter Ralph [Walter Ralph, Jr.].  I think he wound up being a, I want to say he was a neurologist [sic.].  I think he wound up becoming a neurologist.  David, I'm blocking on David's last name--David Young, I think it was.  I can't remember what kind of doctor he became, but you know, we were at the time, we were actually you know fairly, you know we kind of ran in the same social circles and all this kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 658232
Speaker 1: All right, so, now were there any particular instructors in Harvard at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] that really stand out in terms of, or am I going--oh, I know what I was gonna ask you about before we moved into anything else and that was Ron McNair's [Ronald McNair] (unclear) the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger]--
Speaker 2: About right, right, right, yeah.  When he died--
Speaker 1: This is '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: --it was the Challenger disaster.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1986, during January, if you look at all the shuttle disasters for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] they were in January, because the Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia], when it broke up over west Texas, that was in January also [sic.].  There was an African American astronaut on there too, Mike Anderson [Michael P. Anderson], who died.  So, there's all of this superstition rightfully placed by NASA about flights in January.
Speaker 1: Now, do superstitions, just the idea of an astronaut being superstitious is kind of disturbing, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, come on.  Not really (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you know.  You're thinking about them being logical and not--
Speaker 2: And they are that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they still are--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, you know that from, like even people who are athletes.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know they are.
Speaker 2: And musicians.
Speaker 1: I don't invest them with the same logic. The impression is they're going to be logical.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, you know, we all carry these little superstitions.  My mom [Marian Hanna Satcher] was superstitious and, you know, even though I tried to deny being superstitious, I always try to think of myself as being logical, it's just in those moments where, you know, there's no more facts and no more understanding to be had, you got nothing but superstition to go on (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think the mind just naturally goes there anyway.
Speaker 2: I guess so, yeah.  But, you know, this was the first disaster with the shuttle, right, and you know it, I actually had played hooky that day, like today in Houston [Texas].  It's very cold.  It was a cold day up in Boston [Massachusetts], gray, overcast, but you know, by that time I was a real fan of space and NASA and I used to stay home when there was launch just to watch the launch and then I'd go to class so, you know, this particular day too, it was, I knew of the launch and I had a class that conflicted with it, but I was like, you know what, I'm gonna play hooky and stay in my dorm room and watch the launch.  So, I was watching and we all know those images are just really fixed in our minds.  I saw it going up and then the two solid rocket boosters and the plumes from it going off in opposite directions and right when it happened, I just looked at that and I knew, you know, that the thing had exploded and it was just from that point on, did everybody survive?  And that's you know, of course, the media going through its usual not speculating initially and then all that, but I knew right when it happened, I was like, yeah, that blew up so, and unfortunately that is what had happened, and you know, so it was a real damper.  I mean, it, I felt for having just met him.  That was the first time I had ever experienced anything like that.  Somebody I'd met, you know, dying and knowing about him and his family and what they must be going through just made it a much more of a personal experience, so, but the interesting thing, I think, was, in some kind of way it really did make me, I know everybody admires him as a hero but it brought that commitment home to me and what the meant, because you really, in doing that he's putting his life on the line and that's what people that were doing that is what astronauts do.  They're really putting their lives on the line and for the families too, what that means, seeing what his family went through, his wife [Cheryl McNair] and the kids [Joy McNair and Reginald McNair], so it, I think, the interesting thing that came from that, though, is I think he did inspire a lot of other kids.  He did that while he was alive but his death also brought that and it seemed sort of counterintuitive, because why would somebody want to do that after you know, seeing that, but I think it did inspire a lot of kids and certainly it inspired me to just, you know because I just figured that to be that committed to something, you know, it must be something very special, so.
Speaker 1: Did the black student union [MIT Black Students' Union] at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] do something special (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, not at the time they didn't.  There was nothing at the time.  There was, and that's just, I think there's so much going on nationally and you know those recognitions being at that level. I think we you know all took notice and paid attention, but we didn't do anything in particular at that time.
Story_ID: 658233
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, back to medical school, jumping forward--
Speaker 2: A few months (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what, what I was, I was telling you too, is when I--you know the classmates I met, they brought this, they had this thing called, I remember it now, it was called TWC weekend, to recruit students at Harvard Medical [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts].  That was Third World Caucus.  So they had this kind of like, if you like the United Nations [UN] kind of organization where, you know, it was inclusive of students from all different, you know, cultural backgrounds, but they threw this weekend where they have a big party; you know, you gotta have the party, you know, and you got to meet like a lot of the prospective students, people that were thinking about going there plus the upperclassmen that were there, and as I said, it was just, you know, I met some of the most impressive people that some of the women there too, beautiful women that were students there, so for guys, of course, that always plays a role in you deciding where you want to go, even though we don't wanna admit it.  But, you know, just these accomplished and beautiful women that were there, and then the guys I met including my friend B.K. [Byron K. Edmond], you know, who, it was great seeing him.  I couldn't believe he was thinking about being there too, and so, you know all of that kind of made it gel in my mind; you know, "Yeah, I think if I get in here this is where I want to be."  So, yeah once I got the letter saying I was accepted, it was pretty much a done deal for me at that point.  And, and the move was easy because I didn't have to move that far.
Speaker 1: So, were there any particular courses or instructors that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Farish Jenkins who taught us anatomy, and I was, at the time they had three curriculum tracks at Harvard.  One was this thing called Health Sciences and Technology.  I was in that track, background in engineering.  They got the folks like myself in there.  There is the traditional pathway, which was more of a traditional medical school curriculum and then there's this thing called the new pathway, which is the main pathway now at most medical schools, which was a case based learning, which was a radical new idea back then.  And, in terms of the African American students, I was the only one in the HST track.  Most of my other, you know, students and fellow students were in the traditional and there was one of us, her name was Tanya Rutledge, who was in the new pathway.  Actually there was one other guy too, and I'm blocking on his name.  But they were in the new pathway, the case based stuff, and so but Farish Jenkins was this kind of eccentric guy, kind of a combination between Indiana Jones, but he had a British accent and he kind of looked like, what's this guy that was in the Sherlock Holmes movie that plays Watson [John Watson]?  He kind of looked a little bit like him.
Speaker 1: He had the latest set of movies?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the latest set.
Speaker 1: John--
Speaker 2: Him.  Yeah.  So, just kind of cross when I think about it between them and, you know, he talks in a sort of pseudo-British accent and, you know, and like I said he's got this eccentric past.  I think he might have been part archaeologist or something, and just the way that he taught us anatomy was so engaging and made it interesting, you know, which isn't easy to do.  But, yeah.  He was a very charismatic and dynamic teacher and so he sticks out, as I'm sure a lot of other people would tell you during that era.  He kind of stuck out.  Yeah I remember him very fondly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're on a science and technology, I mean health science and--
Speaker 2: Health Sciences and Technology curriculum, which was an invention of, and a compromise measure.  MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] wanted to start a medical school and, you know, Harvard didn't want the competition as the story goes, and so the compromise was that they you know, collaborated on this curriculum track and basically the instructors came partly from MIT, partly from Harvard Medical School and the way that they structure it is incorporating a lot of engineering into how they taught medicine.
Story_ID: 658234
Speaker 1: So, now while you're in school, Mae Jemison becomes the first African American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) African American female who also is a chemical engineering--chemical engineer undergrad.  The other thing about her that I identify with is she did all these medical missions in Sub-Saharan Africa.  I can't remember which it was, but I wound up doing that too.  So, yeah, she had the background which really was closest to mine, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--go, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And obviously when she was, I can't remember which year she flew.
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But captured the whole, everybody's attention just for being the first African American woman.  Also very striking, beautiful woman, so that also captured all of our attention, too.  You know in subsequent years when I have met her, she's also a very interesting person.  I'm sure you've met her too, but she's, you know, she's a very interesting person, and interesting to talk to and she's got some great stories about the training at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and all that stuff, when I was actually thinking about applying and all that, and kind of hearing what her experiences were, that was very interesting for me.
Speaker 1: We'd love to interview her.  We haven't done that yet.
Speaker 2: Oh, you haven't, wow.  But yeah, she flew when I was actually towards the end of my graduate school years [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I, you know, finished grad school in 1993 and she flew in 1992.
Story_ID: 658235
Speaker 1: Now, so you started medical school, but are you taking like graduate courses towards your Ph.D. at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the same time?
Speaker 2: No.  I started medical school, did two years of classes in medical school.  During my second year of medical school, applied for graduate school at MIT.
Speaker 1: This is '88 [1988], I guess?
Speaker 2: During, yeah, 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay, yup.
Speaker 2: And was accepted and started in the latter half of '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you could just kind of freeze your medical--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you just freeze because that's a good time to do it is before you start, you know, your rotations in the hospitals.  So, you finish your coursework, you know, and then the next thing to do is start your rotations in the hospital.  So, that's a good time if you're gonna do something else, and there were a lot of people that did other things.  I was thinking about this guy, Mark [Mark D. Johnson], I'm blocking his name and it's killing me.  He's one of my classmates, African American.  He did a Ph.D. also, but there were a lot of other, you know, students, African American students that get other degrees, like public health, public policy.  At Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] that was part of the reason why, you know, that attracted me there too.  I just saw that people were, you know, thinking outside of the box if you like, and you know, doing other things besides, you know just what was scripted and, and that appealed to me.
Story_ID: 658236
Speaker 1: Now what was your--who, who was your Ph.D. advisor, I guess at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I had one at MIT--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and one over at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The guy at MIT is a guy named Forbes Dewey [C. Forbes Dewey, Jr.], and the guy at Harvard Medical School is Mike Gimbrone [Michael A. Gimbrone, Jr.] and then there was a guy who was head of my committee named Clark Colton [Clark K. Colton], who was at MIT.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there are three people involved (laughter).
Speaker 2: I did kind of a multidisciplinary, if you like, project so it involved engineering but also involved biology and so I needed the expertise from both sides.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was this a dissertation or a project?
Speaker 2: Research that you get in the lab and you do the research and then you write a dissertation based on that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So what was your subject?
Speaker 2: It was actually on how coronary artery disease starts and what influences from blood flow have, patterns of blood flow have, on where plaques begin in coronary arteries.  So, I combined biology with fluid mechanics, a little bit of structural mechanics also, and molecular biology.  It was fun for me because I always liked thinking about life science problems from an engineering perspective.  That's just for me always the thing that made it interesting to me.
Speaker 1: Is that unusual to think that way?
Speaker 2: Not so much anymore.  Back then it was fairly new.  It led to, you know, these biomedical engineering programs which they never had a formal biomedical engineering program at Harvard or MIT up until really recently, but in other places throughout the country they did have formal programs, but yeah, so it's not so much uncommon anymore.
Speaker 1: So what do you think is the reason why, I mean, well we don't, speaking for the general public we don't know anything.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wouldn't say that.
Speaker 1: But why was it like uncommon to think of--
Speaker 2: It's just because of the traditional disciplines in academia.  You know, you had your life sciences and they're in their own silo and then you had your hard sciences, were in their own silo and that just had to do with how things develop back in the '40s [1940s] through the '70s [1970s].  There wasn't much cross pollination.  The hard sciences were really just being taken to the extent that they needed to, like, produce the space program, to produce supersonic flight, and nuclear weapons, for instance, the atom bomb, so that was being taken to that extreme.  But then in the life sciences we still hadn't learned much more in terms of how individual cells worked.  The real breakthroughs came with, you know, Watson [James Dr. Watson] and Crick [Francis Crick] with understanding that everything is based on the genome and then from that how that is translated into how cells are built, and so we really had just had the first major discoveries along those routes and didn't completely understand.  We didn't have the level of ability to ask questions at the scales that we needed to, to, to understand what was going on in individual cells right up until then.  You know, the, the early '90s [1990s] and late '80s [1980s], and then we developed all the tools to ask those, those kinds of questions, so it really was on the vanguard then of what we could do.
Story_ID: 658237
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you go immediately back to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] or did you do a postdoc, or--?
Speaker 2: I, I--after I got done with my, you know, graduate school--graduate school years [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], then I went back and finished at Harvard and then went on to do residency and fellowship.
Speaker 1: So--University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California], that doesn't come until around 19--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's, that's when I was a few years into my residency, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I just wondered--so you go back and finish medical school.  This is when you do the--
Speaker 2: On the marathon, which was my educational training, I was just sitting here thinking about that.  This goes on and on with that (laughter).  And at the time when I was doing it, I didn't really think of it as being that long.  It just all, it actually flowed pretty well even though my contemporaries thought it was excessive.  The other guy, Mark [Mark D. Johnson], I was mentioning to you, that's cool, who did a Ph.D. too, we were the two black students in our class who did Ph.D.'s in addition to, you know, but it was fairly common then, even though not extraordinarily common, but when you decide to do it, it was still kind of going against the grain.  You know, a lot of people would ask you, "Why are you doing it?" You know, "Why are you spending extra time when you can go on and get the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, finish up your medical degree, do your residency, and you know, start paying off your loans." And that sort of thing.  So it was a bit uncommon, or a bit unusual, I would say, and you got that kind of peer questioning and indirect pushback.  I came from an unusual circumstance in that my uncle [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] had done that, you know, he was M.D., Ph.D., and so you know when I was thinking about it, I had that point of reference and I could go to him and, you know, say, "Hey, I think I actually want to do this.  Is that, of course you would recommend it but how should I be thinking?  Is this just crazy?  Am I wasting my time?"  You know, should I just be going through and getting my medical degree so I can get a good paying job, as they say?
Speaker 1: Were you very close to your uncle in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know.  He, my sister [Serena Satcher] went to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], where he was president and he's very close with my dad [Robert Satcher, Sr.].  Out of their siblings they were close.  This goes back to when they were in the field talking encyclopedia dictionary stuff, you know.  They always stayed close like that, and so yeah, you know, when I was coming up through all the years I was talking to him and seeing what he thought and he was, you know, he gave a lot of good advice.  I didn't follow everything he said, but a lot of it helped me to make decisions.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah so the other guy that did the Ph.D. though, did not come from that kind of background.  It was interesting to me that he decided to do it.  You know, he came from, I think he was the first generation.  He was from Memphis, Tennessee, first generation from his family.  They go that far in education and, you know, he went on and decided to do a Ph.D., and then he decided to become a neurosurgery--neurosurgeon, which was one of the longest residencies (laughter) so at least another six or seven years of training after medical school, so, anyway, he's done well.  He's back in Boston [Massachusetts] and I think he's on, on the faculty at Harvard Medical School now, so.
Speaker 1: Now this is Mark--from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 658238
Speaker 1: Now you go into orthopedic surgery.  Did, did you start, I mean when did you start becoming interested in orthopedic surge- surgery?
Speaker 2: It really was during once I got back from my graduate school years [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and did the rotations and orthopedic surgery, a lot of engineering concepts in it because you're working with bone, of course, and you're fixing broken bones, you know, and it's a lot of mechanics involved and so it's both surgery and mechanics.  That's really, kind of, the gist of it.  So that really, you know, was the best fit for me.  It was a pretty natural fit.  I was originally thinking about, I always knew I wanted to do surgery and I was thinking of cardiac surgery because of my research stuff, but after doing a couple of thoracic surgery rotations, I realized that that wasn't exactly the best fit for me.  I think you know, that's, they do a lot of, you know, surgery under the microscope doing anastomoses and things, doing cardiac surgery and I didn't really enjoy that that much, so I enjoy using tools more (laughter).
Story_ID: 658239
Speaker 1: You do your, it's a--your internship and residency at University of California at San Francisco [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now during the time that you're getting the two degrees, you're not married, I take it.
Speaker 2: I wasn't, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: That wasn't until residency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was out in California.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you meet your wife [D'Juanna White Satcher] before you went out there or after?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah actually back in undergraduate school [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so that's when I originally met her and she also went to medical school at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went out to California together?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went out there for residency.  She came out working and, you know, actually worked as a pediatrician out in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Emily Holton [Emily Morey Holton]?  She played a role out in California and then later on out in NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 2: Emily Holton, I met her because of some research I was doing during my residency and she was doing all this work looking at the effects of weightlessness on human beings who travel in space.  And I started working on a project that was related to that, actually trying to understand at a cellular level what was going on in a skeleton as it responded to weightlessness, so the same problem, we're just approaching it in a different way, you know, and using a different set of tools to look at it, but because of the work that she did there was, you know, I went out and spoke with her.  She was out at NASA Ames [Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California], which is in Northern California and so that was my initial introduction to her and, you know, in the course of interacting with her I discovered, of course, that she was involved with the astronaut office and there are a number of astronauts in particular who she had a personal relationship with and one was Scott Parazynski, and was doing his residency at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] when, and she became one of his mentors.  He went on, of course, to become an astronaut and so she introduced me to him and, you know, that kind of really represented at least my entree into thinking seriously about becoming an astronaut myself and what I would need to do to, to do it. You know, just through my meeting him and my interactions with him.
Story_ID: 658240
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee Satcher, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert Satcher, Jr.].  R-O-B-E-R-T, L-E-E, S-A-T-C-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 22, 1965, Hampton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation and title.
Speaker 2: Currently, I am a cancer surgeon at MD Anderson Cancer Center [University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center] in Houston, Texas.  Formerly, a mission specialist astronaut at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and what is today's date.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) May 7, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at MD Anderson Cancer Center in the faculty center.
Speaker 1: All right, now we're finishing the interview we started on March the 3rd of this year.
Story_ID: 658241
Speaker 1: I think we left off with you preparing to become or applying to become an astronaut.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I think it was Emily Holton [Emily Morey Holton] that (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Emily Holton is a life scientist out at Ames Center [Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California] out in Northern California, and I met her when I was in residency.  I did my residency at University of California, San Francisco [San Francisco, California], but I was working on a project to try to understand how bone cells adapt to microgravity and Dr. Holton had done a lot of work in that area; in fact, she was over one of the divisions at NASA Ames that was focused on this work because, obviously for NASA, this is an area of interest.  They have, for years, wanted to understand what happens to people when they go into space.  There is no gravity and what are the effects on the skeleton.  So, I got introduced to her because of the research that I was doing and as it turns out, she had, you know, there had been several physicians who she had interacted with who went to become astronauts.  One in particular, Scott Parazynski, also did his residency out in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area] at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and she wound up introducing me to him and that really was my first contact with an astronaut and that was really important because it helped me to sort of see that there was a process by which you become an astronaut.  It was something that I could actually, you know, take some steps to, to do if I had an interest in it, because previous to that, it just you know, seemed like something that was unattainable to me, so--so, yeah she was the person who really gave me that first guidance and acted as a mentor for me.
Story_ID: 658242
Speaker 1: So you applied for the program several years before you were--you were accepted as a candidate, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--I, when I originally applied, was maybe around the year 2000 or something like that, and they, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] takes astronauts every four to five years or so, but what unfortunately happened, shortly thereafter was the Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] disaster in 2001 [sic. 2003], and so when that happened they just, you know, shut down the, the process for bringing in astronauts and interviewing astronauts.  They put it on hold.  They said, you know, "Look we have your--," in fact, I think I got a phone call saying, "we have your application and we no longer are gonna, we're putting this whole process on hold.  We're not moving forward with it right now.  Would you like us to keep your application so that when we do remove that hold, we will just consider you at that time?"  And I told them, of course, "Yes."  The, I had submitted my application and really there hadn't been any contact with them outside of me submitting my application.  I hadn't heard anything up until that point, because the Columbia disaster happened maybe, I would say, maybe around eight or nine months after I submitted my application.  So, so yeah, but you know, they wound up contacting me maybe two or three years later, and saying, "We're reopening the process.  We're gonna bring in a class of 2004.  Do you want to be considered?"
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in the meantime, though, what were you doing?
Speaker 2: I just worked in Chicago [Illinois] at Northwestern University as a cancer surgeon there also.  My specific area is orthopedic oncology, which is basically when cancer either starts in your extremities, in your arms and your legs or whatnot, or it goes there from somewhere else, and I take care of people surgically that need it.  So, I started off in Chicago and I was working at Northwestern Memorial Hospital and Children's Hospital [Children's Memorial Hospital; Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital] in Chicago and, you know, I had a wonderful time working there.  I was there from 2000 up until 2004, when I was accepted and, and went to NASA to start my training.
Story_ID: 658243
Speaker 1: Before we get you into that, is there a difference in how the musculoskeletal--skeletal system is treated for cancer as opposed to the soft tissues?
Speaker 2: Well, there is.  It's, as I said, cancer can either start or go there.  If it starts there, then they're actually called sarcomas and it's basically still cancer but it just started in the tissues in your extremities and they have to be treated slightly differently than, say, lung cancer or breast cancer of prostate cancer.  Now, we do treat lung cancer, prostate cancer, breast cancer patients too, because those cancers frequently spread to bone and can cause the bones to break, and so that's where we come in and basically helping people when that's occurred.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, is there, is radiation used, chemotherapy, the same or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the three main modalities for treating cancer are chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery.  That's kind of, you know, the coordinated three part approach, and our part has always been fairly straightforward, you know.  It's, you know, either removing the cancer, the area of the bone or the tissue or what not, that's been affected and removing that, or stabilizing a bone and it's very mechanical.  Like, if there's an area of the bone that's weakened, we'll put a plate or some other mechanical device that's inside of the bone that spans that area and in that way restores its structural integrity and keeps it from breaking and it keeps people functional.  That's really the main point of it is keeping people mobile, keeping them functional, able to use their arms and their legs and that's very important for how people actually respond to treatment.  You know, people who are bedridden have a far worse prognosis than people who can still get around.
Speaker 1: I know you're a surgeon, is there, what is the most common cause of cancer in the bones?
Speaker 2: It just happens on its own.  It's just a spontaneous thing.  Usually it's either gonna happen to young people or, you know, older folks.  So, towards the end of life or young people when they're growing, we know that it's just like any other cancer.  It's uncontrolled growth of the cells and, in this case, bone cells.  They tend to start off growing there and then they can spread other places and that's what, you know, can be fatal for a person, but fortunately we, you know the way that we treat that, of course, is with chemotherapy nowadays, removing the affected area of the bone and reconstructing that bone to keep the people going.
Speaker 1: So, there's not a carcinogen that, you know would be in radiation or exposure or something, if you eat too much that can trigger that most of the time or is it--
Speaker 2: Well, we know that radiation can cause sarcomas or cancers in the bone, but most of the people that we see, it just happens spontaneously, so they wake up one day and boy my knee is hurting and it's just getting worse, and that's how they you know, come to our attention.  So, we know it's a set of mutations in the cells that lead to that.  We don't understand fully what that full set of mutations and what the process is that ultimately leads to, to cancer.  I know there's a lot of research right now trying to figure that out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I had to ask those questions, because people are gonna--will wonder, well you know, what does he do, and, and is there you know, what causes bone cancer and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 658244
Speaker 1: So in 2004 they contact you, that--letting you know that you have been selected as a candidate.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And the, and the selection process is a very interesting one.  It is really multifaceted.  It's unlike anything I've ever been through before.  Basically they do a background check on you, make sure you are who you say you are, I guess (laughter) and that's always interesting because they wind up going--and agents are showing up talking to your friends and family and you know, and so they're wondering what's going on.  So it's kind of entertaining in that way.  And then, they do an extensive physical exam.  The first exam they do is a precursory one and they have, you know, I did that in Chicago [Illinois].  I had to go see, I can't remember who the doctor's name was, but basically they did a cursory exam just to do a top level screen to make sure that there wasn't anything, you know, any medical conditions that I would have that would preclude me from, from applying.
Speaker 1: What kind of condition would preclude you from being an astronaut?
Speaker 2: Oh, anything that's gonna impair your function in some kind of unpredictable way, so like if you have seizures, you know heart problems, heart attack, strokes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Diabetes or something?
Speaker 2: Or, on the other hand, say if you're claustrophobic.  You know, that's just incompatible, so it's high level screen there, and then what happened after that was they have a selection board that goes through all the applications, and there's thousands of applications that they are looking at, and he wound up whittling it down to, I think, two hundred candidates and they invite you if you're still interested, of course, to come to Johnson Space Center in Houston [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas] for a week long interview and this, you know, in hindsight you see a lot of these reality TV shows now where, you know, it's these competitions and all of the dynamics and interplay between the candidates and the psychology and everything on display and it really was a little bit, you know, like that in certain ways because you saw people behaving in certain ways.  Everybody responds to, you know, a circumstance like that in their own way.  Everybody's a little different.  Some people handle it very well, some people, you know, do some dysfunctional things and you see that, you know, but yeah, you come down to, at that point you come down to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] for a week and it's, they spend a lot of time talking to you, they spend a lot of time examining you, doing, really, medical tests from head to toe, and then they also are doing your performance tests so they actually see if you're coordinated, hand eye coordination, whether or not there's any issues in terms of your cognitive ability and cognitive functioning under certain circumstances.  They test you out to see if you're claustrophobic.  You know, you might not have told anybody that you were so, you know, they have this famous thing where they put you in a, like a sleeping bag basically and zip you in, you know, and see whether or not that bothers you.  That was actually one of my favorite tests because I got down there and it was, I'm busy, my schedule just doesn't slow down so I get down there and I'm like man, you know, you put me in a bag and I'm down here going to sleep.  (Laughter) When they came and wanted me to come out, I was asking to stay in a little longer.  (Laughter) Just getting into my nap.  So, but in all seriousness it was the first time too that I had spoken with a panel of psychologists and psychiatrists, and they really go and ask you everything about your life and you know your childhood and, and explore in great detail all of those things, because they wanna you know get a psychological profile.
Speaker 1: I have to ask this, now.  Did they ask you any race based questions?
Speaker 2: I'm sure they did.  Just, when you become an astronaut, you, there's a lot of attention that goes with that, and just, you're gonna be in front of cameras.  You're gonna be in all kinds of situations and they wanna be sure that you can handle yourself, even when it's under difficult circumstances, so I don't recall any particular question, but I do recall that that was something that we talked about, which is how would you respond in certain scenarios, like say if somebody were hostile or said something racist to you and you're wearing your astronaut suit, you know, how are you gonna--how are you gonna respond to this.
Speaker 1: You'd have to respond a little bit different than Richard Pryor did on 'Saturday Night Live' interview, right?
Speaker 2: When he was the president (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: That's what we all dream of doing.
Story_ID: 658245
Speaker 1: So, this is, you said it's like 'Survivor' in a sense, but they--they start off with two hundred people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and to get like, what--how many?
Speaker 2: Our class had eleven people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that were selected.
Speaker 1: So you start with two hundred to get to eleven.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, they started with thousands, of course, and down to two hundred--
Speaker 1: To actually show up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that they did the week long interview with and then from that eleven people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  How long was it before you found out that you were one of the eleven?
Speaker 2: It was probably about a month, something like that, yeah, and that's an interesting time because it was really right during the time where social media was coming in and Facebook hadn't gotten to the point of where it was, but there was all this communication that occurred via the Internet and everybody knows the process to some extent and they know that you're gonna get a phone call and it's, you either get a phone call or a letter (laughter).  The letter, of course, is we regret--thank you for your interest and we regret that we haven't selected you at this time.  The phone call, which is indicating that they were interested in you, and it's very interesting because even though you've been going through and actively pursuing this, we all come from different walks of life and, like for me, coming from the medical profession and doing what I was doing, which is a completely different world, really I think in many ways, is far removed as anybody in my class from the whole space culture and it, you know, I was in clinic one day just seeing patients when I got the phone call.  It was some number I didn't recognize which, at first, you know, I was thinking to myself I usually don't answer numbers that I don't recognize, but then I was thinking well, maybe this is the phone call from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] way in the back of my mind, so I just decided to answer it, but in that instant hearing well, yeah, "This is Duane Ross," is the guy at NASA who makes the phone call, "and we've decided to select you and, you know, is this something that you're interested in doing?"  It's a little bit of a surreal moment in a sense of, for me I realized it represented such a radical departure from everything I had done up until that time.  I was thinking okay, I'm gonna have this academic career in medicine and, you know, and I applied to NASA just kind of, honestly not thinking I really had much of a chance of being selected and, you know, finally getting that phone call and having to decide, you know, okay am I gonna go ahead and go through with this or, you know, am I gonna just stay, you know, on the pathway that I've always been.  I didn't have to, fortunately they give you a little bit of time to think about it, you know, they give you, it was probably a week or something like that, because, you know, and that gives you time to go back and talk to friends, family, mentors, whoever you want to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, are you married at this point?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah [to D'Juanna White Satcher] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 658246
Speaker 1: And, and so, you know, I was talking with family primarily and, you know, talking to some mentors that I had in, in my profession, probably some of the opinions that were most important to me were--outside of my immediate family--were some of my extended family, you know, my parents [Marian Hanna Satcher and Robert Satcher, Sr.] and my uncle, who also has had kind of a varied and interesting career.  His, though, I think was always within the medical profession, but nonetheless, you know, he had a lot of opportunities that were kind of, you know, to him very surprising opportunities and at the same time, very interesting ones that allowed him to do some things that he never anticipated.  So, my uncle actually is David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher], who was one of the surgeon general under the, in the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], but I went to him specifically at that time, you know, we have a very casual relationship anyway, but I went to him and said, "Look, you know, I have this opportunity.  What do you think?  What are your thoughts about this?"  Just kind of throwing it in an open ended way and he gave an interesting answer because he said partly what I would expect.  He said, "Look, you know, you've got a great career path that you're on now," you know, and then he asked me a few questions, "What are you gonna do with that if you decide to do that, because that doesn't really, in any kind of obvious way, fit with what you're doing. And then, of course, there's this huge risk that you're taking.  We know about the shuttles that have blown up, so there's a real risk there that you might not survive it." And but one thing that he said to me is well, "Ultimately it's your decision of course, but if you decide to stay in medicine, you're gonna have more of a predictable pathway, but whatever you do I think that the sky's the limit for you." And that had an unintended effect on my thinking (laughter) because he chose those words, the sky's the limit, I immediately said, "Okay, even though you don't think you're telling me this, you're telling me to do the space thing," (laughter).
Speaker 2: You were gonna go beyond the limitations of the sky.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, literally.  So, you know, I basically perceived it and decided to interpret it that way and decided to go ahead and pursue the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] course.
Speaker 2: I, like a lot of people, can only imagine the excitement of anticipating going into space.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's something I had always dreamed about too.  It just really, what would it be like to go into outer space and weightlessness.  I mean, weightlessness is just fascinating, always fascinated me.  There are some movies from back in the day, like '2001' ['2001: A Space Odyssey'], which are just spectacular in the way that they depict it, very accurately, and I always wanted to experience that.  It's just, the other thing that really excites me about space is it really is the final frontier, as they say in 'Star Trek.'  It's the final frontier.  It's the unknown that's out there and by going and pursuing it and participating in that endeavor, what an opportunity.  I mean, you have an opportunity to discover things.  You have an opportunity to explore questions that you can't any other way and, you know, as a scientist, as a you know, and just as a human being, that--that's just incredibly exciting and was really, I think, the thing that, at least in my mind, made it something that I couldn't, you know, walk away from, so, so yeah.
Story_ID: 658247
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--so you were trained as the first orthopedic surgeon to go into space.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: Right? And the--there had been how many African Americans before you?
Speaker 2: There have been a total now of thirty African American astronauts and before me, I guess that means there were twenty, twenty-five, or twenty-six, something like that.
Speaker 1: Really?  I'm surprised there were that many.
Speaker 2: There were quite a few during the shuttle years.  The shuttle changed everything.  I mean, prior to that, you know, up through Apollo [Project Apollo], there had been no African American astronauts.  In fact there had been no women, no African Americans.  It really was exclusively white males and the shuttle, because it was going so much more frequently, that opened up things in the sense of they needed many more people.  Fortunately, too, I think at that point the thinking, and I give NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] a lot of credit.  They basically do a lot of self-examination and they're a world class organization that way in terms of learning from past errors and basically changing their way of doing things as a result of that, but they realized too, hey, we're only sending white males into space.  I mean, you know, the planet Earth consists of a broad variety of people and why are you only gonna be sending one particular group.  Say one day we do encounter ET [extraterrestrial], you know, ET needs to know there's a variety here and we don't all just look the same, so yeah.  So, the shuttle era brought that about.  And, in the early days of the shuttle it was originally planned that there were gonna be trips into space every month.  I mean, it was gonna be this really prolific presence in space on a frequent basis.  The accidents changed that, the cost overruns changed that and by the time I was selected by NASA, we were only doing about three flights at most per year and, but there were still a lot of people there, like Bernard Harris [HistoryMaker Dr. Bernard Harris, Jr.] and others, who were in the '90s [1990s], and that's when, you had a flight every two to three months, something like that.
Speaker 1: I think people began to take it for granted or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was, I think, the negative you know, side of it was because people were going much more frequently than in comparison to, say, the Apollo missions, people started taking it for granted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even though I think the, the level of accomplishment was, you know, was equally as important, but people did start taking it for granted.
Story_ID: 658248
Speaker 1: Now I imagine--and correct me if I'm wrong--but you had a, there was a general training that everybody got and then a training around your specialty as a mission specialty--specialist, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you start it now, you go through basic training which can be a year and a half or so on average and that's just because you've got all these people from different walks of life and you basically want them to be able to work together and you need to understand what that means too, just to be an astronaut, because you have no clue outside of pretty much what you have seen on TV in a popular culture like everybody else, so yeah.  You go through a year of basic, a year and a half of basic training.  One of the most important aspects of that training is learning how to fly and the jet trainers and T-38s [Northrop T-38 Talon], and that's a tool that they use for what's called crew resource management.  Basically, it's how you work together as a crew in a dynamic environment; you know, in this case a jet but that simulates in a lot of ways of being in a spaceship.
Speaker 1: Now, had you ever flown before?
Speaker 2: Just a little bit.  I mean, I had taken private lessons when--towards the end of my residency and fellowship and I was working towards getting my private license, but I hadn't gotten it yet, so I had flown some.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But never in a supersonic jet, you know, in terms of piloting it, so that was all new.  The other thing was we do a lot of training as mission specialists during spacewalk training in this gigantic pool called the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory and you go in spacesuits that have been made to be neutrally buoyant under water, so it simulates being in space, and, but you need to be scuba trained.  You need to also train, do a lot of training specifically for being able to actually train in that facility, and so, that's part of your basic astronaut training, putting you through that whole process.  For some of the water survival and land survival stuff, they sent us to different places.  We went to Pensacola [Florida], to the naval flight training school [Naval Air Station Pensacola] there.  There was some flight training there.  We also went up to Maine to the Acadia national forest [Acadia National Park] to do some of our land survival training.
Speaker 1: This is in case it comes down place that it's not supposed to.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And then, we had training, like in geology; being able to explore landscapes, find important features.  In a landscape that will tell you about the evolution of that particular environment.  And so, we went out to New Mexico in order to do a lot of that training.  Part of it, too, is the astronauts, of course, were the focal point for what NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] does in human exploration.  So, whenever they bring in a new class, you need to learn about NASA as an organization.  NASA has, I believe, don't quote me on this, if I remember I think it's fourteen centers nationwide, and you go around and visit every center so that the people, the personnel that are at each of these centers have an opportunity to meet you and you have an opportunity to meet them.  The spacecraft and the spaceships that we fly on are assembled collectively by all of the centers.  It's directed primarily in certain areas, but there are parts and contributions from all of the centers that are brought together and so it's important to go and meet the people that are doing that because you really are entrusting them with your lives when you're flying on a spaceship, and so it's closing that loop so that they have a face, you know.  They know that this isn't just some theoretical exercise.  It's, you know, these are people that are depending on them, so it establishes that bond and, you know, so it's--its, that's part of your basic training.  That's you know, what you do.  You continue it also, once you, you know, finish basic training.
Story_ID: 658249
Speaker 1: The other aspect is, of course, the public outreach. And, you know, we, we're expected to you know, go to events that there's an interest in learning about space and what we're doing in space and that's, you know, a broad spectrum of events across private industry to academia to government.  So, part of the training is for that.  So once you get through the basic training, you know, you actually go through a graduation, believe it or not.  It basically says that you're officially eligible to be assigned to a mission but at that point you're officially recognized as being an astronaut.  And, it's a big deal, your family's there, all your loved ones.  They put a pin on you that signifies that you're an astronaut and then from that point on, you're waiting for your flight assignment and, you know, I probably, I think I had to wait about a year or a year and a half before being assigned to a flight.
Speaker 2: So during this period of time--
Speaker 1: Actually, no.  It was a little bit longer.  It was, because we finished in--it was around three, no two and a half years waiting to be assigned to a flight.
Speaker 2: You're still training and doing things during this--
Speaker 1: Still training, you're learning--
Speaker 2: You can't go back to your regular job during this training?
Speaker 1: Right.  You're learning other skills, you know, and there are some very specific skills currently for astronauts because we go to the space station and we have to live on the space station and maintain and operate the space station.  So, there is all of the systems you have to learn there including some highly specialized ones like operating a robotic arm, you have to learn how to fly in all the spacecrafts that are either automated spacecraft, robotic spacecraft, or flown by humans, so you have to go to respective centers and also visit respective international partners, in order learn how to operate the equipment.  So, during that time while you're waiting to be assigned, you can, you know, get a lot of those things done and that's the focus of what you do training wise.  You also serve in a functional capacity at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] in a quality assurance role.  As I said, it's really the engineers and the staff scientists that are responsible for creating the spacecraft and the environment that is going to allow you to go to and from the International Space Station safely.  And so, that's an active process in terms of preparing spacecraft, and operating spacecraft and operating the space station and they always want to have someone who's been there or who is going there, you know, to provide that quality assurance that, that, that's necessary to make what they're recommending operational.
Speaker 2: Right.  I would think that you'd have keen interest in making sure everything is right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well there's a group interest there, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody has a keen interest that's going.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know make sure everything is tight, so.
Story_ID: 658250
Speaker 1: Now I read that the EVA training is the toughest training (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It's, it's definitely very physically challenging and mentally challenging.
Speaker 1: That's the spacewalk training.  EVA means what--
Speaker 2: Extravehicular Activity.  So, but yeah, it's very physically demanding.  The suits weigh three hundred pounds and on earth they weigh three hundred pounds, that is.  When you're in training in the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory, you're in this three hundred pound suit, even though it's neutrally buoyant under water, it's a three hundred pound suit and you're having to move and do a lot of, you know, activities that require fine dexterity.  Also, you know, you have to move yourself, right?  So, you actually walk with your hands.  You're not walking with your feet.  You're pulling yourself along, you know, whatever, to trust, or whatever and there are handholds.  You have to learn how to do that while being in this suit and obviously it has to be done with a certain finesse and care.  There are certain parts of the suit that are fragile, like your visor, which is the glass that you look through so you don't wanna go bumping into things (laughter) and then you've gotta learn how to maneuver yourself just using your arms and your hands.  Your feet become secondary but they're important in certain instances.  There are certain footholds that you have to learn how to maneuver yourself into and even though that sounds like it--oh how hard can that be--actually it's quite difficult.  Just because of the bulk of the suit, the fact that you're trying to train in an environment where up and down, there is no up and down and your visibility is limited, you can't really see your feet a lot of the times.  You know they're there, of course, but you can't see them and a lot of what we do relies on, you know, we know where they are because we can see them, so if you're trying to maneuver something you're wearing that's that big into a small space, which is what's required to get into a foothold.  It takes practice and, you know, some people really, it takes people a variable amount of time to get it.  There are some people who never get it, because it really is pretty hard and I had the advantages of having long arms.  That's helpful in these suits.  Also having a certain amount of strength is helpful and in endurance, and I think I had, you know, in addition to just a limp it's just having been used to doing like long surgeries and being on my feet for, you know, eight to ten hours in a stretch.  That's helpful you know, because I know about how, how to pace myself and not overexert myself, you know, know how to stay in, in a comfort zone.
Story_ID: 658251
Speaker 1: I would think the closest, most people will come to understanding what you're talking about is the movie 'Gravity' (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Even though it had some flaws.  It, it gives you a feeling of disorien- being disoriented and a feeling of what it must be like to be in that suit without being trained (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right. But, but the training interestingly enough, the training for spacewalks is harder than doing spacewalks in space.  It's actually harder because you're under water, it's harder work, you know.  I was listening the other day to a story.  They were talking about Bannister, the guy who ran the first mile under four minutes.
Speaker 1: Alan Bannister [sic. Roger Bannister], right, of Great Britain.
Speaker 2: He was, you know, talking about how the mile race is not a comfortable race.  It's a painful race and part of being able to be successful at it, of course, is being able to tolerate that discomfort, you know, and because when you're doing it, nobody ever does it and just feels good while they're doing it (laughter) and the training for EVAs [Extravehicular Activity] has some commonality with that.  You know, it's, you're in the suit and it can be rubbing and you can have hot spots in the suit, it's heavy, it's not comfortable, and yet you're having to be in it for eight hours usually for a run.  No food during that time, just water, and you're tasked with a lot of stuff that you've got to get done and if you push too hard, you get into this, you know, where you go over the point of where your body can recover immediately, build up too much lactic acid in your system and so it becomes really uncomfortable, and you have to avoid doing that is the bottom line, because a lot of times if you do that, you can never really get back to where you need to be.  So, you know, being at that edge, and being you're uncomfortable.  Nobody ever, you know, goes through all these runs, comes out at the end and says wow, I just feel, I feel great, you know, in the sense of I was comfortable through this whole last eight hours.
Speaker 1: There was a thing about a 'Radiolab' on public radio [National Public Radio] with Robert Krulwich and I forget the other fellow's name [Jad Abumrad].  They were talking about why Kenyan runners are so weird and they said it's the manhood training they receive in their teens.  If you can get through that, running the marathon is not--
Speaker 2: Not a big deal.
Speaker 1: Really, it's like what you say about Roger Bannister, but they have so much pain, they have a physical endurance they go through in manhood training that's like hell.  It's horrible.  And, you know, which includes running with something tied to your, you know, and it's really--
Speaker 2: It's horrible.
Speaker 1: And when they get finished with that they can almost do anything.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They can do like a long run--like easy.
Speaker 2: Right.  I would say that's the philosophy with this EVA training too.  It's, you know you go through that, like I said, when you, when you actually get to the real thing, it's easy yeah, and quite pleasant, actually.  (Laughter) Plus a spectacular view.  As you're looking out, and there's the earth.
Story_ID: 658252
Speaker 1: So, so this is, so two and a half years you're going through the training. And now I didn't ask you how your family felt about, do you have children by, by this time?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.  My daughter [Daija Satcher] was born in 2004, right before moving to Houston [Texas], and, yeah, so during the basic training I would, for a while it was like six months before they moved from Chicago [Illinois] to Houston, so I was doing a lot of travelling around, of course, with basic training and I would fly back and forth to Chicago to see them.  I brought my daughter, you know, or they came to Pensacola [Florida] when I was there doing flight training.  That was pretty special.  My daughter was only like six months old.  She's ten now, but she was six months old at the time and, so, I think for families it's probably, there's a lot of worry and it's because you're going through and doing these activities, which are, even with the training there's a risk involved in a lot of these activities, you know, and doing scuba diving, we're doing flying jets.  We're, and then of course it's EVA [Extravehicular Activity] training and there's definite risk and we've had astronauts who have died in the past during training exercises, so that's always there.  I think the biggest fear, though, is surrounding when you're gonna launch and leading up to that, and so I think that that's the hardest thing for most families to go through.  I think, you know, that in the astronaut office there's those of us who were civilian who, our careers were entirely civilian, and then you have those who come from military backgrounds and I think they're a little better, of course, equipped to understand and deal with what's involved because, you know, they've had this experience of being deployed and being put in harm's way going to hostile zones and, you know, Afghanistan, Iraq, et cetera and so their families have some experience with that and have already developed the mechanisms and whatnot to deal with it.  For, you know, folks like myself and other civilians, this is entirely new and it's something, it's a learning process but at the same time, it's, it presents with its difficulties because of the risks and fortunately my family was always supportive of me.  They you know, they weren't happy about the risks (laughter) but they knew it was what I really wanted to do.
Story_ID: 658253
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, now you were assigned in 2008.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: To the crew of--the mission was called STS-129.
Speaker 2: 129.
Speaker 1: And what does STS mean?
Speaker 2: Space Transport System [sic. Space Transportation System].  That's what, I guess the official name for the shuttle is.  The shuttle was always considered to be an experimental system and it was necessary to build a space station because of its size and you could carry up as large as like a Greyhound bus in a cargo bay, so absolutely essential to be able to build the space station, but always considered to be experimental because you look at it and what a radical design for a spaceship, right, you know.  The thing launches like a traditional spaceship but then lands like a glider and also just because of the size.  The largest spaceship ever in terms of the crew quarters and the functional space.  If you look at the Saturn rocket, that's the largest rocket ever, but where the crew was, was just right at the top of the small capsule, so the space shuttle had much more living space.  So, like being at a five star hotel in comparison.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mission was to go to the shuttle--
Speaker 2: Was to go to the space station [International Space Station]--
Speaker 1: To the space station on the shuttle.
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: I remember as a kid like looking at the launch of a rocket.  I expected there to be a big window inside a rocket.  Guys would be inside waving (laughter).
Speaker 2: The space shuttle was as close as you got to that, because windows, you're coming back and landing like a plane and so you know there's a guy piloting it.  They've gotta be able to see, so.
Speaker 1: But on the way up, it's a little bitty, just a little bitty top of this huge Saturn rocket.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 658254
Speaker 1: So, the day that you, you went up, November the 16th was it--?
Speaker 2: Yup, that's right.
Speaker 1: --2008 [sic. 2009]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what was that day like?
Speaker 2: Everything went off without a hitch for us, so we were really fortunate.  It was a beautiful day.  It was a clear sky and, you know--
Speaker 1: Had there been any false starts?
Speaker 2: We had none.  So, I said we were very fortunate.  Everything went as expected.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were supposed to go on Discovery [Space Shuttle Discovery] in the beginning, right?  But you ended up going on it (unclear).
Speaker 2: We switched spaceships, yeah.  So all of the variability was far in advance of our actual, you know, launch and so--
Speaker 1: So you're on the Atlantis [Space Shuttle Atlantis], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm on the Atlantis.  Basically like all crews do, you do down there two weeks prior and, you know, you go through all of your prelaunch activities, your simulations, you're going out and getting into the spaceship, practicing all of that, then, you know, leading up until the day of the launch.  We got up that morning, you know, and got suited up and got in the van.  It's like this silver van that everybody's seen and they take pictures of you walking out to the van, and then when you're getting out of it, and it's interesting when you get out to the launch pad, because for safety reasons there's nobody out there, you know.  You've got a spaceship that's loaded up with all this fuel, you know, and so they keep everybody away from it except for essential support group and you get out there, it's serene and quiet.  You know, you can see off in the distance the crowds and everything way off in the distance but, you know, it's very quiet and really gives you some time, a little bit of time, for reflection.  You walk around the ship, take a look at it, you know, and what I was thinking about is: wow, this is finally it and this is, you know, gonna be, I'll finally get the leave the planet Earth, you know, and get into outer space.  From the time that you get strapped into the ship until the time you launch, it's almost three hours so, you know, basically go up, the elevator takes you up.  There's a, you know, basically the support crew there to help you get into your seats and you're in your launch and entry suit, which is the orange pumpkin suit.  You go through all the systems checks, everything, they close the door.  You get power, independent power on the shuttle, crank up some of the auxiliary power units and you're going through all of this and there are some pauses, because you do some things actively and then the ground has to do their checks and other system checks.
Speaker 1: This is a team activity, anyway.
Speaker 2: It's a team activity, yeah, yeah.  And all the while you're sitting there, you know, and when you're on the ship getting ready to launch, of course it's pointed towards the sky, right?  So you're on your back with your feet here and, you know, the interesting thing is they give you like a sandwich and some snacks and stuff so that you can eat that while you're waiting.  But, everything with us went off without a hitch.  It went just as we practiced it.
Story_ID: 658255
Speaker 1: Now before we launch here, let me just ask you about the crew.  Now you got like how many on a crew and who are they?  If I was directing a movie, I'd, I'd want to pan around the faces before you--as you're describing this. Who's going up with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have a crew of six and the commander, his name is Charles Hobaugh, nickname Scorch, Marine test pilot, flew Harrier jets.  So, you know, and by the way, it also just wound up being all guys going up.  We brought a female crew member back down with us.  It was a women named Nicole Stott.  She had been on the International Space Station for three months, so--
Speaker 1: Was she an American or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She's an astronaut, American astronaut.  She had been on the space station for three months and that was part of our, mission, was basically to go get her and bring her back.  But, the pilot who is the second in command is a guy named Barry Wilmore, nicknamed Butch.  His background was he is a [U.S.] Navy test pilot, and then we have four mission specialists.  Mission specialist number one was [HistoryMaker] Leland Melvin, who is a--correction, he was mission specialist two--he is a former football player.  He played in the NFL [National Football League] briefly and then he started working at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] because he is an engineer by training.  Went on and advanced degrees in engineering.  Wound up working primarily at Langley [Langley Air Force Base, Virginia] before he was selected for NASA.  He is also African American.
Speaker 1: Is this the first trip that there were two African Americans?
Speaker 2: No.  There had been one where there was a man and a woman, and that was Bob Curbeam [Robert L. Curbeam, Jr.] and Joan Higginbotham, had been on a flight, I think it was 116 [STS-116] or something like that, so I think we were second.  And then, the mission specialist one was this guy named Mike Foreman [Michael Foreman], who was also a Navy test pilot.  He was a veteran space flier also, having already been on one space flight prior to ours.  Mission specialist three was one of my classmates that came in with me in 2004, who is, his name was Randy Bresnik [Randolph Bresnik], nickname Komrade.  He is a Marine test pilot also.
Speaker 1: His nickname is Kom- ?
Speaker 2: Komrade, Komrade.  Yeah, it is, the story behind that is his last name is Bresnik, you know.
Speaker 1: Sounds Russian.
Speaker 2: Sounds Russian.  He's in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], you know, so they call him Komrade.
Story_ID: 658256
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about the crew [of STS-129].  And I think we--did we finish naming all of them? I think we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We named all of 'em, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So there's six of you on board getting ready to blast off.  What's it like to take off?
Speaker 2: Spectacular.  It exceeds your expectations.  Obviously, there is no way to simulate it and, you know, when you go, when you finally get that experience and see what it's actually like.  So, it's a tremendous amount of power that the ship launches.  It's almost seven and a half million pounds of thrust and most of it coming initially from the two solid rocket boosters that are on either side of the tank, and the acceleration is always anywhere between, you know, two, two and a half to three Gs [g-force] of acceleration, and the good news is that the vector of that acceleration is this way through your chest as opposed to this way (gesture), because when you're in, for instance fighter pilots and stuff, when doing he's pulling all these large number of Gs.  Basically because the vector is that way, it can make the blood go out of your head and make you gray out and pass out.  We experience all of that, of course, with our training flights, but on the space shuttle, you start off, you know, and I would say the things that surprise me about it were, I was expecting it to be really incredibly loud but it wasn't.  There was a lot of shaking initially because of the solid rocket boosters.  What happens is they turn on the rockets on the back of the shuttle first six seconds before the solid rocket boosters, and when the shuttle engines come on, the whole thing sways a little bit, you know, and you feel that and you know that the solid rocket boosters are coming next, you know, and when those bad boys kick in you're gone.  It's boom, you know, and you get slammed back in the seat and it's exhilarating, it's, you know, much more exhilarating than anything I've ever experienced like a roller coaster or high performance car or anything like that, or even flying in a jet; slammed back in the seat, lots of shaking, wasn't nearly as loud as I thought it would be.
Speaker 1: Is that because the sounds was actually projected back towards the (unclear).
Speaker 2: It's that and also it doesn't take you long to exceed the speed of sound (laughter).  You pick up speed that fast, you know, and it actually gets fairly quiet because you're just, you're ahead of the sound that's being emanated behind the ship.  So the first two and a half minutes are a lot of shaking because of the boosters.  Then the boosters come off and the ride is just a lot smoother.  It's just, you know, smooth and quiet and really you're just feeling, you know, being pushed back in your seat.  We were able to look at our monitors and the windows that are the flight deck outside so you're seeing that, and what started off as something that you didn't really notice too much, or as just the sensation of being pushed back in the seat, you start to notice after about three or four minutes, and the reason why you start to notice it is because you actually have to work to breathe.  You know, you're against this three or four Gs to breathe, and so I actually started noticing one of my colleagues says, "Well, you know, when you take off it's just like a Chihuahua sitting on your chest.  By the time you get to three minutes, it's like a Labrador." (Laughter) At five or six minutes, you know, it's like a Great Dane, and then by the time you are almost to eight minutes, you almost have an elephant sitting on your chest.  So, the time from blast off to actually being in, in orbit and in outer space--well, you're not in orbit, but you're in outer space--is eight and a half minutes.  So, very fast (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 658257
Speaker 1: And, when you get to the eight and a half minutes you're going, you're traveling at 17,500 miles an hour, which is, if you do the calculation, it's five miles per second, which is actually faster than a bullet, but you're in this gigantic spaceship travelling that fast and, you know, it's as I said, by the time you get to that eight minute mark and you know you're almost getting ready for the engines to stop, you're ready for the engines to stop (laughter) because you know it's really, and I was sitting there and I was having to think about every breath, you know.  I was like, man, I gotta think about breathing because my muscles are actually starting to get a little bit tired from having to do this work.  So, when the engines cut off and we were officially in space, it was very nice.  They cut off and then everything starts exploding and that's kind of a magical moment, you know.  It cuts off and I was just anticipating it and I was like, oh man, everything's gonna start floating now.  This is gonna be spectacular.  And it was.  You know.  I didn't have one of my gloves.  I didn't have it strapped on me the right way, so when I took it off it started floating off, you know, and I'm getting out of the seat and, you know, when you're under your buckle and then all of a sudden you're just floating, you know, and just floating around, it's a spectacular feeling and the one thing that we all do right when it happens is, you know, you go to the window and stare out, just like a bunch of kids, you know, because you want to look out and just take in you know, seeing Earth.  It's like you need to mentally verify.  I am in space because, again, this is just kind of unique once in a lifetime for many, kind of things, and I just immediately started thinking I want to just remember as much of this as I possibly can.  What competes with that, of course, is you have a very busy schedule that you have to adhere to and you have a lot of duties, so--
Speaker 2: Can you remember the first thing you saw when you looked out the window?
Speaker 1: Uh, well, I looked out and I saw the Earth and we were, I think we were over Europe at the time.
Speaker 2: Could you make it out?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.  I mean, it looks like, yeah, that's what's incredible.  It looks just like the globe that you have on your desk, but in vivid colors; just incredibly spectacular, vivid colors.  More vivid than you can imagine.  It just kind of blows you away, and it just exceeds what you think it's gonna look like, 'cause I had, I was thinking it was gonna look this way but then you see it and just the colors are so brilliant.  That hasn't had, the reason is when you're in space you're outside the atmosphere and you're in a vacuum of space and so you have this unfiltered light, and the colors, like I said, are just really spectacular and brilliant and you know there's something that's, in certain ways, very spiritual about how it looks and how it grabs you and affects you.  So, at any rate.  The other thing that really you notice when you look down on the earth you know, you can see, you actually can see the atmosphere when you look, you know, kind of on a tangent on the earth.  Let's say that's the earth and you look right on the side, you actually see the atmosphere, this layer, you know, of gas, oxygen and nitrogen, whatever, adherent to the Earth.
Speaker 2: Does it look like a lot of protection for the Earth?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  (Laughter) It looks like a thin, delicate layer.  You know, and you realize that it's like this fluid, just like, you know, a gas is basically a fluid, just like water; water much more dense of course, but that's what it looks like.  It looks like this fluid that's adherent to the Earth and you realize that's what we breathe and that's, you know, and what it really made me realize is that it's not an infinite entity.  It's quantifiable.  You can see that and you can see its layer.  It's like, well there's only so much of that that's there, you know, and that really kind of brings home the point that it really is a delicate system that we have here and, you know, it's obviously it's coming into focus now with a lot of the global climate changes and everything that are going on, but you really gain a very visceral appreciation for it when you can actually see it like that.
Speaker 2: It becomes more real then--
Speaker 1: It becomes very real (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) that human beings could actually destroy this.
Speaker 1: Right. Yeah, we could definitely do that.
Story_ID: 658258
Speaker 1: Very joyous moments though, during those first few--you know, and, and you're sharing it with your crew and everybody's just kind of happy and giddy and you're just like a bunch of school kids that have just been let out for PE [physical education] or whatever, you know?  It's just an incredible moment.  And, but what you have to do then is you've been trained, okay.  Here's the script you have to follow.  You've got all these tasks to do, and so you get into that pretty much immediately.
Speaker 2: So, I guess you're always connected to the ground in terms of what you, are--you're getting ready to do.  They're talking to you.
Speaker 1: They're talking to you.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you just don't shut 'em up or put 'em on hold or anything.  Can't do that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You'd like to sometimes but, you know.  Yeah, no.  Time is very important because there's all this stuff you have to do.
Speaker 2: Now I have a, they include a seating chart here where you always sit--is there any significance to where you're sitting, where you sit in the shuttle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's on a flight deck.  It's the pilot, the commander, and two of the mission specialists.  One of the mission specialists is responsible for essentially acting as part of the flight crew so, just like on the airplane, pilot, commander, flight engineer.  So, one of the mission specialists is basically flight engineer and he's watching all these other systems and working directly with the pilot and commander.  Then there's another mission specialist who was on the flight deck too, but in a more secondary role as a flight engineer.  I was on the middeck, you know, with one of the other mission specialists, Mike Foreman [Michael Foreman], and basically there are a few systems that are on the middeck, so we don't have as much responsibility during flight and the division of labor is that way because, you know, we're the ones that are doing the space walks and they don't want to have somebody who is flying the ship, you know, basically being put at risk if you like doing space walks.  So, we were the expendable ones that way.  I mean it's a job you're happy to have because, you know, and, you get to go outside of the ship, which is the closest you get to being in space and believe it or not, the view that you get with the spacewalk exceeds the one that you had inside the ship, you know, so it's something that I would never trade away.  It's just, you know, and I--and it's the thing for me that sticks out and I remember the most vividly, you know, from my time being there.
Story_ID: 658259
Speaker 1: Now, now when did you make your first spacewalk?
Speaker 2: Man, what day of the mission [STS-129] was that?  Well, it takes three days to get to the, to the space station, and we went out on the first spacewalk with Mike Foreman [Michael Foreman], who is the senior guy.  He was the, he had been, he had one previous flight and, I think, three prior spacewalks, so, and that was probably on flight day, I'd say it was maybe flight day six or seven [sic.], something like that.  So, you know, by that time you're acclimated to being in space.  That's another thing.  It's a transition, you know, when you actually finally wind up getting into space with the microgravity.  There are some adjustments that you have to go through physiologically.  Because there is no gravity, all this fluid that's typically in your legs kind of floats up into your, internally, into your head and your torso.  Your body interprets that as being your blood volume has increased and so you spend a lot of time in the bathroom, basically, because that's how your body deals with it, right?  It's like okay, too much fluid.  Let's pee it off.
Speaker 1: Is there a danger of dehydrating?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Absolutely, and you have to drink and you just have to kind of force yourself to drink because you know that you're gonna lose a certain amount of fluid and you don't wanna get too far in a deficit.  Then, learning how to sleep in outer space and learning how to eat in outer space.  Everything floats, right?  So, you have to make that adjustment in terms of, you know, I think it was an easier adjustment in terms of eating than it was drinking.  You know, with the drinking you have to get used to just everything coming out of the pouch and with a straw and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you suck the fluids out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And your guts basically kind of respond to it almost like you just had surgery on your belly.  If you do surgery on a person's belly, the peristalsis, which is the waves of contractures that go through your guts that move food in one direction, they stop, and the technical term for that is an ileus, but they stop when you actually open up a person's belly and do surgery, and it comes back after a few days or so, but that's kind of how your guts respond to going into outer space, because all of a sudden, you know, the gravity cues that your body uses subconsciously is gone, right?  So your guts are absent to gravity cues, lose temporarily their directional sense, and so, you get this functional ileus, basically, where everything is kind of stopped.  Fortunately, you know, with your upper GI [upper gastrointestinal], with your esophagus when you drink, it doesn't take long for that to adjust and so you're able to get food down get drink down.  What really takes a while is for you know, goi- when you're going to the bathroom.  That takes a while to come back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, usually about two or three days.
Story_ID: 658260
Speaker 1: So, the food you're eating, this is, this--what we've seen the astronaut food in the tube and that sort of thing (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It's--nowadays, it's much better. (Yawns) Excuse me. And they've actually had a lot of input from astronauts and other people associated with supporting flights in terms of, you know, how to make the food better and they have their own, you know, food kitchen and everything and they even get inputs from celebrity chefs nowadays, so there's some food that they send you up with which is quite good and basically it, the way that you prepare it most of the time is you're either just reheating it or rehydrating it and heating it, and, if there's a lot of viscosity or stickiness in the food, then you can have an open container and eat it, because it's not gonna float off or anything like that.  One of the best food items they have was like barbecued beef.  Very tasty.  Another one is shrimp cocktail and the shrimp, they also, they spike it with this horseradish, which is kind of really spicy but it tastes great, in space especially.  It just tastes great for some reason (laughter).  But, you know, a broad variety.  They also had this chocolate cake, which, was incredible.  It was really, really good.  So, not a bad, in terms of meals and rations, much more food there than you can eat, because they know that you're gonna be working hard and, you know, they just make it such that you have plenty of food.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And the other thing I was gonna tell you about is sleeping in space.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's a big adjustment too, because you're floating the whole time, right?  So, there's no such thing as lying down because gravity is the thing that lets you know that you're lying down.  So, without that you're just floating the whole time, and so when you go to sleep, you're still doing the same thing that you were doing when you were awake and doing work.  You're just floating.  And, the only thing that really changes is you turn the lights out and you get into your sleeping bag, you know, so it takes a little bit of an adjustment, you know.
Speaker 1: Is the sleeping bag moored to the craft?
Speaker 2: It is; yes it is.  Because obviously if it wasn't, you would float around, you know, so it's got lanyards and Velcro and stuff so that you can strap it anywhere.  Their policy is they let you sleep anywhere on the space station [International Space Station] and almost anywhere on the space shuttle.  The commander and the pilot have to sleep on the flight deck, but the rest of us, we can sleep anywhere else and, you know, you can strap your sleeping bag to the ceiling or to the wall or wherever, you know, and sleep in whatever orientation you want to and so that was kind of fun.  You're just basically putting it on the ceiling or, you know, whatever (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then when we got to the space station, we could sleep anywhere we wanted on the space station (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so it took--
Speaker 2: --so that was nice too.
Speaker 1: It took three days to get to the station, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 658261
Speaker 1: And so well describe as the station [International Space Station], the station is much bigger than the shuttle, right, it's--?
Speaker 2: It's got living space of a five bedroom house, so very large.
Speaker 1: So how--well, can you just kind of give us an assessment of what it's like to dock to the space station, because if you miss you're gonna--
Speaker 2: And that's the reason why it's done very carefully and meticulously and when you're docking, you're going at only a rate of one or two centimeters per second, you know, when you actually dock.  So, you approach it and you're slowing the whole time, you know, and you come very slowly to it because you can't afford to, you know, you could damage the spacecraft, damage the shuttle, damage the space station, and you know, the docking day on the third day is, that whole activity probably occurs over about six to eight hours, and you know, you basically you're just slowly approaching with each orbit and you get a little bit closer and then you get in the final docking phase and--
Speaker 1: I just wondered, if you, now you're going really fast but so is this space station, right?
Speaker 2: It's all about the relative speed.
Speaker 1: It's relative speed, so when you, if you were to bump it too fast would it be more likely to crash or just bounce it--
Speaker 2: Well, the way that it's engineered is that you would just bounce off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there's a docking ring which extends out, spring loaded, you know, so that when you come together the impact is initially absorbed by that ring and the springs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, if you're too fast, you know, so that you can't basically mate and it's a bunch of hooks that have to mate in order for you to be stably docked, you just come in and bounce off, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, anyway.  So docking is done very carefully.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You don't have any feeling that you're not gonna be able to, you know--
Speaker 2: It's done very carefully and very precisely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, yeah.  Okay.  So--now the space station contained how many people?
Speaker 2: It can contain a large number.  When we were there, there were six of us and there were, how many people were on the station then?  I think there were three; two Russian crew members, two European crew members, a Japanese crew member, and an American [Nicole Stott].  So, I think it was a total of six people on the station when we went there.  So, when we got there, we doubled the number to twelve.  It never felt crowded.  It was always like, okay, you know.  I would go in certain modules and I'd be the only one there.  Then, you know, you just float around the station, maybe having a meeting somewhere else for some other activity, somebody'd be doing something else, never felt crowded.
Speaker 1: So this is, how big is it?  Big as a house, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a five bedroom house living space.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But no gravity, so it's not like 'Star Trek,' with people walking around and everybody's floating.
Speaker 2: And one day, we'll figure out how to do that, you know, just artificial gravity on spaceships so that you will be able to walk around like they do on 'Star Trek.'  That's in the future.
Speaker 1: That would be, that would have to be, correct me if I'm wrong, but wouldn't that be necessary for sustained, or if you were to spend like a year out there, it would be advantageous to have an artificial gravity--
Speaker 2: It would be, yeah, it would be.
Speaker 1: Because of what it would do to the bones.
Speaker 2: To your whole body, but the bones and muscles primarily.  The other deconditioning that occurs is with your cardiovascular system because your heart is used to pumping fluid against gravity, right?  I mean, basically you've got this column of water from your feet up to your head.  Your heart has to pump fluid through that whole system and that means it has to pump fluid uphill, you know, in order to get it up to your head and what not.  When you get in space that's gone, right?  No gravity, so it's just, it's easier for the heart and so the heart in cardiovascular system can become deconditioned as a result of not having to work as hard, and that's why it's so important to exercise when you're there and to do cardiovascular exercise, so you do a combination of both cardiovascular exercise and resistive exercise, resistive to preserve your muscles and skeleton, cardiovascular to keep your heart and lungs you know, strong.
Story_ID: 658262
Speaker 1: So, are you on like a pretty strict schedule when you're (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You are, yeah.  And, and you know that, that can be the frustrating part, because, you know, you, you always just wanna go and stare out the window when you're in space or you wanna sit there and do experiments with, with grav- with no gravity, light a flame and see how that looks or playing with whatever, food, you know, playing with water is really interesting.  Seeing these floating spheres of water and you put your finger in it and seeing how the surface tension works and all this.  It's just fascinating stuff, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now what was the, can you explain the mission of your--I mean, your mission's mission, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were a resupply, repair, and construction.  So, you know, resupply--we were bringing up some gas tanks, the most important ones being oxygen tanks that provide the atmosphere to the space station [International Space Station].  Then we were doing some maintenance and repair work on, primarily on the outside of the station on the robotic arms.  We were reconfiguring part of the station to accept in the future these large satellites that are on there now, and laying down some cabling for those satellites, and the construction work basically was primarily to put the station in its final configuration, because we were 129 [STS-129] and the last mission was 135 [STS-135] and regular space walks stopped with that last, you know, mission at 135.  So, you know, whatever construction work in order to get it into its final form, we were responsible, actually, for a major percentage of some of the truss reconfiguration that had to occur, and we wound up completing all of the truss reconfigurations, and they weren't sure we were going to be able to get 'em done because I think there were three of 'em that had to be done, but we did get 'em all done.  So, it, each of the space walks, we had three space walks total, and they were all very busy, they were all about seven hours in length and they basically were packed with activities that we had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna deal with the space walks next time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So this is the place where we know that's what we're gonna do next time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But thank you very much.
