Story_ID: 290230
Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers video--oral history interview--is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden.  The videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns.  The location of this interview with a distinguished architect and urban designer and planner is 431 Marlborough Street, Boston, Massachusetts, the home of our interviewee.  The date is December 3rd, 2004.  Mr. HistoryMaker, ArtMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Donald L. Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], S-T-U-L-L.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth, Mr. Stull?
Speaker 2: Do I have to tell you (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, May 16th, 1937.  Place of birth, God's Country, the Midwest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in a little, little town called Springfield, Ohio, halfway between Dayton [Ohio] and, and Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation--profession?  How do you describe your profession, title?  You are--
Speaker 2: I founded an architectural firm back in 1966, and am the president of that--of that firm today.  It's in its thirty-seventh year, I think.
Speaker 1: And the name of the firm?
Speaker 2: Stull and Lee [Inc., Boston, Massachusetts].  I took a partner about fifteen years ago, [M.] David Lee, who is wonderful and an incredibly talented young lad who's from the Midwest also from South Side, Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 290231
Speaker 1: Okay, before we move on into looking at your early life and your family history, we have four or five what we call human interest questions, People magazine type questions, just to warm up and, give people a glimpse or feeling of part of your personality.  [HistoryMaker] Donald Stull, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I think chicken, probably, as main course kinds of food.  From the Midwest, I was never really that much into seafood until we--until I came east.  Now, I would have to add to that clam chowder and all, all kinds of seafood, I absolutely love.  But the--I think the mainstay for me, and most of my family, is chicken.  We just can't seem to do enough of that.  And, in fact, for Thanksgiving, I am now frying turkeys which is a--which is a very interesting enterprise for those of you who, who don't know it.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, undoubtedly.  I think that I have an affinity towards spring, as well, because it's new life.  Living where I do in Boston [Massachusetts], and in the Back Bay of Boston, spring is especially pleasant because of the budding of the--of the magnolia trees on Commonwealth Avenue.  I--I've written a poem about that actually some time ago.  But the fall is a quiet time.  It's a time to--for me, to contemplate, to move into a period of intellectual rest, and so I, I really love fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Blue.
Story_ID: 290232
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That--that's a question that I have to answer in a--in an indirect way.  I am not one who has ever focused on vacations as an idea, and so, as many do, anticipating, waiting for vaca- their vacation on an annual basis or otherwise, I--my, my interest has always been driven primarily by work, and what I do.  And vacation, in that context, is a, a time of, of internal contemplation, kind of a time of rest.  And when I have taken those kinds of vacations, it's generally been at home.  I've generally spent the time sketching or reading or writing poetry and just thinking, calling friends and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you use from day to day, or on special occasions?
Speaker 2: I have favorite sayings that change from time to time, I think.  One that I am particularly fond of now is that the--I--I've always been fascinated, I think, certainly since a, a major illness that we'll probably get to later, with, with life cycles and behaviorism and why people do things in certain ways.  And there's an expression that says that frequently, people do bad things for right reasons.  They do wrong things for right reasons.  And it's something that I've sort of become attracted to as a thought in recent years because everyone has a certain aspect of their personality that, that tends towards misbehavior of one kind or another, but if you steal because your family's hungry, then you have done a wrong thing for a right reason.  And to, to shape your life in a way such that you can always do right things for right reasons can be very difficult.  And so I've become a much more forgiving person since that bout with illness and, and I think a byproduct of that is that saying.
Story_ID: 290233
Speaker 1: We are now going to move into your family history, your growing up years, as I said earlier, as a context and a background to fully understand the shaping of your life as an adult and your career and your interests.  And we have a picture of your mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] and I'm going to start with your mother.  Would you give me her full name and when she was born and where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in southern Ohio of parents from West Virginia as one of eleven siblings.  My grandparents on her side of the family had a farm just north of Dayton [Ohio]--just north of Cincinnati [Ohio], I mean, in a place that we refer to as the hills.  It's a very hilly portion of the flatlands of the Midwest near the first capital of Ohio, Chillicothe [Ohio], their farm there.  I always thought the farm was enormous as a kid because that's where we spent our summers.  Working on farm--farms is very hard work for those that don't, don't know it.  It was back then.  And several years ago we went back to visit that farm and the log cabin that they lived in, my grandmother and grandfather and all those kids, and it was about the size of this room, and that just blew my mind.  I, I had this vision of this enormous place.
Speaker 1: The name of your maternal grandparents, could I have their names, your grandmother, her name?
Speaker 2: Carrie Callahan and Henry Callahan.
Speaker 1: Would you spell Callahan for us?
Speaker 2: C-A-L-L-A-H-N [sic.].  But, it's a--it's a, a derivative of a name that they had in West Virginia that was Calliham [ph.] and how that transition occurred, I don't--I don't know.  Callahan is--obviously sounds today a very Irish name, but as is the case with most American-born, U.S.-born, African decent people, our names have been taken from our slaveholders, our masters.  So, obviously that was the case and I can say something about the name Stull that you might find interesting from that point of view as well.
Story_ID: 290234
Speaker 1: But my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] was the fourth oldest among the eleven siblings and a--Rock of Gibraltar.  She's still alive.  She's eighty-nine years old.  She lives with my sister [Virginia Stull], who is a doctor in Colum- in Dayton, Ohio.  She's still ambulatory.  Until recently, she was driving.  And she was the strength as is generally or sometimes often the case with black families.  Certainly of that generation, she was the strength of our family.  She was the one who instilled us with the determination to succeed, the freedom to decide what we chose to pursue, the encouragement to pursue it and finding a way to provide the support, frequently financial, to, to achieve that.  And there are very interesting stories about my family from that point of view.
Speaker 2: What stories had she shared with you and what do you know about her growing up years as a youngster?
Speaker 1: They were tough, very tough.  She worked off and on as a domestic.  The--but, you know, and, and, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], I'm saying, you, you know this.  When--we were dirt poor, right.  Hey, no big thing.  Every--everyone, a lot of people were dirt poor, and this is not news either, and we didn't know it.  And when she grew up with those eleven--or ten brothers and sisters, she didn't know it either.  It--at some point, it becomes obvious when you reach an age and a point in time in life when it's necessary to encounter and relate to the world outside that nucleus, then, then (laughter), as a very wise man once said, everything is relative, and you start seeing the relationships between the shoes you're wearing and the shoes other people are wearing and the house you live in and the house other people--houses other people live in, which you may be cleaning.  And it, it--it's sort of too bad that you have to come out of that nucleus to, to that point in one way.  In another way, though, if you have the kind of background that we had, it makes it possible for you to work at changing the characteristics that create it, that situation to begin with.  She was that kind of person.  She always found a way to provide the lunch money for school.  She always found a way to, to sort of help and then as we grew up, we began to do that with one another.  My ability to stay in college was directly related to my brother who dropped out of college just before termination of the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], so he would have that for his education, and sent me money every month.
Speaker 2: His name?  Your brother's name?
Speaker 1: Robert [Stull].
Speaker 2: Robert?  Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that's who my mother is and she's, she's quite a lady.
Story_ID: 290235
Speaker 1: You shared a little glimpse of her [Stull's mother, Ruth Callahan Branson] personality, but what else could you say about her as a person today?  What is she like as a person?
Speaker 2: She would be very good at oral history (laughter).  She remembers things that I, I don't remember even at her age.  And one of the greatest delights in going to visit her is just listening to her talk.  And it's very interesting, in nineteen--shortly after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], so it must've been '48 [1948], '49 [1949], '50 [1950], she actually had the (laughter) courage and the wherewithal to try to open a restaurant.  So, we had a house on sort of a main drag in the black section on the other side of the railroad tracks in Springfield, Ohio, and she took the living room, front room of the house, which is right at the sidewalk level with the street, and somehow, I have no idea how she did it, she opened a restaurant called Ruth's Place [ph.].  And a few years ago, I saw one of the menus that--that she had, but the thing was--I think it hung on for years and bellied up.  But, the, the--one of the things I remember about it was it had candy ball machines and that kind of stuff and we would always be able to--yeah.  But, she's--you know, on the other side of her, she's, she's extremely religious and in, in ways that I perhaps should be but am not.  She--she's just--I, I--it's hard to explain how amazing she is as a person.  She's very, very strong and her life really was her children.  After those early years where she tried things like the restaurant and so on, her, her life became her--became us.
Story_ID: 290236
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father [Robert Stull].  Would you give me your father's name, and when he was born and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Very interesting story.  My father back then, which was a--it was a real serious problem for young ladies to be pregnant out of wedlock, was birthed as a--as a bastard child of a black woman who was from the Davis [ph.] clan, which is related to the Callahan clan in some curious and interesting ways.  One of my uncles married a Davis and, you know, it just--it, it--all these farm families down in the hills.  I never knew her, none of us did.  A white sharecropper from West Virginia who moved to that part of Ohio named Jim Stull [ph.] with his live-in woman who--common law wife, Mariah [ph.], a black woman, very large black woman, adopted my father, and he took their name.  Jim Stull was a very, very short person.  I have vivid memory of him, had snow white hair, a big white handlebar mustache, blue eyes, and late in life became stark raving mad.  He came to live with us in Springfield [Ohio] for a time, and my father fixed up an outbuilding on the--where--on--where--at our house that once was like a stable type, type building for my grandma and grandfather to live in.  And finally, they, they had to go back to the hills because he couldn't adapt to even that level of city life.  Springfield, Ohio, is not a thriving metropolis, wasn't--isn't now and it wasn't then.  And because he tried to--see, he tried to burn that place down in, in a state of madness and, and so on.  So, that is sort of that, that side of the family.  My father was without roots in that sense, so unlike my mother's [Ruth Callahan Branson] family with all the siblings and aunts and uncles and so on, it was him.  Way late in life, we learned that he had a brother from the, the progeny of the--of the woman that was his real mother.  And I think he may have had a sister, but I'm, I'm just not certain.
Story_ID: 290237
Speaker 1: What was your father's [Robert Stull] occupation and what--
Speaker 2: He was a laborer.  He--I, I recall when we were kids, he worked in a foundry doing sand castings and as a--as an urbanist, I really regret that the kind of synergism that happens or can happen between residential areas and places of work--pretty much don't exist anymore.  But the foundry was a five-minute walk from our house [in Springfield, Ohio].  And my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] used to have us take turns taking his lunch pail to him and we would sit in this smoke-filled foundry with the overhead cranes and the earth floor and him making sand molds and so on and, and share his lunch with him.  It was--it was very interesting--
Speaker 1: Can you tell me anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in retrospect.  I'll never forget it.
Story_ID: 290238
Speaker 1: Can you tell me anything about his childhood and teenage educational experiences, schooling?
Speaker 2: Neither my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] nor my father [Robert Stull] were educated.  I don't know how far he went in school.  I am sixty-eight years old, and when I think back on the early schools that--the schools during the early part of my life that I attended, people today wouldn't believe it.  They were--they were--they were absolutely horrible.  And I--I don't know that--they may not have attended school at all.  I just don't know.  It's not something we ever talked about.  Education became a focus for us as a result of the extended family and my mother's desire for us to, to, to have a better life.  And so she constantly and my aunts and uncles constantly pushed learning.  But the wonderful thing about my family is that it wasn't--it, it wasn't aggressively promoted.  It was always promoted in, in a provocative way.  So, it, it wasn't, you know, learn or else.  It was the wonders of learning and, and we learned, we learned--we learned a lot, and, and pursued enormous diversity of interest.  And of the four of us, my brother [Robert Stull] and two sisters [Virginia Stull and Gladys Stull], we, we have--we have accomplished many, many things as, as a result of it.
Story_ID: 290239
Speaker 1: Would you give me the--your brother's name and the names of your sisters?
Speaker 2: Robert Stull is my brother's name.  My--he was--he was the oldest of us.  I was the next born.  My sister, old--oldest sister after me is Virginia Stull, Dr. Virginia Stull, and my youngest sister, who is dead--my old--my brother is dead also, is--her, her name was Gladys [Stull], a beautiful young lady.  She--during a break between undergraduate school and medical school, my oldest sister who was studying at--medical school at Galveston [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] took a, a year--a one-year break and took courses at Georgetown [University School of Medicine] in [Washington] D.C.  My youngest sister who was at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] dropped out that year and came to D.C. to live with her and became fascinated with the Kennedys.  They both participated in John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] campaign.  And my youngest sister got to know Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy].  As a result of that, after finishing school, she was the first black woman to be in the homecoming queen entourage at Ohio State University.  She was really beautiful in spirit and physically.  She joined the Peace Corps shortly after Zanzibar and Tanganyika merged to become Tanzania.  And while there, she was attacked by a, a--first an equivalent to a, a chieftain, equivalent to a governor of a state here--Muslim who was--tried to force her to become part of his family.  And she was able to get--my brother at the time was managing--an artist--was managing a place in Greenwich Village [New York, New York] called Greenwich House Pottery [Greenwich House Potters and Sculptors; Greenwich House Pottery], and she was able to get a note to him from a, a Peace Corps person who was returning home.  And my brother, and I and my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] went to D.C. to the Peace Corps and tried to get them to do something about it, and they wouldn't.  They said that Peace Corps people were trained to handle that kind of thing.  And so we went to the state department [U.S. Department of State], and within twenty-four hours, she was moved in with male Peace Corps people, and within forty-eight hours, she was in Rome [Italy].  And within four days, she was in New York City [New York, New York] with my brother, and she went through a debriefing situation and she was a total wreck--
Story_ID: 290240
Speaker 1: She [Stull's sister, Gladys Stull] came here [Boston, Massachusetts], she worked under Paul Parks at Model Cities for a while.  We still lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  Then, she went back to New York City [New York, New York] to work with--for Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy].  And she, she was doing--this was early TV.  She was doing early TV type stuff under a, a program called 'The Higher You At' [ph.] up in Harlem [New York, New York] with runaway street girls, just kids, and she started internalizing it.  She'd call me at three or four o'clock in the morning, and she's telling me the things that she was experiencing and so on.  And then one day, she killed herself.  It's a real tragedy--and then--by that time, my brother [Robert Stull] was living in Japan.  It's really interesting, my brother and my sister and I--my sister [Virginia Stull] was in medical school [University of Texas Medical Branch] in Galveston [Texas] at the time.  She got an expert at the medical school to come to New York and analyze the situation because my sister--Gladys [Stull], we called her Tiny, was her name then, was in intensive care and she was--she was in a coma and with--having spasms like that.  So, we all sort of got there and sent through the [American] Red Cross notice to my brother, who had bought a small farm south of Kyoto [Japan] and he turned it into a pottery atelier.  And when he lived in New York before, we had a habit of sort of sitting around with a bottle of cognac and those kinds of things.  He--we, we were sitting on the floor in Lenox [Hill] Hospital [New York, New York] in the--in the corridor near the elevators and we looked like down the corridor, and the elevator doors open, my brother got off wearing, wearing overalls and a work shirt, and, and the way the, the rural Japanese carried their luggage, they, they used big, big, big handkerchiefs, right, they'd put their luggage--
Story_ID: 290241
Speaker 1: You want to continue the story that you were sharing?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And recalling, recollecting, the death of my youngest sister [Gladys Stull] and we--my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] and my older sister [Virginia Stull] and I--oldest sister, had come to New York [New York] from Galveston [Texas], where she was in medical school [University of Texas Medical Branch].  We're sitting on the floor in a, a corridor or hallway adjacent to the elevators at Lenox [Hill] Hospital [New York, New York].  And the door--elevator doors open and my brother [Robert Stull] stepped off.  And, and he had this big, like a blanket with a knot tied in the end of it over his shoulder that had his--it was his luggage, it's a--rural Japanese carried their things that way and a bottle of cognac (laughter).  And he came and, and it was incredible.  It was--it was almost as if we had just seen him the day before.  And he came, he sat down on the floor and he opened the bottle of cognac and we--and passed it around and we all drank out of the bottle, except for my mother.  And then he said, "Let's go see Tiny," and we got up and walked down the hall and into the room and watched her for as long as we could because every few minutes, she would have a spasm, and then we left.  He told us to go home to her apartment, which was up in Spanish Harlem [East Harlem, New York, New York] and he--would join us there.  He wanted to talk with the doctors.  Now, the--this was on--this was--this was the way the family worked.  Because when we were growing up, he was Big Stull and I was Little Stull, and the Burtons lived on our street.  Ronald Burton [Sr.] was Big Burton, Ron--Robert Burton was Big Burton, Ron Burton was Little Burton [sic.].  Ron Burton's the one who became All-American football player and played running back for the [Boston] Patriots [New England Patriots] and retired as vice president of Prudential Insurance Company [sic. John Hancock Life Insurance Company], and recently died.  So, he was Big Stull and Big Stull was now in charge.  So, we went back to Tiny's apartment.  He met with the doctor and pulled the plug.
Story_ID: 290242
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember as a youngster growing up in Ohio in your neighborhood, within your home?
Speaker 2: The, the smells were of the earth.  And I've been strongly conditioned by aspects of things that relate to the earth.  And it gets complicated, because I can talk about that relative to architecture and urban design and clothing and colors and all kinds of things, but we had grandparents on both sides of the family who were farmers, and we spent a lot of time on the farms.  We lived in Springfield, Ohio, which meant that in a five--in this area we lived in, a five-minute walk in three directions took you into the countryside.  A five-minute walk in the other, fourth direction took you across the railroad tracks to where the white folks lived.  And behind our house was the county fairgrounds, which were enormous and we with our air, air guns, BB rifles, and all that stuff, we used to hunt, used to go there to shoot birds and squirrels and stuff.  We would go out into the country with my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] and pick strawberries along the road.  We had a garden.  One of the poems and one of the things I used to write about when writing poems was how, in the spring, my father [Robert Stull] would have a guy named Big Jim [ph.] with his mule plow the, the field behind our house for, for the garden.  And so the earth was something that, that I, I got sort of in a physio-psychological way, not in, in--not in a rational--at a rational level but an irrational level became part of who I am and the smells of the earth.  And it, it--when it rains, you know, I, I pick up those smells immediately.
Story_ID: 290243
Speaker 1: Visual, I'm not really certain.  I think that I can recall when I was very young doing carvings, right, and you're going to find this hard to believe, but I recall at one, one time spending months on a carving about that long.  I must've been early teens.  And years later, relating the image of that carving to a Dan mask only instead of broad this way as a mask is like my face that you're looking at, it was broad this way.  So, if you think of it that way, it was more like the silhouette of a Senufo carving with a very long nose and, and that kind of thing.  So, it was very much like the kinds of images that [Amedeo] Modigliani was producing as a Western European artist, whom in later time, long after his death, we learned was a closet student of African carvings, that he was taking his inspiration surreptitiously from African art.  So, when I say that I'm not religious like my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson], I am spiritual but in, in a--in a more earth, physio-psychological spontaneous way than in a programmed way.  There's something--there--there's, there's something about that connection that I know has found a way to weed itself through my entire being.
Story_ID: 290244
Speaker 1: Looking at your family life as a child and a--and a youth, a young teenager, and thinking about being with your family from day to day, from week to week, were there any special occasions or events in your family life that you remember in any special way, things that were kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back to my--
Speaker 1: --traditions?
Speaker 2: --family when I was a kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah, mother [Ruth Callahan Branson], father [Robert Stull], siblings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Traditions that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We always ate together.  More often than not, the meals we made were--we always ate together, and we talked.  That almost never happens now.  We had responsibilities for the home.  For example, on Saturdays, I did the washing, the old washing machine with the ringers and so on, wash--washing the clothes on Saturdays, every Saturday were my--was my responsibility.  Shoveling the coal was my brother's [Robert Stull] responsibility and so on.  So, we had assignments and it was just--that's what we did.  And it wasn't like, go do this.  I mean, it's just, you know.  And so, so the definition of family was very different then.  And so I grew up with the perception of family as a unit that--I'm applying contemporary phraseology to it, but as a unit of some kind that functioned in sync, not a situation where you have the warden and that being the parents and those people are demanding that you do this, that, and so on.  It was a very different kind of situation.  There was enormous comfort there.  No matter--and, and the other thing was that you were--you, you had the feeling that, that no matter what happened outside, if you could get home, you'd be safe.  You--that, that, that sense of--that sense of comfort was I think very important.  So, eating together and functioning as a unit, without question, functioning as a unit without questioning it are what, what I recall.  It's really curious, though, as a young father, I made no attempt to foster any of that.  All I did was work.  All I did was focus on things outside the family, and the result of it, I nearly destroyed my family.
Story_ID: 290245
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?  How far back can you remember in your childhood?
Speaker 2: Depending on the--the, the--the thing that I'm remembering, it goes way back or not terribly far back.  And the cur- and the curious thing is someone, I guess I read it or something at some point in my life where you--where it's difficult to recall in detail and recollect really awful experiences, more difficult than it is ones that were pleasant.  And I--but, but I think I recall both.  I recall the first time I tried to have a girlfriend and this is outside the nucleus world, right, and I became aware of the fact that my home was awful, physically, and that the smells were terribly good because of the bathroom.  And that the floor was, was threadbare and the, the sofas, you know, and the--and, and, and the--and the--and, and becoming embarrassed about having this girl that I wanted to be my girlfriend come to my house.  I remember that physically and how painful that was.  I remember--but I can't visualize it, I remember the, the--my elementary school [Fulton Elementary School, Springfield, Ohio] and not wanting to go into the basement where the--where the toilets were because of the stench and filth and--that was there.  And, and on occasion peeing my pants and being beaten by my teacher with a--with a paddle for having done that because I couldn't go into the basement to the--to the toilets.  I remember my father [Robert Stull] providing us with used bicycles and then stripping them down to make them look like racers and turning the handlebars upside-down, and then having neighborhood races with the other, other bicycles, like we were motorcycles.  And how a motorcycle--you put one and you turn--you put one foot down and let the foot slide as you turn.  Well, well we'd seen that in a book or something, so we all did that when we turned the corners and stuff.
Story_ID: 290246
Speaker 1: I remember my first paper route, and the day I was bitten by a rabid dog and had to have fifteen shots, rabies shots, one a day for fifteen days because I had--the paper bag was all involved with the handlebars and the--you have to roll the papers first before you--and then you throw them on the porch, and the dog came after me, and I remember putting my feet up on the handlebars and knowing that eventually I would have to bring them down, and that's when the dog would bite me, and that's what happened.  I remember things like--I remember a ride to my [maternal] uncle's [Walter (ph.)] house, the one who influenced my interest in architecture who lived in Fostoria, Ohio, and we were going there, and I was going to spend a couple weeks in the summer there with him, and I got an appendicitis attack and my appendix broke (laughter) during the ride.  And so when we got there, we went straight to the hospital instead of the house and I spent the time, the vacation time in Fostoria in the hospital instead of at my uncle's house.  I--the--things like that I remember.  I remember Johnny Lytle, the xylophonist, who, who actually came back to the homestead, as famous as he was, was a jazz musician and spent a lot of time in Europe.  He stayed in Springfield [Ohio] in the old homestead.  But, their--house was a--had a big junk yard, right.  There was all kinds of broken down cars and stuff, big junk yard, and he built a xylophone using rubber inner tubes and stuff out of this junk, right.  Years later, he and my brother [Robert Stull] opened a little--acquired a house in the old neighborhood that belonged to Mrs. Phillips [ph.], and so down--a little dirt side street off, off of Dibert Avenue and turned it into a memorabilia collection of, of kids from the neighborhood.  And so if I went in there, I would see magazine articles about me and clippings from The Boston Globe, and things from progressive architecture, buildings I did, stuff like that.  And in that--and then my brother played Jew's harp and he and, and Johnny would, would, would go in there and get drunk, and Johnny would--and Johnny's old xylophone, and Johnny would play the xylophone and my brother--blues and my brother would play the Jew's harp.  And they would sit there among all this stuff, you know, Ron Burton's [Ron Burton, Sr.] whatever, right, in this--in--amidst all of this stuff.  Because kids came from there and went out and did stuff.  One of the kids from the neighborhood became welterweight champion of the world, Davey Moore, and, and was hit in the ring and died.
Story_ID: 290247
Speaker 1: Can I come back to your [maternal] uncle for just a minute?  Could you give me your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Uncle Walter [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He was a, a brick mason.
Speaker 1: And we have a picture of him we'll look at later.  Tell me about his early influence as a brick maker, and your notions about what you became interested in.  We'll do that later, but I, I don't want to lose that now either (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I--he, he--I worked with him in the summers and, and developed an interest in the way--the way buildings got built.  He built his own house in Fostoria [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Would you spell, is it (unclear) or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: F-O-R-S-T-O-R-I-A [sic].
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Fostoria, Ohio.  And right after he--he married--he married a Davis [ph.] right after he married, and they were--they were a beautiful couple, beautiful couple.  And they would--they would tell us, the, the youngsters, they were--they were open with us.  They would tell us about the birds and the bees and the things to do and not to do and this kind of stuff, so they were our favorite--they were my favorite aunt and uncle.  And, and I would work with them, like a hod carrier on, on these little construction sites, so I developed an interest in, in the way buildings are built, right.  And that was the beginning of the seed because I--at--almost simultaneously was developing an interest in art, though I didn't know what that was.  I knew that I, I was constantly sketching.
Speaker 1: How old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: In my early teens (cough), junior high school.
Story_ID: 290248
Speaker 1: I was always sketching.  I watch my son [HistoryMaker Robert Stull], who is a well-known comic book artist now, but I was always sketching from comic books and doing carvings and stuff.  So, those were the two interests that began to, for some reason, form.  The reason in the case of construction was my [maternal] uncle [Walter (ph.)].  And in fact, later then in life as I was finishing high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], my primary intent was to be an artist, and I and my future brother-in-law applied for scholarships to the--for a scholarship at the Columbus school, [Columbus] Art School [Columbus College of Art and Design, Columbus, Ohio].  He won the scholarship and I didn't.  And about that time--and, and I was reading vociferously then because of my--the [maternal] uncle [Kenneth (ph.)] who became the attorney who came to live with us.  And I happened to run across Ayn Rand and 'The Fountainhead' and all of that.  And so I said, okay, this is architecture and this is building.  So, I applied for admission into a degree granting program, undergraduate degree granting program in architecture at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] and was accepted.
Story_ID: 290249
Speaker 1: It's a very interesting story.  I was working as a janitor at a Jewish jewelry store downtown [in Springfield, Ohio] called Hart's Jewelers [Hart Jewelry Co.], and the daughter of the owner applied for [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] at the same time I did.  And when I came to--and--she failed the exams.  She--and she had a little Thunderbird, and she ran it up on the curb of--at Ohio State and they sent me to get her car for her.  In the meantime, I learned that I had passed, and I was accepted.  I had taken the entrances exams, and I'd had the interview and so on.  And so when I told him that I was leaving because I was going to Ohio State University, he said, "What makes you think you can pass the exams?"  I'll never forget it, right.  I also, several years later, in 1969, was awarded the Outstanding Alumnus Award for Ohio State University, cent- their centennial year.  And the dean [Elliot L. Whitaker] at this big affair in Mershon Auditorium [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] stood up and lied his ass off, said that he recalled my inter- interview.  I, I became at that time--it's not--no--any longer the case the most famous graduate of that school they ever had.  I went on to Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I was getting published in all the major magazines, and anyone who wanted to go to Harvard, they would have them contact me.  I got kids into Harvard.  I got them jobs and all kinds of stuff--
Story_ID: 290250
Speaker 1: Let's go back if we can to your elementary schooling.  What was your first elementary school and what was that experience like?  And then we'll get you to, to college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: It was the school I was mentioning that--with the awful basement area.  It was called Fulton Elementary School [Springfield, Ohio].  We played in the schoolyard because our house was right across the street from the school.  Now it's a storage warehouse building.  I was a very poor student.  I was a daydreamer.  I was held back two years, not allowed to advance, and both of those years, I was forced to do summer school in order to--in order to advance.  And I was a very poor student through junior high school and until my junior year in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], and I don't know what happened.  Something happened and I became a very good student.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or incidents that influenced you at that point as you moved from elementary into high school?  Were there any particular teachers that had a special--
Speaker 2: I hated the teachers that we had--that I had in elementary school.  They were--they were sort of--in, in later years, I began to think of them as how I pictured Nazis.  They were very authoritarian.  One, one was Mr. Gorrell [ph.].  Another person, a woman, was, was Mrs. Hinkle [ph.].  They would paddle you with paddles.  They--I hated them.  And I, I never liked teachers all the way through junior high school except the shop teacher in junior high school was also the football and basketball coach, and everybody played football and basketball in junior high school in the Midwest and went on into high school.  In high school--
Speaker 1: Did you play football at junior high level?
Speaker 2: Yes, football and basketball.  In high school, there were two--well, in, in the last year of elementary school--no, it was in junior high school, the principal--I had painted--kids had been selected in--from the art class to do paintings on office doors, glass office doors in the school for--depicting Christmas, and he saw the painting that I did and asked me if I would come and paint the windows in his house on the other side of the tracks (laughter), and I liked him for that.
Story_ID: 290251
Speaker 1: And then in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], there was an art teacher and a, a math teacher that I developed a real affinity with, but I was bad.  I was arrested.  I, I broke into the school a couple times with, with my gang.  I did--I was valedictorian of my class and one day while we were practicing, the police came to arrest me and my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] had to come and get me out of jail because the night--the day before Sunday, I had broken into the school and, and rummaged through some, some lockers.  But, those, those two people somehow connected me with two things that I must've had a subconscious--well, art I knew was--I had an interest.  But, suddenly, mathematics, which is something that I couldn't master at all, became a burning interest for me, and I became extremely good at it.  I was doing--I was doing college algebra in high school.  I was doing physics and trig [trigonometry] and--it--you know my work and it, it--so you know that my work is, is heavily invested in the geometries.  And there's a whole philosophical reason behind that, in addition to the gestalt, the, the perceptual psychology, which is woven into that, but the combination of how we interpret what we see, which isn't always what we're looking at, and the order that geometry brings to the chaos, the tendency towards chaos that's a human characteristic, is at the basis of my work.
Story_ID: 290252
Speaker 1: As you entered high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] and approached that junior year and mathematics gripped you, did you have a notion or thoughts then about what you wanted to be, what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I--no.  I had no ambition or belief that I would be able to attend college, but I had a, a--I had at that point--all of--all of us had developed a, a--not at a rational level.  All of this stuff is happening subconsciously.  You have to understand, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], a, a passion for learning.  I was reading stuff--I, I got kicked out of study hall one day for reading 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' [D.H. Lawrence], and I was--I--you know, I, I was sort of functioning at that level because of my [maternal] uncle [Kenneth (ph.)], who had come back from the war [World War II, WWII], had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  The only way he could live in Columbus [Ohio] was to stay with us, so he and my brother [Robert Stull] and I shared a bedroom, and he would talk to us about [William] Shakespeare.  I can--I can quote most of--most of--fifty percent of every play Shakespeare ever wrote, and all the romantic poets, right.  And so he, he, just by talking to us at night and stuff got it--caused us to develop--he--it was--it was--he, he was provocative without even--without trying to be, right.  And so he, he provoked in us an interest to read.
Story_ID: 290485
Speaker 1: Let's continue with summarizing the clicking of the turning point for you in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] and how things changed for you.  Let's maybe repeat a little of that, but let's get through high school and--
Speaker 2: Now, I, I related that to two, two teachers and--but mostly to relationship that existed with our uncle [Kenneth (ph.)] who was the youngest sibling on my mother's [Ruth Callahan Branson] side, who had gone away to the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and come back with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and was the first in our large, large and extended family to attend college.  By then, we had moved from Springfield [Ohio] to Columbus, Ohio, and lived on--the east side in a very modest kind of situation.  And my uncle enrolled at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] and was studying law and, and given the economic situations that existed, he stayed with us and he and my brother [Robert Stull] and I shared a room.  And he was the inspiration, not in any direct way, but indirectly because he provoked us by, by virtue of just being there and talking and asking us to read things and so on to develop interest in reading, interest in, in learning and so on, and that--that's the trigger.
Story_ID: 290486
Speaker 1: We all came in later years to, to recognize that as the--as the trigger that--because, as I said, I was--I had a gang.  I was a bad guy and all that kind of stuff, but--once that trigger happened, I became a very good student, but I, I didn't fall out of favor with the bad guys.  They started--I mentioned they started referring to me as the professor, and so on.  And I--went on to become valedictorian of the graduating class [at East High School, Columbus, Ohio] and was arrested during practice, as I indicated on the stage.  The cops came right up on the stage and arrested me because I had broken into the school the night--the, the Sunday, the day before and--ransacked some lockers.  So--but, that was the beginning of it and--
Speaker 2: What did your mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] say about that?  What did she do?
Speaker 1: She wanted to keep it a secret from our stepfather [George Branson].  That was her primary concern, right.  She fussed, you know, and, and, and did all the ranting and raving and, and so on.  And she said things like she always said.  I can hear her now:  "Donald [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], I don't understand why you do these things.  Basically, you're a good boy," (laughter).  "I don't--what got the devil into you?"  And, and that kind of thing.  And--but that, that was the bridge and--in terms of learning, we never looked back, never looked back.  I can remember him--I--one of my favorite poems, poets--I developed an interest back then, you know, as a bad guy in high school, Edgar Allan Poe who, of course, was here in--Boston [Massachusetts]:  "Once upon a midnight dreary as I pondered weak and weary,"--the--you know, 'The Raven.'  So, that--was sort of the beginning of the trip.
Story_ID: 290487
Speaker 1: Don Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull] enters [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio].  The year?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].  Fifty-six [1956], yeah. Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Tell us briefly, about four years at Ohio State?  And what--
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five years?  And what was that experience like?  How do you remember it?  And what did you major in?
Speaker 2: The--most state schools back then had a program that enabled you to enter a baccalaureate degree, a bachelor's degree, in a professional degree.  And so I, I entered into a professional degree granting program in architecture.  And I had mentioned before some of the issues regarding the, the application and acceptance and so on.  The experience was a very interesting one.  I was a--I was a, a very good student and, and really excelled.  And I think that surprised the school.  And so I became like, like their prize, one of their prizes.  The--when I couldn't get work in architectural offices even in--with the state architect or the school architect's office on campus, the school made me a, a, a TA assistant in architectural history, and I met Perry Borcher, who was the architectural historian and, and had a major influence on my life.
Speaker 1: Would you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: Borcher, B-O-R-C-H-E-R, Borcher.  Perry was American.  He was born in Arizona.  He married a Danish woman and was an architectural historian who spent a good deal of his time outside this country and incredibly bright, and I became his teaching assistant.  And as part of that experience, I collated his slide collection of world--of architecture from around the world, and the learning experience in doing that was absolutely astounding.
Story_ID: 290488
Speaker 1: Sometime in that process, a person named Rich Miller [Richard A. Miller], who was associate editor at Architectural Forum in New York, came to [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] as a visiting professor, and he put together a special project in our senior year to--urban design was just becoming a discipline.  Dean [Josep] Lluis Sert, the Spanish architect who came to Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from Spain, he was a disciple of Le Corbusier, was the--introduced the first academic program in urban design in this country, though he often said, it, it doesn't matter what you call it, everything is architecture.  The--but, but, Rich Miller brought the concept of urban design to Ohio State University in this special program, and it was to take a look at an old section of center city called Germantown [German Village, Columbus, Ohio], which had these quaint little buildings and they--and little houses and so on.  And it subsequently became famous.  It became a major school project.  I was one of the members in the--in the team that went into Germantown and analyzed it using cues division, drawn directly from gestalt psychology, which I mentioned before is one of the bases for the way I think and work.  So, when you--what, what you do is you, you look to understand the generic characteristics of the thing visually and--before the gingerbread and the--or--and--that--that's what any given period of architecture has a underlying generic skeleton, or structure, that defines it in that period in time, whether it's Victorian or art deco or whatever.  And we developed what we called a series of cues division.  For example, you can look at the John, John Hancock [Tower, Boston, Massachusetts] building under certain light situations, you, you don't see it, something happens called--there's a cue division, something happens called environmental fusion.  And so the glass planes of the wall--of the wall, they blend with the sky units.  So, so we developed--so then Perry [Borcher] in the architectural history department had me analyze some of the world's most outstanding architecture using the cues division that we had developed.  So, the Parthenon [Athens, Greece], analyzed the Parthenon, relative to things like continuation of edge and environmental fusion, and so on.  So, we took a section of his slide collection that he used for teaching and set up a subdivision within it that had to do with that.  And that was my beginning.  We won a fellowship from the Bruner Foundation in New York City [New York, New York] to do additional research in perceptual psychology, and that's what developed these cues division.
Story_ID: 290489
Speaker 1: Germantown [German Village, Columbus, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mentioned cues division.  Could you spell that, cues, for me so--
Speaker 1: C-U-E-S, cues.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: German Village went on to become internationally famous.  It--the--something called the German Village Society [Columbus, Ohio], which existed in the area, these were families that were basically involved with the brewery industry.  The German Village Society was given legislative status and became German Village Commission.  The design guidelines that we developed were refined by the city and state planning agencies, and became criteria governing any new development or renovations in the area.  It became a model for three other areas in the city.  One became Victorian Village [Columbus, Ohio], another became--and, and Rich Miller [Richard A. Miller] said to me, because I couldn't get a job there, he said, "Go east.  I will sponsor you.  Apply to all of the schools in the East that you are interested in," right.  I applied to Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts], MIT [School of Architecture and Planning, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Pennsylvania [School of Design at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I wanted to go to Pennsylvania because I wanted to study under [Louis] Kahn.  I was accepted at all three schools, but Harvard is the one that gave me a scholarship, so that's why I came here.
Story_ID: 290490
Speaker 1: Coming back to the experience at the school, I don't know if you know very much about architecture, but architecture, traditionally, was a wealthy white gentleman's profession.  Princes and counts, and people became architecture--traditionally and historically, became architects, and it was not a profession that was viewed to be--have a necessity for supporting a livelihood.  And generally, there was a benefactor like the Medicis or the, the--or the pope, or whatever, for Michelangelo and, and other, other famous architects, prominent architects at the time.  As a result of that, when I became a registered architect in 1966 just to open my own practice, there were fewer than twelve registered African American architects in this entire country.  Can you imagine that?  And I knew all of them.  The two that were practicing, Fry and Welch [Louis E. Fry, Sr. and John Welch], in Washington, D.C., supported their practices because they were--one was dean and the other was on the faculty of school of architecture at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], right.  So, I found myself--my whole world changed because I became totally immersed in architecture, and everything in that world was white.  The only thing black in the School of Architecture [and Landscape Architecture; Austin E. Knowlton School of Architecture, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] was me and a--and a--and a janitor called Will [ph.], and that guy was so proud of me.  He'd been a janitor there probably all--his whole life, and he and I used to, to stand outside the back door outside the basement smoking cigarettes and talking, right.  He was so--you know, and I get teary when I think about it.
Story_ID: 290491
Speaker 1: I became a prize for them because here--of--so, all these years later, I get the outstanding alumni award [Outstanding Alumnus Award], [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], centennial year, big medal, right.  So, I go to the awards.  Now, this is--this is during the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].  I'm a--I'm caught up in the--in the--in the movement, right.  I'm commuting to Yale [School of Architecture, New Haven, Connecticut] to advise The Black Students Workshop [sic. The Black Workshop].  That's when I got to know Kingman Brewster [Jr.], and we became very good friends, and he offered me the deanship.  I'm wearing army fatigue jackets and, you know, full face (unclear) beard trying to--taking a bunch of students to, to San Francisco [California] and trying to occupy Alcatraz Island when he--because they--tried to get on there with the Indians [Native Americans] who have occupied it, picketing the Embarcadero's Expressway [Embarcadero Expressway; Embarcadero Freeway], you know, telling Yale that the architectural program they have wasn't--isn't relevant because, you know, it's all about white cathedrals and not the way people live, and so on.  So, I, I--and that weekend, I flew from here [Boston, Massachusetts] to Miami [Florida].  I was a member of a group in Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida] called Black Grove, Inc.  That's a whole other long story.  I flew from there to give a lecture at, at Rice [University School of Architecture, Houston, Texas], two places where the upper level was dropping because of overdevelopment and evaporation of water and the west portion of the Okefenokee [Swamp] was drying up, and then flew over to change flights in New York, New Jersey, and you see all these chemical wastes and stuff, so I was in a really shitty mood.  Because I came from, from Houston [Texas] to Boston [Massachusetts] and grabbed a tuxedo from a rental place in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and headed back out to Ohio to do--to do the thing.  And then I came back here because I became one of the ten outstanding young men in Boston award a week later.
Story_ID: 290492
Speaker 1: So, I'm there [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and the dean gets up and starts talking about how he encouraged me when I came for my first interview.  The, the guy tried to convince me that I shouldn't consider architecture.  He said, "Architecture is not a place for black people, for--Negroes.  You have to have contacts," he said, "It's about country clubs and stuff."  And he said--he said, you know, things like that.  He said, you know, ask me--so, he literally said, "Maybe you should consider law or, or mortuary or something," right, literally.  So, he gets up on stage and he says this stuff.  So, when I get up to receive the award [Outstanding Alumnus Award], I told everyone in the auditorium that I was angry, and I started by quoting from Blind Gary Davis [Reverend Gary Davis], the Harlem [New York, New York] street singer, 'Samson [and Delilah],' the song 'Samson.'  "If I could have my way, I'd tear the temple down," right.  And that's the way I did that.  And then Perry [Borcher] was the--and his wife were assigned to me as my chaperones at, at the affair and afterwards.  The dean was having an affair for me at his house out in the suburbs.  All my--all my former students and all these people were coming.  Perry and his wife and I went to the faculty club and got drunk.  We got to the party late.  Cars were everywhere, so parked way at the end of the street, walking down the street singing and so on.  We come into the house and Dean [Elliot L.] Whitaker pulled me into his den, and he was just crying, right, just apologizing, and crying and so on.  That thing I did at that award ceremony was one of the most awful inhuman things I've ever done, ever.  I'll regret it forever, right.  That man did a wrong thing for the right reason, right.  Later, we patched it up.  When he was in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], he--Second World War--he was designing instrument panels for aircraft, and he spent some time in Boston [Massachusetts], and he had photographed Scollay Square from the top of the Custom House Tower [Boston, Massachusetts].  Then after Scollay Square was torn down and the Government Center [Boston, Massachusetts] plan was done, he wanted to have photographs of that from the same location so he could compare them.  And for the first time since that affair, he called me and asked me if I would take those photographs for him, and the injury was healed.  Very interesting.
Story_ID: 290493
Speaker 1: Harvard University School of Design [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that was a year program, was it?  Two years?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: One, two?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I finished it in a year for, for the master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then continued--Harvard at the--the school--Graduate School of Design was going through a transition.  It became one of the world's leading schools of architecture as a result of a fallout from Nazi Germany when [Walter] Gropius, who was founder of the Bauhaus [Staatliches Bauhaus, Germany], had to leave Germany and he brought a number of the members of the Bauhaus with him.  And as you--as you probably know, the Bauhaus grew out of the notion, or concept, that the Industrial Revolution could, through manufacturing techniques, produce economically high levels of quality in furnishings and in buildings that--and the international style came out of that.  So that a Queen Anne sofa, which in today's dollars might cost fifteen thousand dollars to create, could be created out of bent tubes of metal and stuffed leather for a fraction of that price but a high level of quality and design.  And so that's how the international school and the Bauhaus and my house is full of--I mean, that, that was designed in 1839, right by Le Corbusier.  This chair was a [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe chair, and was designed for the Barcelona Pavilion [Barcelona, Spain] in 1942.  So, [Walter] Gropius came here.  He brought a lot of his people with him and he became dean at the school.  In the meantime, Dean [Josep Lluis] Sert, at the time Gropius created The Architects' Collaborative [TAC], one of the most successful and largest architectural firms in the world out of Cambridge [Massachusetts], and became more and more involved with that practice, Sert--Josep Lluis Sert was attracted, sought by Harvard and came here, took the--took the deanship, and he was a disciple of Le Corbusier, so this clash was happening at the school when I--when I came there.  And it was an incredibly interesting time because the level of intellectual discourse regarding architecture was at an all-time high.  It was absolutely un- you could cut it with a knife.  It was an amazing time to be there, and that's when I showed up.
Story_ID: 290494
Speaker 1: What happened after you received your master's [degree] from Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  Where did--what happened next?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Well, the--just, just before going there, when I--dry throat thing--when I graduated from Harvard, my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson] and my youngest sister [Gladys Stull], the one who died, and my stepfather [George Branson] came to Boston [Massachusetts] for the graduation.  Two of my fellow students allowed me access to their charge accounts at [Fred] Stone Reprographics, and some other places around the Square [Harvard Square, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so that I could acquire the materials I needed because I didn't have enough money to do my master's final project.  My former wife was working as an assistant to the dean at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard found her that job.  Harvard--when I kept asking them to give me information before I came here about my scholarship.  They just said, "You're accepted, and you have a scholarship," and all summer long I was calling and so on.  And finally, the woman on the phone said, "Look, Harvard has accepted you.  That's all you need.  Don't worry about it.  Whatever you need to be here, they will do that," right, and they did.  They finally did that.  And I told you I lived in the place where [HistoryMaker] Hubie [Jones] lived for, for a time.  So, when I got my cap and gown, the, the--for the robing, the (unclear) was extra, so I decided not to--not to pay for it, right.  And my sister found out about that and went to the Harvard Coop [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and got one for me.  Now, these are people from the Midwest.  My mother was accustomed to making her clothes.  She'd get a J.C. Penney pattern, and if it was going to be a special affair of some kind, she'd go to buy cloth and she would make what was considered to really be nice, right.  If it took someone who grew up in that environment and was living in this environment to immediately see how awful those clothes were in this environment, right, my mother had made her clothes, which was an enormous honor to me for my graduation, gloves, a hat, the whole--the whole nine yards.  And when she dressed, I knew it was an embarrassment.  What do you do?  What do you say?  Because those who--the, the context within which it was embarrassing was wrong, not her, right.  Dean [Josep Lluis] Sert was an old world gentleman of the highest order.  We showed up in the yard for graduation.  He took one look at the situation, put my mother on his--sorry--on his arm and chaperoned her for the entire affair, the right thing for the right reason.
Story_ID: 290495
Speaker 1: Graduation [from Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts], family here, what happened next?
Speaker 2: Went to work for TAC (laughter)--
Speaker 1: For what?
Speaker 2: The Architects' Collaborative [Cambridge, Massachusetts], [Walter] Gropius--Gropius' firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worked under--
Speaker 1: That was in Cambridge [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In Cambridge.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Harvard Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: How do you spell Gropius?  I want to get that for the record.
Speaker 2: G-R-O-P-I-U-S.
Speaker 1: Thanks.
Speaker 2: Walter Gropius, founder of the Bauhaus [Staatliches Bauhaus, Germany].  He created The Architects' Collaborative and the majority of the faculty members at the design school were, were the creators or the partners of The Architects' Collaborative.  It grew, it's--it was disbanded several years ago, but it grew to be one of the largest and most successful and most prominent architectural firms in the world.  It did the University at Baghdad [Baghdad, Iraq].  I mean, it was just an enormous success.  I worked there under Gropius on the JFK office building [John F. Kennedy Federal Building, Boston, Massachusetts] downtown.  I was one of the designers.  I had worked the summer before school with a Jewish architect in Copley Square [Boston, Massachusetts] named Sam Glaser.  It was sort of like a--known as a sweatshop.  Sam was able politically to get built into a joint venture with Gropius to do the federal office building downtown in the new Government Center [Boston, Massachusetts], the JFK building, and he liked me.  He understood a lot of things, being Jewish.  He went to Gropius and wired a position for me in that joint venture working under Gropius.
Story_ID: 290496
Speaker 1: It was a very exciting time to work for Walter Gropius, to work for The Architects' Collaborative [Cambridge, Massachusetts] under Walter Gropius, was--people would have killed for that, and there it was, right.  And it's like Rich Miller [Richard A. Miller] said when he said, "Go east, and I will help you."  He introduced me to [Sam] Glaser, he introduced me to [Hugh] Stubbins.  He made it possible for me to get that summer job.  He came here right after school started because he was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate going all the way back to undergraduate school, wealthy kid, and he was back at Architectural Forum in New York City [New York, New York] and, and, and started building one of the largest medical facility design firms in the city, and had a little red sports car.  He came up that summer before my family joined me here [Boston, Massachusetts], took me to dinner at Betty Crocker's house--that was her stage name--in Lexington [Massachusetts]--who was a friend of his family and his mother and father, right.  And all of this stuff is strange to me, weird to me.  I'm thinking, I'm in the wrong place.  I should go back home.  I'm living in Marvin Gilmore [Jr.]'s mother's house that summer, right.  She's leaving food for me on--outside the door when I come home at night, and I'm sitting out on the roof drinking Chianti with, with a kid who was going for the--his summer job is translating Russian technical writing at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right.  And I'm thinking, Jesus, what--you know (laughter), anyway, here I am, working for Gropius, right, under a guy named Roland Kluver who later, his daughters babysat our kid and it's a whole different world, you know?  The, the world--there--there's--it--it's still a white world, but I'm not--I'm not black anymore, right.  No one is looking at me and dealing with me in those terms, right.  I didn't know where Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was, right.  I, I had no involvement whatsoever with the black community in Boston [Massachusetts], right.  It never even occurred to me, right, and I hadn't had that involvement except near my family since I entered the School of Architecture [and Landscape Architecture; Austin E. Knowlton School of Architecture, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] because I entered that world I was talking about, right.  And I'm hanging out in coffee shops listening to Joan Baez, who was a friend of Roland's family, you know, and all, all this kind of stuff.  And it was--it was just a, a whole other--a whole other place.
Story_ID: 290497
Speaker 1: Then, I came back to [Sam] Glaser and then I--designed for Glaser, I designed Castle Square [Tenants Organization] in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and I made presentations before the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority; Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)] and the [Boston] City Council.  Those presentations were seen by Ed Logue [Edward J. Logue] and other key people in the city, and they, they singled me out.  Ed Logue became one of my best friends, and he became like a mentor for me.  When he went to New York to head up the state commission [Urban Development Corporation] under [Governor Nelson] Rockefeller, he took me with him.  And I got two major projects, one in Brooklyn [New York], which later was sold to, to Jackie Robinson's widow [Rachel Robinson], and, and one in--the Bronx [New York], right.  And so those, those were the kinds of times, but in that process, I built a firm, and it was all white.  And I, I had no African American or people of color in my firm, but I started becoming aware of that and attempting to, to find people, and there weren't any.  It wasn't a matter of non-aggressive--all, all--had my firm stayed that way, I would've grown to be another I.M. Pei, I'm certain, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just for the timeline, what your describing now, this was the--
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 2: --early to mid-'60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The time--
Speaker 1: Six--
Speaker 2: --timeline?
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  I had a firm--I had an office here in my house.  I had another office diagonally across the street on the entire first floor of the building in the corner there, and I had a branch office in a warehouse building that I shared with two art galleries because super art was vogue, over by the Museum [of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], on 470 Parker.  You may remember that at that diagonal sign painted across the front wall of the building in super graphics that said 470 Parker.  And we shared that space with two art galleries showing large scale sculpture and big salt shakers and all that kind of stuff.  I had clients then like Sonesta Hotels [Hotel Corporation of America; Sonesta International Hotels Corporation], IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], right.  And then I rediscovered who I am, right, and I got black again.
Story_ID: 290498
Speaker 1: And one by one, I had five senior associates.  We were negotiating partnerships--partnership.  We were having--we were meeting once a week at the Harvard Club [of Boston] over on Commonwealth Avenue [Boston, Massachusetts].  I hired [M.] David [Lee], who came here from Chicago [Illinois] for graduate work, wanted to work in this office.  I hired him, and I started moving him up.
Speaker 2: David's last name?
Speaker 1: David Lee.
Speaker 2: Lee?
Speaker 1: My current partner [at Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts].  And I started moving him up.  And at one point, my senior associates got together and said--presented an agenda at one of our meetings at the Harvard Club challenging my doing that with a whole list of reasons, experience, and they were right, longevity with the firm, they were right.  They were right in all of them, right.  But, they were doing the wrong thing for the right reasons, right.  And I sat down and wrote a response to each of them, when they were hired and the level of experience they had, right.  And, and one by one, they left the firm.  One by one, they left the firm.  And that's when we started working in Highland Park [Boston, Massachusetts], did a master plan for Highland Park.  That's when I met Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] and those guys and started--and, and then I became--I became their person because they didn't have anyone like me, right.  Our community was still buying zebra-skinned sofas out of cheap furniture stores in Dudley [Square] Station [Boston, Massachusetts], and I was telling them, "Stop doing that.  You don't have to do that anymore," right.  So, I, I, I became--their gunslinger.  I became their, their mouthpiece.  I became their many things.  And because of the other part of it that had taken me into downtown first and into the cultural world of the city first, right, we had the best of all worlds, and at the same time, I started getting involved with the--with the uprising, with (laughter)--I was contacted simultaneously by a community called Newhallville in New Haven [Connecticut].
Speaker 2: What was it called again?
Speaker 1: Newhallville.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: Newhallville, N-E-W-H-A-L-L-V-I-L-L-E.  They had activated for a new elementary school.  The city picked the architect and said, "Here's your architect."  They said, "Fuck you.  That's not our architect.  We want to pick our own architect."  They'd heard about me.  I wasn't involved in New Haven or at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] at the time, so they came up to Boston [Massachusetts] to talk with me in my office downstairs.
Story_ID: 290499
Speaker 1: In the meantime, Kingman [Brewster, Jr.], really, really smart guy, went to the AIA [American Institute of Architects] and said, "I need a black architect," right.  [Charles H.] Taylor, of The [Boston] Globe family, was provost at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] at the time, right, and they found out that I was up here and I'm certain they found out about Max [Abramovitz] in New York City [New York, New York] as well.  So, next thing I know, Taylor without calling or anything, right, just walks into my office one day, right, and says, are, "Are you interested in going to school in New Haven [Connecticut]?"  I said, "Who are you?"  He said, "I'm provost to Yale."  I said, "Building at Yale?"  And he said, "No, public school," right, because the people who were heading the school department had that relationship.  And then the next thing I know, I've got three people from the school department in Boston [Massachusetts] talking with me about doing the school.  They didn't know--one didn't know the other was doing it.  And I didn't tell them, right.  So, I got the designation to do this school, which later became--renamed the Jackie Robinson Middle School [New Haven, Connecticut].  I did two schools that year.  That went in the Blackstone School [Blackstone Innovation School] in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts].  Both were selected by United States State Department [U.S. Department of State] as a result of recommendations of the--of the Educational Facilities Lab [Educational Facilities Laboratories] at Ford Foundation [New York, New York], and became part of a USA traveling exhibit of schools that opened in, in, in Moscow [Soviet Union; Moscow, Russia] and traveled through Europe.  And that, that was sort of the beginning of my involvement with Yale because then the black, black students did an uprising and they tried to burn the building down, the Paul Rudolph School of Architecture [Yale Art and Architecture Building (A&A); Paul Rudolph Hall, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and the school made it possible for them to set up in what was a pen shop across the, the street from the campus and set up what was called The Black Students Workshop [sic. The Black Workshop], and I was then contacted again by Taylor to ask if I would come there and become an advisor for them.  I went back to the Educational Facilities Lab and got a, a special program funded for that--for that group and became their advisor.  And in that process, Kingman appointed me to several committees at the school and the [William] Henry Bishop [Visiting Professorship] chair at the school, and I began sitting in on some very, very interesting deliberations and, and major dinner parties at his house with visiting dignitaries from around the world.  It was an amazing--an amazing experience.
Story_ID: 290500
Speaker 1: The modern Civil Rights Movement really came to Boston [Massachusetts] in the mid-'60s [1960s] with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] being here twice, '64 [1964], '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: The march down Boylston [Street] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had the boy--We had the school boycotts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We had, with King's assassination, of course, tremendous turmoil in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] at Blue Hill Avenue.  We had the Racial Imbalance Law [Racial Imbalance Act of 1965] that was passed, so we really had a civil rights, things going on here in Boston, and you're here.  How did all that affect your emerging, blossoming architectural work in the city?  I mean, civil rights, where were you in all that?  How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: It, it was a very deciding factor.  When I left [Sam] Glaser after coming there, back there from TAC [The Architects' Collaborative, Boston, Massachusetts] and I did Castle Square [Tenants Organization, Boston, Massachusetts] and all of that, and, and I made those presentations and I started being recognized, a developer named Jim Lenihan [ph.] had created a company called the Development Corporation of America.  He had been in New Haven [Connecticut] with Ed Logue [Edward J. Logue].  Ed Logue came here to head up the [Boston] Redevelopment Authority [(BRA); Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)].  Jim Lenihan came here also with his development corporation.  He was a Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] graduate.  He--an attorney on his staff saw a presentation that I made to the BRA and talked with Lenihan--no, Lenihan saw it and spoke with this attorney and, and sent this attorney to talk with me as an emissary for his company and gave me the opportunity to create an in-house architectural firm for Development Corporation of America.  I saw that as something similar to what I.M. Pei had done with [William] Zeckendorf in New York City [New York, New York] because Pei started by creating an office within Zeckendorf's development company [Webb and Knapp], and that's when he did Kips Bay [Towers, New York, New York] and, and those early buildings in, in New York City on the West Side--on the East Side.  So, I did that.  I went from a salary of $7,500 a year to $14,000 a year--double.  It was un- you know, I couldn't believe it, right.  And I set up this office for Jim.  And, and Jim and, and Jerry [ph.], whatever, two young guys--they were--they were Kennedy friends.  You know, they drove the Lincoln Continentals and they were part of that whole, whole group.
Story_ID: 290501
Speaker 1: I wasn't registered.  I did not have an architectural registration.  I was using the registration of a friend who was on the faculty at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], right.  So, I decided I needed to take the registration exams that year.  They bet me--we had a--my office was a little two-room situation on the mezzanine of the Old South Building on 294 Washington Street, but there was also an entrance on Milk Street [Boston, Massachusetts], so I used the Milk Street address because it was fancier.  It had DC current [direct current].  I had to use a transformer to operate my one IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] electric typewriter, right, but I had an office, and I wasn't registered.  At the time, one of the projects I did for them was the Sears' Crescent in Government Center [Boston, Massachusetts], the oldest building left in--standing in--
Speaker 2: Which building again?
Speaker 1: The Sears' Crescent, the oldest building left standing in the Government Center.  As you face [Boston] City Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], it's the building on the right where Cornhill street used to be.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: During the construction of that building, the fourth floor of the center bay sheared off, and it fell, knocking down all the floors in this intersection into the basement, and I was practicing architecture without a license (laughter), right, and without insurance or anything else.  In any event, they--these, these young, you know, hot shot guys, (unclear) guys bet me that I couldn't pass the architectural registration exams, take--for the--taking them just one time.  The average was three times.  And they bet me the office.  And I didn't know I, I had won--I, I had passed.  I was in the office--let's call it--like I said before, all I did then was work.  I was in the office working, and I got a call from [Jim] Lenihan [ph.], who had stayed up in--on the North Shore [Massachusetts], and he was a polo pony rider and all that stuff, but he also had a in-house apartment at the--at, at the West End [Boston, Massachusetts], called and, and said they were having a meeting in the coffee shop over at the West End in, in this--in the complex that Jim lived and that they, they really needed me to, to, to come to the meeting.  So, I dropped everything and ran over to the meeting.  And it was a surprise for me.  They had read in The [Boston] Globe that morning that I had passed the exam, right, so they gave me the key to--so that's how--that company was called Design and Planning Associate [ph.], and at that point, it became my firm and it became Stull Associates [Inc.], SAI [Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts].  Every--remember back then, it was SAI, S-A-I, and that was the beginning of my firm--
Story_ID: 290502
Speaker 1: I brought it [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc.] here to Marlborough Street [Boston, Massachusetts] from there [Old South Building, Boston, Massachusetts], and that's when I started building it and then the thing happened with the associates and I ended up very much involved.  Part of what happened, I was continuing to work primarily for DCA [Development Corporation of America], and then Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, and I developed a real emotional problem with everybody I was working with.  And, I mean, these guys have been--I did the wrong things for the right reasons.  These guys had, had made it possible, had enabled me to do all kinds of things.  They had enabled me to compete with some of the best architects in Cambridge [Massachusetts] for housing projects and win, right.  They had made it possible for me to have my own office, right.  And when Martin Luther King was killed, I hated them.  And they used to try to tell me, "Don [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], you know, we didn't do this."  You know, "Let's deal with this," right.  But, that's when it started and that's when I left down there.  I bought this building, I left down there, brought the office here, and bit by bit, we stopped working for them.  And that's when I got involved with the movement.  That's when I rediscovered--Martin's death caused me to rediscover my own blackness.  That's when it started happening.  And that's when, I think the germ of the idea of there being--of, of, of their being--of being in blackness, which is the--that paper ['The Being in Blackness'] I told you I, I--for the keynote I gave [at DesigNation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I think that's when the seed for that got planted, that there is in fact a being beyond professionalism, beyond that which is book learned, in being black, that if it can be identified and focused in the right kind of way will make what you do unique, uniquely yours and uniquely a result of the experience that you represent via your ancestral developer--
Story_ID: 290503
Speaker 1: You worked with, and are still working with, public agencies, community groups, tenant organizations around designing public housing, educational facilities, highway infrastructure, correctional facilities, office and retail space.  Tell me about some of those early major projects in any one of those genres, housing, education.  What kind of stands out in your mind?
Speaker 2: State of mind?  Is that what you said?
Speaker 1: No, what stands out in your mind in terms of those early major projects?  What were the ones that you--
Speaker 2: In terms of housing, we [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] did a lot of it.  We became sort of Kahlil Gibran type forerunners in housing in a lot of ways--in, in, let's say, three ways in particular.  One way was that we began representing developer and developer types that, prior to that time, did not have opportunities to develop anything, and so we became champions of the rights of users to participate in the--in the process that resulted in the design of things that influenced their lives.  We developed ways to--we, we developed special programs in community planning, in user accessibility and participation, handbooks.  We took resident groups to field trips like to Montreal World's Fair [1967 International and Universal Exposition (Expo 67), Montreal, Canada] to see Habitat [67], and, and we pioneered a lot of the principles in community planning that are presently being used nationwide by architectural and planning firms.  The Tenants' Development Corporation in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] was the first tenants group ever to be officially designated and recognized by FHA [Federal Housing Administration], the forerunner of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], as, as qualified to be their own housing developer.  And Ed Logue [Edward J. Logue] made a commitment to give them a hundred buildings in the South End to develop, right.  We had a lot to do with that, right.  We provided--when I said our people started--had a situation where they could then use us, right.  They never would've gotten the designation if it hadn't been for us.  We--gave them a legitimacy, right, because we were in both worlds.  In prefabricated and component hou- building design, we were pioneers in the development of precast building systems, working with San-Vel Development Corporation [sic. San-Vel Concrete Corporation] out of Littleton, Mass [Littleton, Massachusetts], long span, concrete, extruded planks on concrete-bearing walls.
Story_ID: 290504
Speaker 1: We [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] developed the infill housing system that was exported to Baltimore [Maryland], to, to Brooklyn [New York].  We were--we were involved with a group that would--attempted to build a plant in the Brooklyn Navy Yard [U.S. Navy Yard, New York, New York], and to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We, we developed that system, which had some very interesting ways to expand and contract opinion on the infill sites.  So, innovation in technology, the, the enabling of, of rights and opportunities for those who live in housing, not just those who build it for them, and the process by which just by doing, we taught.  Just by doing, we taught, right, and didn't even know we were teaching.  I remember when I got the--when I--when I received the, the American Institute of Architects Honor Award one year.  [HistoryMaker] Byron Rushing spoke.  And one of the things he said was that--he said, "Don Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull] has been greater than he knew he was because of all"--and basically what he was saying was because of the things that happened that he--that he wasn't trying to make happen, simply by virtue of his doing the things he did, right.  And I--I'll never forget that because--well, so that, that was that.  The other thing were, were the schools.
Story_ID: 290505
Speaker 1: The Blackstone School [Blackstone Innovation School] in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and the Jackie Robinson [Middle] School in New Haven [Connecticut].  The school in the South End, we [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] were--we, we became attracted--attractive to a citizen's group in Chinatown [Boston, Massachusetts] that was fighting Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts].  So, they said, "We"--Tufts was expanding, so they said, "We need someone who will represent us," right.  These Chinese folks, right, called the Oak Street citizens, whatever, right.  And they came and got me, right.  And that's when I met Hermann [H.] Field, who was director of planning at Tufts.  We became very good friends and so on.  So, they, they were going to do a school, the city was going to do a school there, and I was sort of their ombudsman.  So, they said, "You don't do a school here unless Don Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull] designs the school."  The city, because of some political and funding, federal funding issues, felt as though they needed a high profile architect, right.  So, they hired Dean [Josep Lluis] Sert, right, my old dean [at Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  When, when the dean found out that, that he had been hired over me, he resigned.  This is the guy who chaperoned my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson].  He never allowed a situation that would permit me to thank him for doing that, right.  So, now the city is without an architect.  They say, "I guess, maybe we need to talk with Don Stull."  So, they come to talk with me and they say, "We'll make a"--a guy--a guy--[Robert T.] Kenney was, was a developer at the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority; Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)] at the time.  He had asked me to come up to his office and he had a map on the wall with red pins in it, all the new schools that we're going to do.  He said, basically, "Don, here's my problem," right.  I've always believed in trying to understand the other guy's problem, right.  "Here's my problem.  If you can help me solve the problem--this problem," he said, "this school's not going to go anyplace, the way"--
Speaker 2: Finish.
Speaker 1: --"the way Oak Street is trying to take it.  But, if you can help me solve my problem, the next red pin is yours."
Story_ID: 290274
Speaker 1: Don [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], would you continue with the work with the schools?  And you were talking about Blackstone [School; Blackstone Innovation School, Boston, Massachusetts] and the opportunities--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And [Robert T.] Kenney was then the director of the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority; Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)] and then making these designations.  Basically, he said, "If you can help us resolve this, the next--the next school that we have to do is yours, but this can't be your school.  And so--and, what do you--what do you think?"  And I said, "I think that if you hire The Architects' Collaborative [(TAC), Cambridge, Massachusetts], you designate them, and if you designate the people I suggest within the Collaborative as the principal for the project and the chief designer," which was Alex Cvijanovic, who was one of the partners, and Martin Surkov [ph.], whom I had worked with because they were kindred spirits.  They believed in, in community planning.  They believed in, in the process by which users participate in determining what the thing is they're going to use.  "Then, I will advise the Oak Street community group to, to proceed--on that basis."  So, I, I met with, with them.  I told them what the deal was.  I didn't try to hide it, and I recommended that they go with that arrangement.  They said, "Okay, Don, we'll do that if the city will also hire you to be the interpreter of the process for us.  So you--so, no matter what the architects throw, you trust them, are saying to us, we've got you standing there saying that's right or that's wrong or here's what I am--advising you to do."  So, we did that and the very next project was the Blackstone School.  And Kenney, true to his word, no competition, no competitive process.  "It's yours."  And, and it was the first school after the Oak Street school that was open plan, team teach, not--non-grade structured, which is also what the Blackstone School--what the Jackie Robinson [Middle] School was in, in New Haven [Connecticut].  And because they were experimental in both architecture and program, they were part of the package put together by the U.S. State Department [U.S. Department of State] for the traveling exhibit, world--Western Europe traveling exhibit, except it also went to, to Moscow, to Russia [Moscow, Soviet Union; Moscow, Russia].
Story_ID: 290275
Speaker 1: The thing that sort of got us [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] into transportation planning was the--was really the trigger, the major trigger that, that made us the, the--for, for a period of time, the--the point guard for the black community.  When the moratorium was called on the building of the extension of I-95 [Interstate 95], and a study group was going to be put together to analyze alternatives--remember Bishop [ph.]--the kid--the, the--who was one of the organizers of the opposition, he later went to work for [James] Rouse down at Columbia [Maryland] (unclear)?  Tony Pangaro [Anthony Pangaro], who now is a major developer with Millennium [Partners] out of New York [New York] for developments here in Boston [Massachusetts], had been with the BRA [Boston Redevelopment Authority; Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)].  He went with [Edward J.] Logue to New York.  He was in New York at the time, and the community turned to us because they had the opportunity to enter and to influence who would be hired as the director or manager of this special project that was to explore alternatives to the highway extension and asked for recommendations.  I immediately said, "See if you can get Pangaro back up here."  So, he was brought back, and he was found acceptable by both sides.  So, Tony became the director as a young kid (laughter), became the director of that program under Frank Sargent [Governor Francis W. Sargent].  And out of that came the alternative studies and all of that.  And we were hired as the principal architecture and urban design consultant to the engineering prime, Frederic R. Harris, to conduct those studies.
Story_ID: 290276
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that highway [Interstate 95 (I-95)] extension.  What was that--where would that extension run from and to?  What was the--
Speaker 2: I mentioned earlier that I, I took a bunch of kids out to San Francisco [California] to protest the building of the Embarcadero Expressway [Embarcadero Freeway].  We also took them up to protest the building of the air highway in Seattle [Washington] along the--along the sound [Puget Sound].  It was happening and, and it happened a lot in the Midwest and the Southwest.  What was happening was that the, the highway lobbyist was a licen- lobby was creating a license to steal among major highway building contractors.  So, the politics in this country had reached a point where it was committing to, and there was a lot of political, political advantage created for the politicians, to building infrastructure, and no commitment to maintain it, which is one of the reasons we have such a problem with a lot of our old infrastructure now, sewer systems, highways, and so on.  So, a lot of folks were making a whole bunch of money building superhighways, which is exactly what the other side of that industrial complex was interested in because they were selling cars and they were selling tires and transmissions for cars and all of that kind of stuff.  So, the highway, super highway expansion system in this nation went absolutely crazy and its res- and--it was--the--it resulted in some of the most taxing environmental tragedies that, that we could possibly have experienced, and we may never totally recover from.
Story_ID: 290277
Speaker 1: One of them was the notion that once you get to the city [Boston, Massachusetts], not only do you want to ring around it like 128 [Massachusetts Route 128; Yankee Division Highway], but now we want to get you right into the middle of the city with the high speed thing and you don't bring that in through Wellesley [Massachusetts], right (laughter).  You find the path that takes you through public open space and parks, not good environmentally, and through the areas that are least politically capable of resisting it, and therefore, the low income in some areas of the city.  And it happen- it's happened in every major city in this country, right.  And at one point, we [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] were hired by the federal DOT, federal [U.S.] Department of Transportation, to do a study of this phenomenon in major cities around the country.  We looked at Washington, San Francisco [California], Houston [Texas], Dallas [Texas], New Orleans [Louisiana], [Washington] D.C., the Beltway [Capital Beltway; Interstate 495] area, and we wrote a report.  They reviewed the report.  We did a draft report and--the people who working for DOT demanded that we change it, right, and we wouldn't do it.  They modified it and then they just put it in a warehouse someplace.  I don't think it was ever published.  That's what was happening here.  With the extension of I-95 [Interstate 95], the intent was to get people who have an interest in the center city, no interest in anything between the center city and where they're coming from, into the center city as fast as you possibly can, and the people impacted in the negative way be damned, right.  And because of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and because of the [Civil Rights] Movement, ordinary people were empowered and developed energy and the courage and the political capability to stand up and say, "No."  We may not be able to help make something different happen.  We may not have the financial or political capability of doing something positive, but we have the ability to do something negative and stop this, and that's what happened.
Story_ID: 290278
Speaker 1: And to Frank Sargent's [Governor Francis W. Sargent] credit, who later appointed me to a major position, the head of the state art commission [Massachusetts Fine Arts Commission]--actually, it was his mother (laughter).
Speaker 2: Frank Sargent was who?
Speaker 1: The governor at the time.
Speaker 2: The governor.
Speaker 1: And he, he was--it reminded me of my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson]--it was his mother who started going out on the picket lines, right, and created such an enormous embarrassment for him.  I think he would've done anything to get his mother off the street, right (laughter).  But, he's the one that called the moratorium.  He said no more building of highways within [Massachusetts] Route 128 [Yankee Division Highway] in the city [Boston, Massachusetts] until we have rationally analyzed what the alternatives are, and that's how this process started.  And, and that's how the cleared land, the land that had already been cleared for the highway construction, we [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] started--we were the spearhead firm--commission to look at alternative uses, alternative development uses.
Speaker 2: How many miles of land had been cleared for that intended extension?
Speaker 1: Four and a half miles.
Speaker 2: Had been cleared of--
Speaker 1: Houses, light industry--mostly houses, light industry--marginal housing, but housing, light industry and, and in two locations, it was proposed to pass through designated park land from Forest Hills [Boston, Massachusetts] to Becket [Massachusetts], right.  And when it got to Forest Hills, it started clearing land along the right of way of the Penn Central [Transportation Company] railroad.  It was a commuter rail Bost- connecting Boston to New York City [New York, New York] and south to [Washington] D.C.  But, that project was amazing.  It--proved the worth of empowering people.  It proved that, that although everyone can't know best, those who are heavily invested in a focused self-interest need to be provoked into considering alternative possibilities, and frequently when they do, they find that they're not hurt, that it's not painful.  I know a lot of the highway engineers we were working with at the time, who were really--they hardly spoke to us coming into that project.  At the end, we made them heroes.  When we went to--with--you know, that received a Presidential Design Award.  We went to D.C. to pick up the Presidential Design Award and all these people got up and made these wonderful speeches, [M.] David [Lee] got up and said, "We made you famous.  We made you famous.  The people made you famous because none of this would've happened had it proceeded the way you had been doing things," right.  And that was true.  We, we did.  I mean by, by we, I mean my firm, but the broader sense of awareness.
Story_ID: 290279
Speaker 1: The moratorium declared by Governor [Francis W.] Sargent, you still had a clear strip of land and that clear strip then was used for something.  You could tell us about that and then you and your firm [Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] had a major role in the design of the reuse of that land.
Speaker 2: That--that's right, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden].
Speaker 1: Could you explain that for us?
Speaker 2: The--since a highway was not going to happen and the, the, the way politically it was possible to still take advantage of the funds earmarked for highway construction was a special program enacted at the federal level that later was refined into the (unclear) program that we have today, which essentially said that if there is a transportation initiative being planned, it does not necessarily have to be highway.  It could be rapid transit.  It could be commuter rail.  And so that enormous block of funds that was available for highway construction could be diverted to tran- other transportation-related purposes.
Story_ID: 290280
Speaker 1: And so the relocation of the Orange Line came to the [Southwest] Corridor [Boston, Massachusetts] as an enabling vehicle, and the improvement of the commuter rail line, it became part of it.  So, it became a major transportation, multimodal transportation component, which had, had three of its stations in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and one at Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts] included bus, intermodal bus--
Speaker 2: You mentioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) operations as well.
Speaker 2: --the Orange Line.  What was the Orange Line?
Speaker 1: The--one of--one of my classmates at Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was Peter Chermayeff whose father was Serge Chermayeff who came to Harvard with Walter Gropius.  He was a Bauhaus [Staatliches Bauhaus, Germany] person.  He started a firm in Cambridge [Massachusetts] called Cambridge Seven [Associates].  He and five--and six other people about our age--and it became a major firm.  And his brother [Ivan Chermayeff] was a, a, a graphic artist in New York City [New York, New York] who was doing large scale graphics, which was popular at the time, big salt shakers and Coke bottles.  And they got the commission to come up with a graphic concept for the transit system in Boston [Massachusetts].  So, they named different legs of the system colors.  And the Orange Line color, the color orange was establ- was, was, was given to the subway line that went out through Roxbury, through the South End [Boston, Massachusetts], Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Roxbury, and Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts], right.
Speaker 2: That was an elevated rail.
Speaker 1: It was elevated.
Speaker 2: Elevated rail--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about thirty feet above--
Speaker 1: About.
Speaker 2: --ground level?
Speaker 1: About, a little less, and it went out Washington Street to Dudley [Square, Boston, Massachusetts] as elevated, stopped, and, and continued to Forest Hills [Station, Boston, Massachusetts] along Washington Street.  That got moved from Washington Street due west--
Speaker 2: Well, that elevation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to the corridor.
Speaker 2: The elevated rail got, got demolished, right?
Speaker 1: Torn down.
Speaker 2: Torn down.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  As part of this move.
Story_ID: 290281
Speaker 1: But you have to keep in mind that it couldn't happen unless it was transportation-related because an act of [U.S.] Congress would've been required, otherwise, to use those funds or there wouldn't have been any funds to improve the corridor [Southwest Corridor, Boston, Massachusetts], and the corridor had to be improved because they'd already screwed it up.  They'd already knocked down everything just about that was in it, right.  Since the transportation corridor, the public transportation did not have to be as wide as the highway [Interstate 95 (I-95)] extension, a lot of the cleared land now had no use.  And so one had to develop urbanistically a concept for how you approach thinking about that.  Well, thanks to Bob Embry [Robert C. Embry, Jr.] down in, in Baltimore [Maryland], I was on the design advisory panel for the City of Baltimore, we met every few weeks, he came up--and when they were doing their first--the first leg of their subway system [Baltimore Metro Subway], he came up with a concept that later got referred to as value capture.  He said, "If you're building--if you're making a new public initiative with enormous public funds, look for the opportunities to capture the value resulting from that initiative happening at any given place."  So, if you're building in a major subway station, that is generating people--evaluate what value that, that--those people represent that you can take advantage of with other facilities.  The--the federal program then got expanded to say that if it's transit-related, it--some portion of the funding can come out of the highway funds.  So, when he did--when, when they did their, their transit system, a major Philadelphia--Baltimore has this major system of, of, of neighborhood markets, marketplaces like Faneuil Hall Market [Faneuil Hall Marketplace, Boston, Massachusetts].  One of them is called Lexington Market [Baltimore, Maryland].  So, one of the stations they put at Lexington Market, right, and it generated over $500 million of new development, right.  So, so that--so, so developing a way of thinking about this land, this vacant land especially as it related--influenced the placement of the stations and began to provide one with a mindset urbanistically for how to think about what might happen around it.  So, what do we have?  We have the Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] around Ruggles Station [Boston, Massachusetts].  We've got the new [Boston] Police Headquarters building.  We've got Ruggles Center (laughter). We've got the Reggie Lewis Track [and Athletic Center, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Did you [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] do all those?
Speaker 1: We did Roxbury--Community College.  We did the new police headquarters building.  We did Ruggles Station.  We did the, the buildings at Ruggles Center.
Story_ID: 290282
Speaker 1: Didn't you [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] also do the above-ground landscaping--
Speaker 2: For the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) above the sub--
Speaker 2: --corridor [Southwest Corridor, Boston, Massachusetts] itself.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The question became, because the railroad that was there was elevated.  The question became, do--can you put--should this whole subway system, railroad system, be in a tunnel?  Cost was enormous.  Should it be in an open cut, which forms a rift through the--the two sides of this community had been held apart for too long already.  Should it be partially elevated and, and partially at grade?  Same kinds of problems.  It was my partner's idea to do cut and cover, and to develop, as part of the urban solution, a surface park from Copley Square [Boston, Massachusetts] to Forest Hills [Boston, Massachusetts] that he called completing the ring of homestead.
Speaker 1: How many miles is that roughly?
Speaker 2: Four and a half miles.
Speaker 1: Four and a half.
Speaker 2: So, he said you're starting at Copley, right, which is basically the, the, the Copley Square Park [Boston, Massachusetts] and all of that, which connects over to the [Charles River] Esplanade [Boston, Massachusetts], and the Esplanade is the beginning of the homestead necklace that ends at, at Forest Hills.  Let's take that park straight out the Orange Line on cover, over the cut, right, and connect it up.  It was his idea.
Speaker 1: David?  [M.] David Lee?
Speaker 2: David.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.  It was his idea.  He was a young kid.  He wasn't dry behind the ears, and that, that my senior associates didn't think should be an associate.  So that's what--and then--and, and it, it--everyone got behind it.  People in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] said, "We don't want a park," in Bay, Bay--on the Bay--on the--not Bay Village, on the St. Botolph Street side, the Back Bay [Boston, Massachusetts].  The South End was derelict, right.  "We don't want a park.  We, we want a barrier here," right.  So, the solution had to give them a fence.  That sucker wasn't finished a year before the people on the Back Bay side was removing sections of fencing and going in and planting flowers and maintaining the park, right.  It, it was absolutely amazing.  And, of course, it received worldwide acclaim, almost immediately.  We did the urb- we developed the concept plan for the urban design, which included the park.  We developed the design guidelines for everything in the urban environment, the fences, the walls, the seats, the lighting, everything.  We developed the design guidelines for all of the stations, the escalator and elevator arrays, the, the platform furniture and so on, and then we did Ruggles Station [Boston, Massachusetts], which has won every design award in the book, every one, and symbolically and physically reconnects the community, Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] with the cultural side, the Huntington Avenue side of the city.
Story_ID: 290506
Speaker 1: Would you tell us a little bit about your design and your work with Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts], and its proximity to this new surface park and transportation corridor [Southwest Corridor, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: You know, Roxbury Community College was really a critical first happening in--on, on vacant land, land that had been cleared for the highway [Interstate 95 (I-95)].  Before I go into it in a lot of detail, just a couple things about the whole notion of urban design as it relates to architecture.  When I studied architecture at the Harvard Graduate School of Design [Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was shortly after Walter Gropius, who was the founder of the Bauhaus [Staatliches Bauhaus] in Germany and had to leave because of the Nazi uprising, was replaced by Dean Josep Lluis Sert, who was also European and was one of the major forces in the international style of architecture.
Speaker 1: Could you spell his last name for us?
Speaker 2: S-E-R-T, Sert.
Speaker 1: And the first name was Dean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--his first name--he, he was dean of the school of arrchitecture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lluis Sert.  And he was sort of a Spanish aristocrat, very, very interesting person.  I loved him dearly.  But, he introduced the concept of urban design as a design discipline for the first time, I think, nationwide and certainly in this country, and he introduced the first academic degree-granting program in urban design.  Shortly after he was--he became dean at Harvard, my partner came here for graduate studies, [M.] David Lee, and he took a dual degree in architecture and urban design.  In addition to the other things that I said about our involvement in the Southwest Corridor, David was largely responsible for bringing the firm into that process because of his interest in training in urban design.  They--as I indicated before, the corridor cleared land and we--and the program generally were looking for ways to reknit the community and find viable uses for cleared land.  We've since been doing that in cities across the country.
Story_ID: 290507
Speaker 1: And the very first opportunity that existed was Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts].  A number of people like Paul Parks, and Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] and others who were interested, very interested in education in the city [Boston, Massachusetts], especially education for people of color wanted very much to see a community college that would serve that population in the, the greater Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Roxbury area, and for a number of years struggled to try to get this college going.  The state at the time had a policy of laying a grid across the state whenever the population did a group of grids, rose to a certain number, it qualified for a community college.  And, of course, that didn't apply here.  Bunker Hill [Community College, Boston, Massachusetts] had been built and so on.  So, they hired a, a person at the Harvard School of Education [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a guy named Tabers [ph.], to do a, a study.  Tabers concluded that there was a need for such a spatial institution, and that it should probably accommodate a student population, FET [sic. FTE], full-time equivalent student population of about five thousand students.  The state was then persuaded, aggressively persuaded I might add, to do a first phase of a community college for Roxbury at 1,500 students.  That is what then happened on one of the cleared, cleared sites for the highway [Interstate 95 (I-95)].  The, the most interesting thing about that college is that the state's policy at the time was to do mega structures. That is to say to do basically one large building that would satisfy all of the requirements of a college program.  We, instead, because of our urbanistic mindset proposed a campus of buildings.  And so Roxbury Community College is a very linear, urban campus of buildings, instead of the mega structure, and it sort of set a new mode for that kind of--that kind of facility.
Story_ID: 290508
Speaker 1: As you designed Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts], you were always sensitive to the users and, of course, the users in this case are the students, the adult students, and there are adults, many of them.  What were the special things that you tried to build in for these users?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, the--I, I have to go--I think a bit into philosophically the way I think about design.  The--if, if one is going to design an educational facility, it's my view that you first need to ask and answer questions regarding, what is education, what is learning?  And then begin to evolve a design that's responding to and answering those questions.  When I did Roxbury Community College, the question for me at the time was that learning--the conclusion I arrived at was that--is that learning is an interactive process, that it's an interaction between student and books, student and teacher, teacher and teacher, student and student, student and environment.  For example, in a learning objective in design, we know that from a physical point of view, from a scientific point of view, the shortest distance between two points is a straight line.  Therefore, the most efficient way to get from one place to another place is that way.  However, if that is in a learning environment, the critical question is not how quickly you can get there but what happens to your mind on the way?  And so that may not be the shortest distance or the fastest way to get there.  You may decide to take the line through a labyrinth of learning experiences.  That's one of the reasons Roxbury Community College is not one big mega structure building, but a--but a campus.  And so I looked for ways to create the, the places within that environment where one could enjoy the interactive process of learning at very many different levels.  We've got some sculptures sitting in different places, places where you can sit outside quietly and contemplate the places and all the buildings where in--that kind of interactive process can happen.  The, the dialogue with the community also influenced that because the site happens to be along the foothill of Highland Park [Boston, Massachusetts] where the, the top of the hill is the old standpipe, which--the fort [Roxbury High Fort, Boston, Massachusetts].  And historically, the people who basically were the movers and shakers of Boston [Massachusetts] built their suburb places on the hillsides and the hillside places overlooked the mills down in the valley in Lower Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] that were fueled by Stony Brook.  So, in that valley, historically, there were New England mill buildings.  And so we used that reference for the individual structures of the--of the college.  They take on the characteristics and the proportions of, of the mill buildings, and they provide visual vistas from the hill out to the various other parts of the city without looking at one enormous massive building.
Story_ID: 290509
Speaker 1: Probably less than a tenth of a mile from Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts], and bordering the surface park [Southwest Corridor Park, Boston, Massachusetts], is the Boston Police Department headquarters [Boston Police Headquarters, Boston, Massachusetts], which is relatively new, what, half a dozen years old.  You were the architect for the new police headquarters building, which for I guess half a century had been downtown Boston [Massachusetts], and now it's out in a traditionally black community.  Tell us about what you considered and how you went about designing this new Boston Police Headquarters?
Speaker 2: The, the site of the Boston Police Headquarters, first of all it was--it was a major decision for the city to move that kind of facility out of center city.  That's where the headquarters of all kinds, like the city hall happened in--traditionally in, in cities.  The, the area where the Ruggles Station [Boston, Massachusetts] sits, which we designed, is really at a crossroads for the city because on the west side of the corridor [Southwest Corridor, Boston, Massachusetts] is an area that has evolved as a cultural, cultural center.  There's Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts], there's the Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], there's the Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts] leading into the Fenway [Boston, Massachusetts].  We designed that station both literally and figuratively as a bridge across the corridor to, to connect the two sides of the city across the seam which had been repaired when the elevator--elevated railway came down to make, make the corridor happen.  And an opportunity for a sub node, a center, a civic place, a--place for people existed at that node.  It's the, the concept that I was speaking about I think before innovated by Bob Embry [Robert C. Embry, Jr.] down in Baltimore [Maryland] of value capture.  And so on the east side of the corridor, on the Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] side of the corridor, that opportunity existed and became known as Ruggles Center.  The police headquarters then was considered to be a site that could join with Ruggles Center to create this new urban node.  That's how the site was first--was first identified.
Story_ID: 290510
Speaker 1: Problem nationwide of urban gangs existed here in Boston [Massachusetts] in a major way.  Boston launched with a lot of participation of local ministers and, and others, a program that turned away from the notion of arresting and imprisoning young people to a different set of principles regarding how that was to be dealt with, and it was community policing.  Bradford [sic. William Bratton] who, who was the chief of police here went on to New York [New York] and is now out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], is the--was, was the--was the person who began to initiate that process here.  It was a major factor in moving the Boston Police Headquarters [Boston, Massachusetts] from downtown out into the community.  The building then and its program called for a user-friendly type place, not a place that would create a physio-psychological distress (laughter) like, like police stations have historically done, but one that, that would invite public use.  And so the program of that building is one that is a mixing chamber for community participation as well as the--as well as the police activities that, that occur.  It also became the--a, a sort of leading edge communication center for 9-1-1 and that--and that kind of thing.  It has a restaurant in it.  It has a daycare center.  It has public meeting spaces and--in addition to the crime lab and all of the other kinds of things that the cops have to do.
Story_ID: 290511
Speaker 1: Your work, Don Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], has also had a major impact on housing, not just on Boston [Massachusetts], but in many cities across the country.  Would you share with us some of your major housing projects and, and how you went about the challenge of providing environmentally new housing in the new cities?
Speaker 2: It's a very interesting story.  The--when I became a registered architect, there were fewer than twelve African American registered architects in the entire country, 1966 if you can believe that, and I knew them all.  At the time, Boston was experiencing its--probably its first major renaissance in the development of the city under Mayor [Patrick] Collins and Ed Logue [Edward J. Logue], who headed up the Boston Redevelopment Authority [(BRA); Boston Planning and Development Agency (BPDA)].  Urban renewal was very much a major factor, improving sections of cities and destroying many times, in many cases, the, the rich historic fabric of, of cities.  And so the architectural profession was very busy here doing big and wonderful things and was not terribly interested in doing housing.  So, a window of opportunity existed for me to launch an architectural practice in housing, and that is what I did.  So, all of the early commissions that we had were primarily focused in housing, affordable housing, housing funded by the old FHA, the Federal Housing Administration, under, under the, the [Section] 236 program and [Section] 221(d)(3) [Below Market Interest Rate], and so on.  Some good housing happened as a result of those programs, and some disasters happened.  There are some situations where I've done the same housing development three times because the first two times didn't work very well.  The, the, the missing link that we understand now, of course, is that, that in order for any environment to be sustained and, and managed and maintained, there has to be an ownership interest.  There has to be an investment beyond simply paying rent.  And so the--that--that's now been understood by the programs that, that do housing, so that's how it started.
Story_ID: 290512
Speaker 1: We [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] were a very early pioneer in prefabricated hou- building housing from pre-assembled components, like pre-cast concrete panels and pre-cast concrete extruded plank.  We did a lot of basic research in, in that kind of housing.  We innovated with a local developer, the idea of building housing on vacant sites in the city [Boston, Massachusetts] rather than--rather than large, large developments, and that was called the infill housing program, which started here.  We took it to Baltimore [Maryland].  We did a, a small version of it in, in Brooklyn [New York].  We were considering doing something with the abandoned [Brooklyn] Navy Yard [U.S. Navy Yard] in Brooklyn, building plants there and so on, this developer was, so we were heavily inves- and still are.  We're still doing a good deal of housing both here and, and, and around the country.  We recently won a design competition to do a major housing development in Norwalk, Connecticut.  We're doing one in, in--we just finished one in Newark, New Jersey, and Newark is hot now.  It's an urban center.  It's really be--be--finding a, a revitalization of its own.  So, it's a mainstay.  It's something that we care a lot about and seek opportunities to work that way.
Story_ID: 290513
Speaker 1: You are a visionary.  You are very much concerned about your profession, and you've been involved in dialogues and workshops and activities with other architects of color across the United States and internationally.  Tell us about a major coming together of architects in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] under what I understand was called New DesigNation [sic. DesigNation] and you were a participant in that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was.  I was one of the keynote speakers at this conference.  What it--what it was--it was incredibly interesting.  It was a conference of international designers, and I met a young black kid who couldn't have been more than twenty-five or so who was--who headed up the design division of Nike [Inc.] in Germany, right.  I mean, the--it was just--I had never been in an environment so totally African American with, with that level of, of skill and talent in my entire life.  It was like being on the moon.  And for that--for that conference, right, I keynoted a paper entitled 'The Being in Blackness.'  For some time now, the, the proposition that there is a black aesthetic has been debated intellectually within the creative, creative world, and I chose to, to address that, that question in, in this paper.  Basically, what I concluded was that--if you first address the question of beauty and what is that and what are the components that make, make that up, the, the essence of beauty isn't black or white.  It's not cultural.  Like most things, the answers are found in the physical world.  But that having arrived at those conclusions, the cultural base of a people can contribute and shape those conclusions in various ways, and that there's a very special characteristic that is a function of being black that when overlaid on that phenomena will create a unique kind of aesthetic experience.  And the paper was extremely well received.  In fact, a group of students attending the, the conference sort of collared me and had me do it all over again at a private room in the hotel (laughter).  It was--it was incredibly exciting, incredibly exciting.
Speaker 1: Have the participants of this meeting continued to, to meet?  Is this an ongoing organization at this point or?
Speaker 2: It is.  It is.  I don't know--I think the last meeting--I have not participated in any of the subsequent meetings.  I think the, the last meeting was out on the West Coast.  I think it was either in San Francisco [California] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 290514
Speaker 1: And again, the overall purpose or purposes for convening and coming together of architects of color, the overall purpose?
Speaker 2: It's--they're--they're not just architects.  They're, they're--in fact, architects are a minority--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --in, in the group, primarily because architects, black architects are a minority in the professions generally, that it's--it's a cross-section of, of designers, fashion designers, people in theater, people in commercial art--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --from, from around the world who--for, for example, my son who's a--who's an artist is--was, was recently invited to participate in an art festival [The Carnival of the Two Rivers] in Bordeaux, France.  And it, it involved--it--we don't understand how many people there are in other places of African descent.  We, we really don't.  And I at this sort of senior citizen stage of my life and just beginning to understand what I have missed by not being connected with that world.  So, he went there and he gave a workshop on, on comic book art for this festival.  Once a year, Bordeaux has an art festival and they choose a marshal for the festival.  And this past year, they chose the--la Parisians [sic. Les Nubians], it's two sisters who are of, of African French descent who live in Bordeaux.  And in fact I think they were up for an Emmy [Award] this year.  One of them is a friend of my son, and they were chosen to be the, the organizers of the festival this past year, and they, they, they came up with a concept of inviting artists in various disciplines to do workshops and then present their results at the end of the festival.  So, he went there and they--and worked with the kids, and they created a superhero, and then they did a comic book about the superhero and it was presented at the end of the, the conference, very, very, very interesting.  So, he's connected with that international world in a way that I never have been.
Speaker 1: Well, he'll be telling me about that this afternoon when--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --he will be a HistoryMaker also.  And I understand from our videographer, Scott Stearns, that your son, Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Stull] perhaps will be the youngest HistoryMaker at this point--
Speaker 2: That's very interesting.
Speaker 1: --in, in the project, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 290515
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Donald Stull, in addition to your sharing with me a rather visionary piece called 'The Being in Blackness,' you also shared with me another essay called 'The Zoo is Dead: Let Us Build a New Place for a Living City,' which I understand is a proposal of a prototype for an institution for all cities, and you worked with a colleague by the name of Julia Allen Field.  Would you tell us a little bit more about this writing and the thinking behind this publication?
Speaker 2: Well, I--think I first have to tell you a bit about Julie [Julia Allen Field], who is truly a visionary.  She's one of the very first environmentalists with [Norman] Laliberte, and those guys over at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in this country.  Julie grew up as a golden spoon kid up on Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts] years and years ago, God rest her.  She went to a finishing school in the building that Louis [Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] is--clothing store is in now that, that once was a finishing school for ladies.  She did the European tour on the steamer and all that kind of stuff.  And then she ran away from home and in fact was doing the European tour, she just didn't come back.  And she got involved with the--with the gypsy population in Western Europe and became very involved with, with carnivals and that kind of thing and developed an enormous love for animals.  And that was the beginning of her--of the graining of Julie, Julie Allen Field.  She subsequently returned to this country and, and married the heir [Henry Field] to the [Marshall] Field's [Marshall Field & Company] department stores in Chicago [Illinois].  When I met her, she was taking some special courses at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she heard about me and she came to my office to meet me.  And we immediately fell in love with one another.  She, at that time, lived on Main Highway in Coconut Grove in Florida in a mansion.  She had founded, which is one of the reasons she had come to talk with me, she had founded an organization there working with a minister in the section of the Coconut Grove called Black Grove, which is where all the folks who did domestic work and that kind of thing for the mansions lived, and with a numbers runner called Black Grove, Inc. [Coconut Grove, Florida].
Story_ID: 290516
Speaker 1: And the intent of that organization [Black Grove, Inc., Coconut Grove, Florida] was to--was to recast the physical and environmental characteristics of Black Grove, Inc., and to find a connection between Black Grove, Inc., and Biscayne Bay, and that connection for--so the people could come to the water, and that connection was intended to be through her [Julia Allen Field] estate.  And she wanted to know if I would join Black Grove, if I would become a member of Black Grove, Inc.  And, and as I say, Norman Laliberte and many of the--Urban Dan Kiley [sic. Daniel Urban Kiley], these were the kinds of people who were in, in Black Grove, Inc., in addition to the minister and the numbers runner.  So, we would--we would meet and--for think tanks on, on, on the estate and I, I sometimes would bring some of my students from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] down for, for the sessions and so on.  And basically, it was a, a group of visionaries, dreamers, right.  For example, Julie [Julia Allen Field] learned that a black jaguar in the--the Bronx Zoo [New York, New York] was refusing to be cooperative and was a--was a real problem and that there was--they were considering putting the animal to sleep, and she started a campaign.  My, my oldest daughter [Cydney Stull] was at Shady Hill School in Cambridge [Massachusetts], just five or six years old, so I mean she became part of the campaign to raise nickels and dimes from kids around the country to buy Rebecca, was the jaguar's name.  And she did.  She bought Rebecca.  She got a friend who was a pilot down in Florida to, to, to help her crate it up and put it in a little airplane and they flew it down, C plane, landed at the edge of her estate and put it in her--put it in her study, which was a separate house out at, at the point near the--near the boat dock.  And eventually, she took Rebecca back to the Amazon.  She created an organization down there called Amazon 2000 [ph.].  They built a cage a mile long in the Amazon jungle, and they put Rebecca in it, and tried to re-acclimate it by--her by degrees back to--back to the wild.  At one point, she was released from the cage, and she was killed.  She--not by, by predators but by, by other animals, so she didn't really (unclear)--that's who Julie was.
Story_ID: 290517
Speaker 1: When Boston [Massachusetts] announced that it was going to revitalize the zoo in Franklin Park [Franklin Park Zoo, Boston, Massachusetts], Julie [Julia Allen Field] and I were incensed.  The notion of caging animals is in and of itself an animalistic activity.  Animals do--for example, an elephant expresses less than a tenth of his octave range in captivity and, and animals should be captured, but they should be captured with cameras and high--you know, the, the--they shouldn't be--and if, if you want to capture a white panther, about the only way to do it is with a leg breaking, you know, trap device, right.  So, so, the whole idea is insane.  And as a Bostonian, I was particularly incensed because at that time, Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] was an enormous slum and the zoo was in the middle of the slum.  So, you drive through a, a human cage for people to get to cages for animals.  It just--I was absolutely incensed by it.  And it was my first major--and so we, we, wrote this--we wrote this paper ['The Zoo Is Dead: Let Us Build a New Place for a Living City'], which incidentally--and we sent it all over the country.  And it was--it was adopted by the Black Panther Party for--at the conference they had in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as--and, and so it got a lot of publicity, and then, it was my first major encounter with the press, right.
Speaker 2: Your first major encounter with the press (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With the press.  I was called for an interview.  So, on the telephone, I do an interview with The Boston Globe, right and I, I asked them, make certain that they--could I review it before it was published?  "Oh, no problem.  No problem."  And they completed distorted everything I said.  I mean, the, (laughter) the article came out like, "Why does Don Stull [HistoryMaker Donald Stull] the architect hate little baby elephants," or something.  I don't know.  It was--I was absolutely tarred and feathered.  Michael Dukakis who later became governor, two terms, I served under him for one term, was a, a--I think in the house [Massachusetts House of Representatives], he was a rep at the time, and he called absolutely infuriated, right.  And, and my office was here in my house at that time, and demanded that I come meet with him and, and explain why I was opposing the, the, the zoo, and so on.  But, that's, that's what generated the paper.  It--we did not anticipate that--anything like that or like this could happen within our lifetime, right.  It's a vision of what a human environment could be and should be, and it shouldn't be in any way about caging animals (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  Don Stull, the last (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If I had to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If I had it to do over, I don't think I would want to experience anything like the results that that paper generated at the time (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 290518
Speaker 1: The last time I was here in your home, when we did the first part of this interview, you showed me a model of the Boston Harbor memorial to the Middle Passage [Middle Passage Memorial].  And as a black historian and a student of enslavement and slavery history, I was just fascinated, and the Middle Passage has been something I've studied.  Robert Hayden's--not me, Robert Hayden the poet--
Speaker 2: I knew him.
Speaker 1: --did a poem called the 'Middle Passage.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your work on this memorial is another example of your visionary spirit and your thinking.  Tell me about, about this project.  We'll have a chance hopefully in the video portion later on to capture this model, but tell me about this project.
Speaker 2: It--it's very emotional.  One of my very dear friends, Paul Goodnight [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight], is a painter, is an artist.  I have much of his work.  I absolutely love him.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: G-O-O-D-N-I-G-H-T.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: He was the artist-in-residence selected for the Olympic Games [1996 Summer Olympics] in Atlanta [Georgia] and, and he's located here, here in Boston [Massachusetts].  He has been a mentor for my son [HistoryMaker Robert Stull], and for many, many young people.  Two years ago, he got a group of young kids who had an interest in art, couldn't really afford it, enrolled with them at Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts], and paid their tuitions.  The, the guy is absolutely amazing.  The--one of the reasons it's so emotional is because it, it--it's a project that I started working on as I was in the early stages of recovery from--over a year of cancer treatment.  I had yet to go back to work.  Basically, I was--I was at home and working to regain my strength, and Paul called me.  He had just returned from West Africa and said that he had been discussing with people there.  It was basically in Mozambique, Malangatana [Ngwenya], was a major mural, mural artist--don't ask me how to spell his name--there about the notion of creating memorials dedicated to the most horrific period during the African American slave trade, one somewhere on the West Coast of Africa either literally or figuratively facing one on the East Coast of this country across the ocean.  And he was putting together a group of artists and others to start thinking through what that might be.  And the first meeting was held in the middle of the winter in the museum of the African American center [Museum of the National Center of Afro-American Artists, Boston, Massachusetts] that [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis had--Elma Lewis here in Boston had, had set up and, and I attended.  And it, it was--it was incredible--
Story_ID: 290519
Speaker 1: The question was put to me--well, the, the discussion started with the assumption that the memorial [Middle Passage Memorial] should be a wall.
Speaker 2: Should be a?
Speaker 1: A wall.
Speaker 2: A wall?
Speaker 1: It was shortly after, after the Vietnam [Veterans] Memorial [Washington, D.C.], which had been a, a, a smashing success and it, of course, is a wall, and it's very, very moving and so on.  And there just was no question about it.  I mean, this was going to be a wall.  And so the, the dialogue began with how to do this wall, and it was just going on and on.  John [T.] Biggers, God rest him, artist in Houston [Texas] out of--you know, you know who he is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was, was on, on a conference call, and we--and we're just talking about how to do this wall.  And I just sat there, and I didn't say very much.  And at some point, they turned to me and said, "Don [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], what, what are your views?"  And I had to say that, that first we need to talk about what a memorial is, and we don't start talking about it as a wall.  We start talking about its purpose, its intent and--and, and so I just started talking like I do and it just kept coming out and coming out.  And then, then sort of people--I--at first, I wasn't certain what was happening because I thought that I was upsetting people and, and so on.  And then--and then they said, "Would you please come up with an idea and show it to us of what you're talking about?"  And I did.  I, I came back home and I literally did some sketching in bed on a sketch pad that laid out what a memorial like this could be, and then I wrote a letter and I sent it to Paul [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight] with the sketches, and that was the beginning of it.
Story_ID: 290520
Speaker 1: We had made several attempts to make it [Middle Passage Memorial] happen on Spectacle Island [Massachusetts] here in the harbor [Boston Harbor], and they have not been successful at all.  At one point, four years or so ago, we came very, very close to forming a partnership with the aquarium [New England Aquarium, Boston, Massachusetts], and we had put together a three-part process that was intended to lead to the initiation of the--of the memorial, and that fell apart.  Most recently, Curtis Davis, who you may know, was one of my students at Harvard [Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts] many, many years ago and has come on--come, come along to be one of the most articulate spokesmen for art and urban design in the city [Boston, Massachusetts].  He headed up the harbor art commission for a time.  He's just a, a--an amazing person, called me a few weeks ago and indicated that he's a member of a committee that is looking at the development of--as a--as a public park, looking at the development of Spectacle Island, and in the process selecting artists to do public art on the island, and asked for permission to show them a video that was (laughter) back before video animation was something you could do at home on the back of your cell phone.  The students and the--at the MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] computer lab put together an animated video of the memorial on the island, approaching it by water and, and walking through it and so on.  And the dean of architecture at MIT did a narrative and overlaid on the video and so on.  And Paul [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight] gave him--I had loaned you my copy I think of the video, but Paul had--Goodnight had one and gave it to him and he made that presentation.  I've yet to hear back what came out of that, but it was Curtis' hope that a, a renewed interest might come out of that to, to create an opportunity to pursue the possibility of, of picking this up again and making it happen.
Story_ID: 290521
Speaker 1: Well this memorial [Middle Passage Memorial] now that you envision and that you sketched out, what will be the components of, of this memorial?  It's not going to be just a wall, so what are the components of the memorial?
Speaker 2: There are several ways to think about a memorial, many ways, many ways, and, and probably many more than I can imagine, but what, what is very, very obvious is that it has to provoke very, very powerful physical and psychological response.  It has to do that.  And one then--based on the subject matter of the place, one then determines whether it should be a visual stimulant standing in space that you look in the long view to, should it be something that encloses you?  For example, the [Vietnam] Veterans Memorial [Washington, D.C.] is a wall, but the wall is created in a valley, shaped in the land, so that when you're--and the--and the wall itself is shaped so that when you are in the presence of the wall, you are in an outdoor room.  And then, it creates a very disturbing, a very disturbing physical and psychological response in the viewer because it--of its mirrored surface, you are looking at yourself through a film created by the names of those who have died.  And so--and that's, that's, that's, that's gestalt, the, the psychology of vision, gestalt psychology.  It's theater, right.  If, if whether you are a spiritual person or not, whether you believe in religion or not, I can make you cry by the way I shape space and handle light.  Le Corbusier, the French architect created a pilgrimage chapel on a hillside in the South of France that is absolutely amazing.  It--you see it on--it--it's, it's on the military crest of the hill, Ronchamp Chapel [Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, France], and you see it from a distance.  But as you--as you grow closer, it disappears.  And then to get it--to get to it, you have to--you have to ring around the hill.  So, you see it, and then you don't.  The next time you see it, you're closer, and it starts building up, building up in anticipation.  And theater in design is called leadlight, that which provokes you to move forward.  And what you see is not always what you're looking at, but what you see is what generates your physical and, and emotional reactions.  If you--when you enter that chapel, the, the experience bombards all of your senses.  If it's daylight outside, it's dark inside.  You're walking on a level plane and when you enter, you hit a, a sloped plane.  The, the smell of incense starts being thrown at you.  The, the, the windows inside are--the walls are very thick and the windows are very thin and they have silhouettes of, of religious iconography and Virgin Mary or something, and the way the sunlight comes around the figures causes the edge, the boundary condition of the figures to move, right.  And that stuff makes you want to fall on your knees and pray.  And, and Le Corbusier was agnostic, right.  But he used the--okay, so, so, you, you, you create a theater of reality and that's what this memorial does.
Story_ID: 290522
Speaker 1: First of all, it [Middle Passage Memorial] provokes you in a long view to approach it because it doesn't tell you all that it is in the long view, it simply hints at things, but it creates an interest in several ways, and I won't go into all the ways.  And then as you approach, you get more and more information, but still not enough.  And then when you enter it, you enter it on a bridge over water, and the water is, is animated and activated, so you hear the sounds, and you enter on a bridge cut kind of structure that has solid walls on either side, but when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, your access to your memorial is over water--
Speaker 1: Over water.
Speaker 2: --but the memorial itself is not built over the water.
Speaker 1: No, no it--
Speaker 2: 'Cause that was my original understanding.
Speaker 1: There's a--it's a--it's a basin.  It's a basin that has water in it and the water is activated by tumbling down the sides of a pyramid.  And, and when you reach the center of it, the sidewalls of the--of the bridge fall away and it becomes a shaky--it--it's not--you feel it moving as you walk on it.  So, it's, it's building--it's creating an anxiety and tension, right--
Story_ID: 290523
Speaker 1: Have you visited the Holocaust Memorial [United States Holocaust Memorial Museum] in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't.
Speaker 1: It uses perceptual psychology in the way I'm describing it, right.  You--you walk across gratings that feel like the kinds of things you'd find in prisons with hidden lights under them.  So, at a--at a subconscious level, not at a rational level but at an irrational level, a subconscious level, your, your, your, your mind is being bombarded and you don't even know it.  All you know is you feel funny.  You don't feel quite right.  The responsibility of doing that kind of--the, the responsibility a designer has when they mess with your head is to--is to bring your head as close back to normal as it--as it--as they possibly can before you finish the experience, right, not, not to leave you there, right.  And sometimes that's difficult to do.  When I was talking about schools, it was about that, the, the--what is learning?  It's, it's an interactive process.  Well, I, I--the, the day I visited the memorial, was just before it opened.  I had--a special invitation.  I--the, the--I was--I, I stepped into the box car, right, and the way the box car is anchored in the space, when you walk, you feel it shake.  You know, you hear--you hear the floor boards creak, right, and it's incredible the kinds of emotions that start happening inside you, right.  And when I walked through it, I heard someone sobbing, and I turned around and looked back and there was an older guy behind me crying, right.  And he was crying because of the combination of visual and psychological experiences the designer had created in this theater, right.  So the Middle Passage Memorial is theater.  All wonderful architecture is theater and all great architecture is great theater because it creates predetermined physio and psychological responses, right.  That's what it is.  And I, I pray that someday it will be built.
Story_ID: 290524
Speaker 1: Your work as an architect and your achievements have been noted with many awards and honors, and I was interested in you sharing with me several of the awards that you've received, one most recently I understand, that have meant the most to you and that kind of epitomize what you've been trying to do all these years.  Of all the awards, what two or three stand out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in your mind?
Speaker 2: We have a gallery in the office [Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], I rotate my art collection through it.  One side of the gallery are photographs of all the buildings that we've done that have been awarded.  The other side of the gallery are just all of the awards we've received over the years, and you forget, you forget.  And the--life is like that.  You forget.  And on occasion, I come in to the office, and I walk down the gallery and I start remembering.
Story_ID: 290302
Speaker 1: There's something that happened to blacks who were brought to this country as slaves.  They lost self-respect.  They lost confidence.  They lost the comfort of believing that the next day would be different.  The immediate descendants of our ancestors were less that way, but still were.  They lacked confidence.  They thought themselves unworthy.  There have been generations of us, including me, who have questioned our capabilities, who have--who have felt intimidated and insecure, who have stopped believing or never started believing that we were equal.  It is absolutely grand to see that changing when you look back over history and you see where we are now at almost an exponential rate.  There's some of that in my son [HistoryMaker Robert Stull], but there isn't very much and there will probably be less in his son.  And so, one part of the answer to your question is all of them, all of them, and there are, are a lot.  The other--the second part of that, second, second answer I want to make for that--have for that question is that--and this--it, it--it's an--it's an award to me that when the president [Kingman Brewster, Jr.] of Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], who became a personal friend, asked me at thirty-four to take the deanship of the School of Architecture, that was an award of a--of enormous consequence and my saying no is part of the phenomena of that award, right.  Once before, we talked about wrong things for right reasons, right.  That's an example only it's a reverse.  He asked me for the wrong reasons, and I said, "No" for the right reasons.  The third was when I received the first of the Boston Society of Architects Honor Awards [for Design Excellence], right after they were created.  I came into a room that probably had five hundred people in it.  It was incredible, absolutely incredible.  Then--and there are many other--I--we [Stull's firm, Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] received the Presidential Design Award for the Southwest Corridor [Boston, Massachusetts]. We received the Harleston Parker Gold Medal Award for work here in Boston [Massachusetts], highly prestigious.  It's a gold medal that probably weighs as much as I do.  But, those are traditional kinds of awards.  The other things that I talked about are very different.
Story_ID: 290303
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you would like to add to this oral history interview that I haven't asked you about, or touched upon?
Speaker 2: You know, when we first started this, I think it--there were a number of things that, that sort of started.  First of all, I'm amazed at how much I'm remembering.  Not first of all.  First of all, it was you, right.  And the memory of having known you and all of that came rushing back as soon as I saw you.  So, one aspect of my--of, of thinking or feeling about this was altered at--right, right there, right.  And it caused--I think it had something to do with the degree of comfort that I began to feel that stated releasing my mind to talk about things without thinking about me.  I think that, that was important.  The reason I say that is because--is because there are so many things that I think are important in a--in a person's life and so many things that have been important in my life that others--it would be good for others to hear that I can't get to.  There isn't--there isn't enough time.  There isn't enough whatever, right.  For example, I was the first--my, my--me, my brother [Robert Stull], and my two sisters [Gladys Stull and Virginia Stull] were the first--were the second group of people in my expanded family, which is incredibly large, to go to college, right.  We hear that all the time.  You have people like me.  "I was the first one to go to college."  My--our, our, our--the youngest uncle [Walter (ph.)] in my family on my mother's [Ruth Callahan Branson] side was the first to go to college.  He was the only one to go to college.  He had no place to live, so we all lived together.  My brother and I shared a room with him when he was in law school, right.  He introduced us--you know, I, I know all of the romantic poets.  You know, I can quote [Samuel Taylor] Coleridge and [William] Shakespeare, right, because of him.  I've--I--you know, I, I can remember sitting in, in, in a--getting kicked out of study hall in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] because I was reading art, right, 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' [D.H. Lawrence] and--how that--how that sort of multiplies.
Story_ID: 290304
Speaker 1: I now have two cousins studying--two cousins studying architecture and one [Malika Callahan (ph.)] who graduated with honors as an architect that I just helped get a position in Seattle [Washington] because of me.  It's amazing.  She is, is one of two children of--a cousin--of my generation, just a little--a little less than my generation who was a single mother, who went back to school and just took a degree in medicine and is doing her internship in, in, in North Carolina because my sister [Virginia Stull] is a doctor.  It's--where, where do you stop?  You, you know?  Yeah.  You know what I mean.  Yeah, I, I could talk about my children a, a bit and how what, what being a parent means to them, not you, what it means to them that you don't even know or understand.  As I was going through early parenthood, I paid absolutely no attention to them.  All I did was work and when I wasn't working, I was playing, right.  That was my life, right.  I never came to know them as human beings until they were practically adults, right.  And when my, my first wife and I separated and finally divorced and I moved away, and then I came back to the old house which is here, and I got sick, right, and I looked up and there they were, right.  My son [HistoryMaker Robert Stull] came--would come by on weekends.  He'd come by and stay a day or whatever.  And one day, I came home from work that weekend and he was here, and he never went back to Brookline [Massachusetts].  We, we never even talked about it, right.  I, I was thinking, how could this kid love me?  So, so I could talk about the kids.  It's just--I think my life has been--has been very fortunate in a lot of ways--
Story_ID: 290305
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you've not yet done?
Speaker 2: I want to travel more.  I regret not having been in Australia with you last week (laughter).  I want to paint and draw more.  I want to write more, especially write.  I, I want to write a lot more.
Speaker 1: What do you want to write about?
Speaker 2: I, I want to write poetry, which I do now, and my fledgling experience at doing that causes me to conclude that you don't know when you start what you want to write about.  It's sort of--it's sort of--it's, it's like if I'm designing a, a, a building or something.  It's what I--when talking to kids in my office and when I was teaching, I, I, I referred to as discover and respond.  You don't know until you start and discovering in forms, and by being in form, you do.  So, there's, there's that.  I'd like--I, I do know that I'd like to write about things that--which means research and, and exploration as well, things that I neglected in life up to this point.  I want to find out about them and I want to write about them, whatever they are, and I think to some degree that's tied to the notion of traveling more as well.  And it's all a big circle because it also will, I think, work its way full circle around to a visual illustration, to visual illustrations of some kind tied directly to that experience or to those experiences.  And then I think finally, I want to be totally at peace, which I suspect is impossible so, so that that's the way I go out.  I've never been even close to being totally at peace.  There's always something churning that keeps it that breathless kiss away (laughter), and I, I suspect if there's a big boom somewhere that it's prearranged that you will come to that place before you finally quit.
Story_ID: 290306
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I--that I was fundamentally a decent human being.
Story_ID: 290307
Speaker 1: And lastly, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: This is a bit self-serving, the building of the Middle Passage Memorial on Spectacle Island [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 290308
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of, of our mother [Ruth Callahan Branson].  In many situations that I have heard like this one with the person being interviewed, African American person being interviewed, they've attributed much if not all of their status and success if they've achieved it to, to their mothers using terms like strong, determined, very supportive, and so on.  And all of those applied to, to my mother tenfold.  The period of our growing up between elementary school [Fulton Elementary School, Springfield, Ohio] and high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], she was a single parent there taking care of four siblings, and she was absolutely determined about our being educated and the notion that we could do anything we set our minds to do.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No, we want it that way.
Speaker 1: --photograph of my brother [Robert Stull].  I think I probably mentioned earlier that he was an artist.  He died six years ago of a heart attack shortly after retiring as associate dean of the College of Art [sic. Department of Art] at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio].  We were extremely close.  He was about a year and a half older than me.  He was a ceramic artist, a painter, and lived and, and worked in Japan for a number of years.  He converted a farm in southern Japan near Kyoto [Japan] to a, a pottery atelier, and worked and lived there for a number of years.  I miss him terribly.
Speaker 2: This is when my stepfather [George Branson] (laughter), he came into our lives shortly after I was of high school age from the Deep South, from Mississippi.  He was an auto mechanic and sort of a hippie guy.  He was into blues music and all that kind of stuff, which from a highly religious family, as I was from, was sort of--sort of a, a no-no.  But, he and my, my brother loved fishing and they would--they would do a lot of--a lot of fishing together.  He facilitated the ability to a very large degree for, for us to, to attend college in the early years by his presence in our--in our family in the way in which he helped my mother provide for us.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Good.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  There I am, bottom row, second from the left (laughter).  This is a photograph in elementary school, which is right across the street, diagonally across the street from my house in Springfield, Ohio.  It was very interesting because a lot of people from that street went on to do some fairly interesting things with their lives.  Ron Burton, for example, who was running back for the Boston Patriots [New England Patriots] and a vice president of John Hancock [Life] Insurance Company is in this photograph.  He is up to--he's in the second row and the second from the right.  Johnny Lytle is standing beside me on the left of me in the photograph, and he went on to become a very, very world prominent jazz musician.  In fact, he played at my, my brother's memorial.  So it's sort of an interesting group of folks that (laughter)--this, this photograph is very telling.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my brother and he's working on a foot-push kiln in, in his studio in, in Japan, throwing, throwing a pot.  He became very, very well known internationally as a potter.  He pioneered glaze chemistries, metallic glaze chemistries, and on two separate occasions managed Greenwich House Potters [and Sculptors; Greenwich House Pottery] down in the Village [Greenwich Village] in New York--New York City [New York, New York], quite a guy, quite a guy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And, Don [HistoryMaker Donald Stull], if you could just give us--on all of these photos, if you don't know the date or the year, if you can give us like a decade, you know, just so we have a sense chronologically of where it fits.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I--this had to have been in the '60s [1960s].  Let's see, I started my firm [Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] in '66 [1966], so this had to have been in the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s], this, this photograph.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, great.  Thank you both.  We got it.
Speaker 1: Right is the younger.  The one on my left is the older.  This was taken some time in the mid-'80s [1980s], around '84 [1984], '86 [1986].  Actually, I think it may have been a little later than that.  I think it was after, after cancer and cancer was 1986 is when I came out of treatment, so it had to have been later in, in 1980.  My daughter [Cydney Stull] on my left now lives in Florida.  She lived in New York City for a time.  She's married to a Chilean guy who's an absolute delight.  My daughter to my right [Gia Stull] is here with my son [HistoryMaker Robert Stull] and I in Boston [Massachusetts] and is a--is a, a student artist.
Story_ID: 290309
Speaker 1: This is before the cancer.  (Laughter) The reason I refer to the cancer quite often is because it's almost as if I've had two lives.  I sort of relate to pre and post cancer in, in very different ways because it changed me in--enormous ways.  This is my oldest daughter [Cydney Stull], the one who now lives in Florida with her first husband.  And the painting or collage that you see on the wall behind them is, is one done by an artist, also, who was my son--my brother-in-law from my--from my first--my first marriage.  She with her husband and their first child at a Thanksgiving dinner here [Boston, Massachusetts] in the house.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a, a photograph of my immediate family, my mother [Ruth Callahan Branson], my stepfather, my brother standing beside my mother, then me, then my sister [Virginia Stull], oldest--older sister, younger than me, and then the baby sister, Gladys [Stull].  There's a story here.  We're standing in a place called Goodale Park [Columbus, Ohio] near our house.  My brother and I are in tennis togs.  We had been teaching ourselves to play tennis in this park, which was about a block and a half away from where we lived, which was in sort of--you, you wouldn't believe the house we were living in at the time.  It was absolutely awful, unbelievable.  I was so embarrassed about where we lived.  I--was a freshman in school--in The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] at the time, which was about eight blocks heading out beyond this park on the bus line and I would get off the bus going back and forth to school a couple of blocks away from where I lived so no one on the bus could see, see me approach the house.  My sister immediately to my left is a--is a, a practicing doctor now.  My mother lives with her in Columbus, Ohio--in Dayton, Ohio.  My sister beside her, Gladys, telling you was one of the first members of a homecoming queen entourage, black, at Ohio State University.  She received hate letters as a result of it.  She went on to meet the Kennedys.  My older sister between undergraduate school and medical school [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] had a one year leave that she used to take studies in Georgetown in [Washington] D.C. and they worked in the--in the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] campaign and met the Kennedys.  My younger sister then joined the Peace Corps after that and was in Tanzania shortly after Tanganyika and Zanzibar merged.  Some very unfortunate things happened to her there and she came back and went to work for Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] up in Harlem [New York, New York] and became involved in counseling young runaway women, street women that--and could not really handle it adequately emotionally and she took her life at twenty-two.  She killed herself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  We need to try to date--excuse me.  We need to try to date this photo or, or assign a--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --era to it.
Speaker 1: It had to have been '58 [1958], '57 [1957] or '58 [1958], 1957 or--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And then if you could just recap for the, the people who are--we're going to have people who are going to listen to your narrative and create a caption for the photo.  If you could just real quickly go left to right, my father, my mother, my brother, myself--
Speaker 1: My--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --my sister.
Speaker 1: My stepfather, my mother, my brother, me, my sister, and my sister, younger sister.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And the names of your sisters?
Speaker 1: Virginia is next to me and Gladys whom we referred to as Tiny is next to her.  My brother is Robert [Stull] or Bob.  My dad is George [Branson] and my mom is mom (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.  Great, thank you.
Speaker 1: This is really interesting.  My brother, an artist, he, he, he did--he worked in all kinds of media, large stretched skin canvases, ten, twenty feet across, as I indicated, large scale ceramics.  He was commissioned to design a park in Atlanta [Georgia] and it's the only time that we worked together on a project.  He--and we did it here at the house.  He was developing the design and I was preparing architectural drawings for it.  It was then commissioned.  This had to have been in '84 [1984] or '85 [1985].  They then hired a contractor to build the park.  The contractor started building it and couldn't really manage the contract and so he was dismissed.  My brother then got a number of his artist friends and they moved into a hostel near the park and lived there for a period of about a month and a half, and he and his artist friends built the--built the park--built the, the playground themselves.
Speaker 2: The person who is in the foreground of this photograph is my son, Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Stull], with a person who is still probably one of his best friends and--T.L. Lee, who is the son of my partner, [M.] David Lee, and this was taken at the Million Man March in, in D.C.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I think we're coming on a series of photographs of, of my extended family.  The family on my father's [Robert Stull] side is zero, my natural father's side is zero.  The family on my mother's side was absolutely enormous.  There were six aunts and five uncles and just a--vast array of nieces and cousins and all kinds of folks, and this is a photograph taken at one of the family reunions.  I can't date it exactly.  I pulled it out for two reasons, one is, is to point out the woman standing with her--with her knee cocked and her foot up on something straight back, that woman is a cousin.  She's from--my generation.  She raised two children as a single parent.  Her--I, I--my four--my--I and my siblings were the second group in our family to attend college.  I think I may have mentioned that before.  She has two children that she raised as a single parent, and one [Malika Callahan (ph.)] of them now is a--is a--practicing architecture living in Seattle [Washington] because I'm an architect.  She went back to school herself.
Story_ID: 290421
Speaker 1: This is another photograph taken at a family reunion many, many years ago.  It's interesting because the family reunion, we stopped off there, I and my three children on our way--on our way to Disneyland [Anaheim, California], so it was sort of a big holiday period of several weeks.  The young lady on the left is Malika Callahan [ph.].  She is the young lady who's now an architect practicing in, in, in Seattle [Washington].  The next person is my daughter, Gia [Stull], who I spoke about before.  The next person is my son, Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Stull].  You get a feeling for how long ago it was because Robert is now thirty-five.  Next to Robert is my daughter, Cydney [Stull], who now lives in Florida, as I mentioned and is married to a Chilean, and the next person is the youngest of my aunts, Aunt Idella [ph.], on my mother's [Ruth Callahan Branson] side.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Great.
Speaker 1: This--the, the person standing up in the jumpsuit is the person who sort of started it all.  The--I, I wanted to use this photograph for two reasons because the two male people other than my father [Robert Stull] and stepfather [George Branson] that were formative in my life are here.  They are two uncles.  The one standing in the jumpsuit is Uncle Kenneth [ph.] who was an attorney.  He was the first person in our family after the Second World War [World War II, WWII] to take a degree in--a college degree.  He went on to become a--an attorney.  He was dean of the college of the--of, of the school--law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law] at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] for a number of years.  My, my oldest sister [Virginia Stull] when she was studying medicine, medical school [University of Texas Medical Branch] in Galveston, Texas, he made it possible to--for her to live with him while she was in school.  When he was in law school [Moritz College of Law] at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], he, my--and my brother [Robert Stull] and I shared a room in our family's house, which assisted him in taking his degree.  It's from him that we were introduced to literature and just all kinds of things.  The other man in the photograph sitting is my Uncle Walter [ph.], who was a small masonry brick contractor.  And I couldn't get work as a--as an architectural intern in the summers even though I graduated third in my class, undergraduate degree in architecture at Ohio State University, and in the summers, I worked with my Uncle Walter, carry--you know, carrying hod and that kind of thing, helping him--helping him in his--in his--in his work.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Did you say about when this was taken, the date?
Speaker 1: This was probably--that's Aunt Idella again.  You can see how much she's changed.  I, I can't place this.  I, I just can't place it in time.  Both Kenneth and Walter are dead now.  Idella's the only one left living in that photograph.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was 1988, I think.  I'm on the left, right out of--right out of cancer treatment.  My hair had started coming back.  I was a lot--a lot thinner than I am now as you can see.  The occasion was the, the Dunphy [ph.] family, very prominent Boston [Massachusetts] family, held annual meetings that they called the circle and they were like think tank sessions and a, a great cross-section of the population of Boston would participate in the meetings at the circle to discuss the city and the issues in--involved that the city was facing.  This particular session included Bishop [Desmond] Tutu and his wife [Nomalizo Leah Shenxane].  The woman standing between the bishop and his wife is my younger daughter, and the person standing to the right beside Mrs. Tutu is my partner, [M.] David Lee.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is probably some time--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This, this is shortly after I--I started my office [Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], I founded my office in October of 1966, so this had to probably have been in the late '60s [1960s].  Governor [Francis W.] Sargent is to the left, and I'm just barely recognizing the guy to the right.  I was being sworn in as the, the new chairman of the Mass Fine Arts Commission [Massachusetts Fine Arts Commission], which I served--capacity I served in for five years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.  Oh, same thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This again is, is Frank Sargent, the governor.  It was probably year--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I talked about housing earlier and how it was the window of opportunity for my firm.  I'm standing in the foreground here, and one of my senior people, project managers, is standing off to my right.  I'm touring or visiting a site of a new project in Norwalk, Connecticut.  We entered a competition that had a total--for a hou- design of housing on this site and that had a total number of entries of sixty--sixty-eight, I think, entries and we won the competition.  I went to visit the site prior to winning in preparation for the design.  And then this photograph was taken when we went back for the awards ceremony, awarding us the contract when I had to make a presentation to the mayor and city counselors and to op- and the public and the press.  I wanted to get there early so I could revisit the site and confirm or not confirm that the design that we had won the competition with was one I still believed in after the fact.  So, we were walking the site and, and I felt very comfortable that we had--we had produced the correct design.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Could you give us the name of your--oh, let's go, go with this.
Speaker 2: Yes, the--this is on the site again.  I'm trying to get some sense of scale and vista and the person standing next to me is the project manager that I mentioned before, Marc Prufer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: P-R-U-F-E-R.  Marc is spelled M-A-R-C, without a K.
Story_ID: 290422
Speaker 1: This happened in September of this year, September or early October.  This is the award ceremony.  The--this is the competition.  I can't recall his name, the comp- competition organizer who is making--giving a talk about the project.  The entrance--entries for the competition were from all over the country, several from California, actually, and the award ceremony was held in this beautiful, absolutely beautiful art deco mansion that's there in, in Norwalk [Connecticut].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is--I had my practice [Stull Associates, Inc.; Stull and Lee, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] in over the years.  I think this is the one that was the most exciting.  It was probably around 1978, 1979, something like that.  It's an old warehouse near Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] in the Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts].  We had a, a sort of multi-storied space, and what we did was we leased the space with two art galleries from the fashionable Newbury Street gallery scene.  It was during a period where large scale super graphic art was very, very popular, and these galleries needed large spaces within which to share--to show their art, so we shared this space with two art galleries.  We had a French cook who came in and prepared lunch for--lunches for us.  It was absolutely marvelous and a marvelous office.  And I, I recall one, one winter, we created an assembly line and made wood toys down on this space.  This is where--this is the main space in a two-story loft type, type world, and our conference room was on the bull's eye in the middle of the space.  And there was a balcony around the edges of the space that had all the drafting and design stations on it, so--that looked down on the--on the conference room.  But, we created a assembly line down on this floor and made wood toys for, for kids for Christmas.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the warehouse building.  The--my initial--from the time I entered the School of Architecture [and Landscape Architecture; Austin E. Knowlton School of Architecture] at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] until the, the late, late '70s [1970s], basically I functioned as a white person.  Everyone in architecture that, that, that I knew and met in school, there were no people of color.  The--my office--there were only, as I may have mentioned before, a half dozen registered African American architects when I began my practice in 1966 in the entire--in the entire country.  So, my office was entirely composed of, of white kids.  And they sort of--they, they--I, I was referred to as the boss.  This is one of the people, an incredibly talented designer named Jim Velleco [James Velleco] in, in that--in that office, that warehouse office.  He went on to establish a, a partnership with one other of my employ- employees at the time and they, they started building a lot of high end con- condominium, condominium type housing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Great.
Speaker 2: This has an interesting story.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: About twelve or fourteen years ago, I think it's been that long, maybe a little less, I was asked to--I, I have served and continue to serve, less now than the past, on not only local but national panels of one kind or another with the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] and the GSA, [U.S.] General Services Administration.  GSA is a federal organization.  It's the building or builder agency for all of the--or most of the federal user agencies.  And the, the number of buildings that it does around the world is just absolutely staggering.  They had a design awards program that had been on hold for a number of years, and they decided to reactivate it and I was asked to sit on the jury that year to determine who the winners would be.  We could not award any of the architectural work that had been done by the federal government and submit it for awards.  It was so awful.  And we, we ended up awarding--I think the only architectural building, new, new building that--design building that we awarded was the addition to the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.], which was mostly underground.  We did award some artwork including a, a mural done by Jacob [Lawrence] in Jamaica, New York [Jamaica, Queens, New York].  We--made a statement, which was it was a shame that there was a time when, when the Kahlil Gibran of architecture were government buildings, were public buildings, the, the, the town hall on the--on the--on the town green and they, they were the--they set the tone and quality of architecture for, for our culture in that we had eroded into a mindset and a, a cultural attitude where we were building awful, awful buildings generated and driven primarily by expediency and cost.  We were then asked to come back and give a seminar on design excellence at the awards ceremony and we did that.  The GSA then made a commitment to establish a program dedicated to design excellence, and that program has been incredibly successful in the way it selects architects and so on.  I've been on the peer group panels--peer group catchment for, for selection in, in that process.  We have been the only African American architect since this program was initiated to have been short listed for a federal courthouse any place in the country.  This short list was from a list of over thirty architects to design--and it was short listed to three firms to design a courthouse in Springfield, Massachusetts.  This is the design that we prepared for that competition, and we finished second to Moshe Safdie, who's an Israeli architect, who's here in this country as well.
Story_ID: 290423
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Paul [D.] Goodnight, the artist who I mentioned before.  It was taken here [Boston, Massachusetts] at the house, and it was probably the second time we had gotten together to try to launch the Middle Passage Memorial that, that I spoke about earlier.  The two paintings that you see in the background are Paul's paintings, are two of the several paintings of his work that, that I have in my--in my collection.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I think I indicated earlier that I--that I sketch generally in order to say something as opposed to an--abstractions and that I write.  Most of the sketching that I did during this period of time, which was from 1977 until 1989, '88 [1988], '89 [1989], a period of ten to twelve years, and, and it covered the period between the time that my first wife and I separated and I began living alone and dealing with the demons of that, and the point at which I was--be--I, I, I had gone through cancer treatment and was in remission.  This is a sketch written to illustrate a poem--made to illustrate a poem that I had written called 'Now and Then,' [ph.] entitled 'Now and Then.'  The photograph to the left--the sketch to the left was of the current time when I made the sketch.  The one to the right is a sketch of me before the cancer.  I--the, the--for people seeing these, it doesn't mean very much, but I, I can see in what--when I look at these two drawings, I can see what I know to have been the change that I experienced in my mindset and attitude regarding life very, very clearly.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The--one, one of the most prominent and significant fighters of cancer is here--is here in Boston [Massachusetts].  It--the, the, the--I had a team of five doctors and my sister [Virginia Stull] would, would make--would've made the sixth, and they designed a special protocol for me to treat my cancer, which reminds me whenever I think about it of how unfair life can be.  If I weren't me in Boston, that never would've happened.  If I'd just been another, another Joe on the street, I'd be dead today.  But I wasn't and, and I'm very grateful that, that it was possible for me to have this kind of attention.  But, they designed a special protocol for me which was incredibly expensive.  They then applied for a grant as, as an experimental procedure or protocol and got most of the treatment funded for, for me.  Dana-Farber [Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts] is, is the cancer center and they subsequently put together a, a number of books like this and some other things to raise funds for, for Dana-Farber.  And they asked me and several other prominent people here in Boston and, and in other locations who came here for treatment if we would be good enough to, to be photographed.  And this is a photograph of me in one of their publications in one of my buildings, the Ruggles [Station], Ruggles transportation station here in Boston near Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 290424
Speaker 1: As I indicated when we talked about--this is the Middle Passage Memorial.  You're looking at a model, scale model.  You can see the scale people in, in the model.  The model has a glass case around it, so you're seeing the reflection on the back of, of the, the, the view of, of the model.  This, this basically is, is indicating--if you can imagine a, a, pyramid.  Pyramid is the, the strongest geometrical structure in, in the plane in solid geometries.  The, the outer planes of this established by the suspension cables, it's a suspension cable design form a, a pyramid, and then it's almost as if you carve away the pyramid to come inside and find this.  The--because it's a, a suspension cable structure, it, it allows movement.  And so you have the experience--I, I indicated before that the intent is to create a very strong physical and psychological emotional response to the experience of the--of the memorial that is a reflection of the experience of the actual Middle Passage.  And so you approach the, the--from the long view, you see this, this, this element coming up that ends in a point.  It is--that, that point would be a, a jet flame of fire, so that from a distance, that's what you would see.  The basin over which the memorial appears to be floating is a water basin and the water is animated or activated by, by coming into the basin down steps in a lower pyramid.  So, as you approach the memorial and to enter it, the, the reflections of the moving water are, are, are thrown up inside the memorial and they dance around on the walls, so you're creating a kind of animation using elements that are not, not animated.  And because of the way in which the tension structure works, there's a movement that's happening, a creaking, a, a feeling of lack of total stability.  You approach the interior on a bridge.  The sidewalls of the bridge fall away to crea- to, to enhance your sense of anxiety and mystery as you cross diagonally across the interior of the memorial, which is the--is the passage or the crossing, and you exit then the, the other side.  The entire composition is intended to induce emotional response and emotional reaction by using these, these gestalt, cues division that, that I mentioned earlier.
