Story_ID: 13244
Speaker 1: My name is Wesley South, Wesley Waterford South.  This is Tuesday, July the 18th, year 2000.
Speaker 2: And I want you to state your position, career, position, or--
Speaker 1: My--whatever position I had is on hold now.  I have not been at the radio station, WVON, since August of 1994, but I'm a 49 percent owner and I am the organizer of that station.  I was the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] for--what would that be--fifteen, sixteen years.
Story_ID: 13245
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I-- food is my favorite food.  I eat almost anything, except chitterlings.
Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I doubt if I have a favorite color.  I've never thought of it.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wherever I go I like to enjoy where it is, and so I don't have a favorite.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring, fall.  It's not hot, not cold, so one or the other.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying--phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't deal with that, favorite saying--with sayings.  I just speak my mind, and I have none.
Story_ID: 13246
Speaker 1: I'd like to start with you talking about your growing up.  And I know you were born in Oklahoma, and I also, know you're named after your father [Elijah Wesley South].  He was a medical doctor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I would like you to tell me about your family, and growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  The first thing I could remember, and people say, including my grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] and all, say I don't remember, was when my mother [Mayme Waterford South]--we lived in McAlester, Oklahoma. I was born in Muskogee [Oklahoma], March 23rd, 1914, and the first thing I remember is my mother purchased a rolling pin where you put ice in it and it was--.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your earliest memory and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my earliest memory was my mother was buying from a woman who made extra money by buying--selling household items, and she lived across the street from us.  And my mother had purchased an aluminum rolling pin, so where you could put ice in it.  Very practical, I would imagine.  And I went with her to get it, but the lady had two rolling pins, two or three others, and they both had red handles and I wanted--as a child I'd like to see her get that, and my mother wouldn't get it.  When I was telling her about that years later, she said, if you remember that, your brother was just a month old and your father was--had gone to Missouri--he was a physician--to see his father, your grandfather, and he was dying of cancer.  And that means you were twenty months old.  And I can remember that as if it was yesterday.  Nobody believes it, so that's early. I grew up in McAlester, Oklahoma.  I was ten years old.  I have an older half brother.  My father's first wife died and when--let's see, they were married, I don't know, but my older brother, who was a physician, was born in May of 1905.  My sister [Thelma Shaw], who's still alive, was born in 1907.  She was just ninety-three.  And I was born in 1914, as I said, March 23rd, 1914.  And we lived in McAlester and my father was the physician for the mines.  At that time, they had coal mines.  That was the industry there and the industry--they closed down, oh, about '24 [1924] '25 [1925].  And the town to this day still is just a place where people live, with very little to live on. Well, my father was-- got his degree--his medical degree from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  He was one of the first ones there around the turn of the century.  He was born in 19--1874, and he's from Missouri.  And he was--times came hard right after the war, and the mines closed.  And he was paid in chickens, pigs, eggs, and--but that did very little for the house that we had.  So we said we're going to move here [Chicago, Illinois], and he was going to Omaha, Nebraska.  And we came here to--and we were going to meet him there, but times became worse.  And to make a long story short, he never left there and we never went back.  My younger brother went back when he was about thirteen and stayed until he was twenty-one.  And we talked on the phone with my father and mother there, oh, twelve years.  I bet four and five times a day we were going, always go to Omaha, but that never--he went to Tulsa [Oklahoma] and opened a clinic and he was--we didn't want to go back there.  My mother didn't want to go back there, so that was the end of the--end of that association.  We lived with my grandfather, Robert Howard Waterford, and with--and his wife, my grandmother and--.
Story_ID: 13247
Speaker 1: You were talking about how your--did your parents [Elijah Wesley South, Mayme Waterford South] still officially--?  Then they sort of separated or divorced then.
Speaker 2: They didn't divorce.
Speaker 1: They just separated.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, why didn't your father--what was--? You said that it was complicated, but is it--?
Speaker 2: He wanted to stay there, and we wanted to stay here.  If there was any place I hated worse, that was Oklahoma.  And I had gotten to like Chicago [Illinois] and my mother liked it, and I like being with my grandparents and great-grandmother [Mary Barber] and that was it.
Story_ID: 13248
Speaker 1: When I had asked earlier when the cameras weren't rolling about your middle name, Waterford, and you started to tell me the origin of that.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's what I was going to.  My grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] was one of six children and he was born in Edmondson, Arkansas in 1860 about four-- and December, two days after Christmas, about four or five days--four or five months before the beginning of the Civil War [1861-1865].  His grandfather was a free black who came to this country as a seaman from somewhere in the islands.  I couldn't tell you which--which one.  And he met my great-grandmother [Mary Barber] when he was in Memphis [Tennessee], for some reason, and they were married.  But she remained a slave and he left.  She had five children: five sons and one daughter.  And his name was Waterford.  He was Robert Waterford.  My grandfather was Robert Howard Waterford.  My grandfather was the third child of this union.  And in 19--near the end of the Civil War as I'm told--and it happened in the states of Arkansas and Mississippi.  They knew they were going to lose, the owners of the slaves, the free people, knew they were going to lose the war and they thought they would go to Texas, which was a republic before it joined the United States, and they went to Texas.  They walked with wagons and all, and they--when the war was over, they didn't know it for a while and it ended in about April.  And that's--and then there was some people who found out slaves were there--the soldiers did, and they were freed. And they call that to this day Juneteenth [June 19th, 1865], and everyone was happy.  And the soldiers, Union soldiers, compelled the slave owners to give their slaves a transportation, a wagon, if they had it, a wagon and a horse.  And my great-grandmother had six children, six or seven, I've forgotten.  And they started back from somewhere in Texas to Edmondson, Arkansas which is six--directly sixteen miles east of Memphis, Tennessee.  And on the first night that they're there, they tied up the horse and everything, someone stole the horse and the wagon.  And while still in Texas, they had to walk from Texas.  Fortunately, it was June, July, and August, and, occasionally, they would get a lift by walking across a field and someone giving them a ride.  And it took them about three months to get back to where they were, and they lived there.  They had land, and this Waterford had bought the land.  He bought it, and gave each of his grandsons ten acres. And that ten acres stayed and it--all of it stayed in the family until about, oh, 1965 or something.  It's about thirty years--thirty-five years ago we sold it.  There were so many of the people and so they got something like thirty dollars or forty dollars, because the heirs had multiplied so. My grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] wanted to be a physician and he went to a medical school after my aunt, who was the third child, who was born in 1889.  And he went to medical school, about 1890, '91 [1891]--a medical school in Memphis, Tennessee.  And during the summer for three years he came to Chicago [Illinois] and he went to--he worked as a waiter and went to what is now Rush Medical School during the summer.  And he was a friend of Dr. Daniel Hale Williams, who was supposed to have been the first physician to operate on the heart.  He went back to Muskogee, Oklahoma.  No, he went back to Arkansas and my grandmother did not--they were living in West Memphis [Arkansas] and he wanted--that's where he wanted to go.  But she said," No".  She was not going to rear her daughters--she had three daughters then--on a river town, which were like slums, and all types of people there, so he moved to Pine Bluff, Arkansas and they grew up there.  He was a physician.  And Lewis--I forget Lewis's last name; his first name--was another black who was a friend of my father's and grandfather, and he owned a race track.
Story_ID: 13249
Speaker 1: My great-grandmother on my grand--on my mother's side and I knew her.  She was--I was seventeen when she passed and her name was Mary Barber, but she was Caine (ph.).  She married a fellow by the name of Caine.  She was a slave.  She was born in 1848, and she was twelve years old when, yes, just twelve when the Civil War [1861-1865] began.  She was sixteen when it ended and at seventeen, she and about twenty-five young women, ex-slaves, walked from Le--in the area of Lexington, Kentucky to Memphis [Tennessee], because they'd heard that was a better place to live.  It was in the summertime and they went.  And they had one--she told us of one woman who was tall and muscular and she carried an ax handle.  And if anybody tried to molest any of those girls she didn't have to do to hit them but once, and they were left alone.  They got--arrived in Memphis without any of them being raped and they were--which was unusual at that time.  There were Union soldiers there, and they were together, but they were--they were fighters.  My grandmother was a small woman, but she was like a little--I don't want to say it--she was a fighter and didn't care who she hit how--what she did for protection.  And they were known when they went to Memphis.  They lived together for a while. Another little story adjacent to that.  One of the young women had a small brother, who was about nine or ten years old, and he didn't want to be left in Lexington by himself, so he started out and he walked.  And she threw rocks at him and he went, but he kept walking and everyday he'd be behind them.  Well, at night they'd call him, you know, "You've got to go back".  Well, after three days there was nothing they could do but take him along.  And he was--he proved to be an entrepreneur there in later years, and had sort of a wood shop where he sold wood and things. But getting back to my grandmother; she went to Mississippi, and she was working in a home and, as a maid.  And they were Jewish--it was a Jewish--. Her name was Schoolfield (ph.).  It's a Jewish name and she was-- this man was her, not master, but help.  And then he was going to marry her, but he didn't, as it happened, and she left with her daughter and went to Memphis and that--my grandmother grew up in Memphis.  And she met my--my grandmother met my grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] there as-- when he was--going to school.  He hadn't gotten to medical school yet. And they were married when she was fifteen, and my mother was born when she was seventeen..  And when he went to medical school, he took his children to Edmondson [Arkansas], which was across the river about sixteen miles, to live with his family, where my great-grandmother was and they grew up there.
Story_ID: 13250
Speaker 1: Now, getting back to Pine Bluff [Arkansas], I told you they sent--they wanted them, the girls, educated and they sent all three of them to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And what they all had--my aunt died in 1986, and you may know her.  Did you ever hear of Sadie Waterford? Sadie Waterford.  There's a manor today out in Crestwood [Illinois] where she started a home for girls--pre-delinquent girls and that's another story.  But getting back--bringing them up, they went to Tuskegee and they all loved the pictures they have of Booker T. Washington, and it's one of their prize possessions to be with him and have his picture.  He would have his picture made with many of the students.  I think you had to earn something, good grades or something, a certain like, before he would do that.  That was one way of encouraging the people, so he would have their pictures made with him. And in 1903 they moved to Oklahoma from Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  They were still in Tuskegee.  And when they came home in 1904, about August, they found they had a little brother.  They surprised them.  And he was born in--he was the prince of the group and he died.  He was ten years older than I am.  He died in 1988.  He became a lawyer and he was with the city here [Chicago, Illinois].  And as it was with many black professionals, dentists, lawyers--I don't know of any doctors--in order to survive, they had to work in the Post Office, and he was one.  But he graduated from the University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois] with honors, but couldn't get a job in any of the law firms as you did, and my daughter did, but things were different then as you probably know.  Because of his skin coloring, people thought he was white until they--but he let them know who he was and that's one reason he didn't--he was hired at one place, one firm, and he was there about ten days when they found out and they found reason to let him go.
Speaker 2: You know, this is--the person you're talking about now is your--.
Speaker 1: Uncle.
Story_ID: 13251
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you to describe your parents.  You know, what was your father like?
Speaker 2: My father [Elijah Wesley South] was pure African, and he was from Missouri.  And they have a town there.  I don't know where it is.  My brother, up until he died a few years ago, he used to go to the annual reunions.  But they have a south street named for my father's grandfather.  His grandfather and father were slaves, and he was about my size, and he was muscular.  And his grand--his grandfather--his great-grandfather was brought here from Guinea, Africa, and he met his mother.  They were taken to Missouri and they--that's where he grew up.  He went to Jefferson City, got his college degree, and then from there he went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And he was one of the--I won't say he was the first class, but he was one of the, one of the first to be there.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what type of person he was though.  Can you sort of describe him?  His father had been a doctor.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: His--Oh, on the other?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was mother's father.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it was my mother's father.  No, my father's father was a minister.  And what else?
Speaker 1: So what kind of person was your father?  Would you--?
Speaker 2: He was very mild mannered, very mild, extremely mild.  He carried a gun, even though he was mild.  And the reason he carried a gun, when I knew him, there was a riot in Tulsa [Oklahoma] in 1919.  Are your lights blinking?
Speaker 1: We've still got a couple minutes left on the tape.
Speaker 2: Oh--oh, I see.
Speaker 1: And there was a girl--a black girl who was about fourteen or fifteen--was raped.  And we had a water purification plant there in McAlester [Oklahoma] and they caught the man.  And she was killed, incidentally.  They caught him, and he was not sent to prison.  He got out of it some way and the people decided they were going to--that was not going to happen again.  And a week--well, soon after--I wouldn't know whether a week or month, but it was in the summertime.  And, incidentally, most of these riots occur in the summertime when it's warm.  Someone, a Caucasian fellow broke on a Saturday night, broke into a house there, and he was killed. And the police came there.  And we had very few telephones there.  My father had one, but they had a lot of runners and they got people.  And they went down to this place and wouldn't let the sheriff arrest this man, because this man had broken in, and somehow or another they were able to get away with that.
Story_ID: 13252
Speaker 1: My father [Elijah Wesley South] organized--was among those who organized a sort of like a police group within the black community.  And in 1923, this was two years later, our house was set on fire.  That's why we came, the main reason that we came.  We split up and we came to Chicago [Illinois].  He stayed there to collect money and the people, a lot of people owed him.  And the mines had not gone bankrupt and they owed him a large sum.  Oh, when I'm saying large, I wouldn't know how much it was, but it was--he was hoping to get it.  He got something like ten or twelve cents on a dollar.  And he went to Tulsa [Oklahoma] which had had a riot in 1919.  That was the only time in this country that homes of anybody had been bombed by air--air bombardment.  I don't know if you've heard of that.  The--there were many--there were just sections of Tulsa that were just burned out, and they were--a lot of blacks were killed and a few whites were killed. My grandfather became angry with many of the conditions there and that's--he left there in 1922 and came to Chicago, not as a physician.  I think he was sixty-two then, but he had made sufficient money to retire here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you--so your father was essentially--I mean you describe him as a quiet man, but he was a--was he also a rabble rouser as well?
Speaker 1: No--no, he wasn't a rabble rouser.
Speaker 2: He wasn't a rabble rouser.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: But you said that he--but how did--? You said that he was--  your house ended up burning down, because--.
Speaker 1: At night.
Speaker 2: At night, but he was involved--.
Speaker 1: We think--we could never prove who set it afire and--
Speaker 2: Okay; but who did you speculate?
Speaker 1: The Ku Klux [Klan].
Speaker 2: Okay--okay--okay--okay.  That's what's--Okay--okay.  But it was in reaction. They had targeted him because--.
Speaker 1: That's right--of his leadership.
Speaker 2: Describe--.
Speaker 1: He, the minister, of--he belonged to the ME [Methodist Episcopal] Church.  We belonged to the AM-- my mother--my mother and us, we all belonged to the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: His father was a ME [Methodist Episcopal] preacher--Methodist preacher, and they were--the man that preached there, and my father, and there was another doctor there, Dr. Gray.  They all--they stuck together and they all, as I said, they all were armed at all times.
Speaker 2: But in many ways, I mean, maybe not because he wanted to--he was somewhat of an activist, your father.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was--yeah--yeah.
Story_ID: 13253
Speaker 1: Describe your mother to me.
Speaker 2: My mother [Mayme Waterford South] was a--she learned in Tuskegee [Institute, Alabama] to be a dressmaker, and she was a good seamstress.  She was a--she came here to Chicago [Illinois] and that's how we lived.  She was a seamstress and she made--she was a friend of a woman there.
Story_ID: 13254
Speaker 1: There was the flu epidemic of 1919, I think it was, where twenty million people were killed worldwide.  I don't know if you're familiar with that flu epidemic.  Oh, it was terrible.  It's in the history books.  And it was terrible in the, all over the state, all over the country.  People were wearing masks.  You know, if you ever see any movies at that time.  They didn't know where--they didn't know what they know today. My father [Elijah Wesley South]--and it was in the paper--was the only physician in the state of Oklahoma who did not lose a single patient during that epidemic.  He was, he guessed that he put his patients that he had on liquid diets.  And they got them up out of bed to walk around a little, as much as possible.  And he did not give them eggs.  There was something other.  I don't know what the rationale was and I don't know if he knew what it was, but that they felt he it would clog the bronchials or whatever--wherever that attacked them.  And he had that reputation, but it did not appear--it appeared in one paper.  When they found out he was black, it was never published.  Now, it was published in the 'Chicago Defender' and we got the 'Defender' quite--almost every week down there.  That was him. Now, I was getting to my mother [Mayme Waterford South].  There--tuberculosis was very--very rampant at that time.  And we had a--my mother had a friend who had a daughter and she--this--a very beautiful girl had tuberculosis.  My uncle that I told you about, who was my mother's brother, they lived in Muskogee [Oklahoma].  Mildred Green--I'm thinking of her name.  Her father was a--the photographer there and he--she had tuberculosis.  And when we moved to Chicago [Illinois] there was not as much TB [tuberculosis] here as it was in Oklahoma.  But my younger sister [Thelma Shaw] who was seven in 19--it was 1927.  She was eight.  No, she was nine.  She had to go to the sanitarium because she had tuberculosis.  I don't know if you're familiar with the sanitarium on Crawford, 5400 North. And when I came here there were green signs, as I remember, where they--what's the word you used when you keep people out of--you can't go into that house or--.
Speaker 2: Quarantine?
Speaker 1: Quarantine.  It was quarantined for scarlet fever and--.
Speaker 2: You mean for tuberculosis?
Speaker 1: No, scarlet fever.  And tuberculosis--I don't know if there were any.  I don't recall anybody.  And smallpox which was red--those red--there was red, yellow, and green were the three.  I've forgotten what the green was.
Story_ID: 13255
Speaker 1: Now, getting to my mother [Mayme Waterford South].  My mother was a seamstress here [Chicago, Illinois] and she was one of the leaders of the union to raise the pay. And it was piece work.  And when they found out that even the fastest of the-- they called them operators--could only make $4.00 or $5.00 a day, they knew something was wrong, and when they got through, it was about doubled.  And she was quite protective of us and my sister.  And in 1930, she was working at Roosevelt Road, now near Halsted [Street].  She had a--went to--the Arrow Drug Company--and they would not serve her.  And she went to--I don't know if you knew Judge Green here.  Did you know him?  Judge Wendell Green was a lawyer and he was the second black judge here in Chicago or third black judge in Chicago.  And he won this case, and she had $500.  He got his, whatever, his portion.  In 1931, that was a whole lot of money.  And my grandfather bought a six flat building, 5417--5417-19 Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and he lost it, because of the [Great] Depression.  You know, he and people just couldn't pay their--and we were all living together at the time.
Story_ID: 13256
Speaker 1: When you moved to Chicago [Illinois],  you were ten years old, weren't you?
Speaker 2: Ten years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had formed an impression.  Was it the burning of your house down with the Ku Klux Klan that left a strong memory with you, or was it that you just didn't like other things about Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: There was nothing to do in Oklahoma.  I was not afraid when I was at home or in the neighborhood, but I was afraid when I would go downtown to Woolworth's, or to my father's [Elijah Wesley South] office which was on the fringes of the downtown at that time.  I had some good friends here and I didn't have that many in McAlester [Oklahoma]..  There were two or three there, because it was a small town.
Speaker 1: So do you remember what your impressions are when you first came here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We got off at forty--we went from McAlester by train over to Edmondson, Arkansas where my mother [Mayme Waterford South] grew up.  Incidentally, she was born--what's the name of the college in Memphis [Tennessee]--black college?
Speaker 1: Memphis State?  Memphis State?
Speaker 2: No, it's not a--no, that would be a state. Not--. Anyway, it's a college there.  She was born in the house where that college started.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: She was the only one that was born in Memphis.  The others were born in Edmondson.  But, anyway, we took a train to Edmondson.  We were there for six weeks.  Got to Memphis and got the IC [Illinois Central Railroad] and came here like the others did from there.  And we got off at 43rd and--IC.  Now, I had seen buildings, a few buildings in Memphis. But when we passed the Tyson Hotel at 43rd [Street]--eight-story building, it's still there.  They renovated it.  I noticed it last week or so.  Eight stories.  I thought--and when I went down and saw the new Wrigley Building, that was something.  The next year, '25 [1925], is when they had the [Chicago] Tribune Tower right across the street. My mother took us to all the cultural things.  We saw plays, and that's the Auditorium.  And in 1927, one of her friends from Oklahoma came to, came to, and spent the night with--spent two or three days with us.  And we went to the Navy Pier in the summertime, and when we got there, there was a lot of confusion.  It rained and they--and we were going there to catch a boat that would take you from the pier to Lincoln Park, and then turn around.  It cost a half a dollar or something like. The boat called the 'Favorite' and it's in the record book.  And it began to rain and everybody on one side of the boat went to the other side, and the boat capsized.  None of us could swim.  If we'd have been--had gone an hour earlier, we probably would have been on that boat.  And I think fifteen, twenty--I don't know how many, but quite a few people drowned and that's what was going on when we got out there--bringing the bodies in.
Story_ID: 13257
Speaker 1: You say that you're a product of the Chicago Public Schools.  Now, you went to [Edmund] Burke Elementary School.
Speaker 2: I went to Forestville [Elementary School] first.  When we came in--we had got here on the 29th of May.  The 30th was Memorial Day.  We called it Declaration Day then, but it's Memorial Day weekend.  And on the June 1st we enrolled at Forestville.  I was in the sixth grade and I had--they had me stay in the sixth grade.  It was just for a month.  There were three, maybe a half dozen that I can  recall, blacks in that class.  When we went back in September there were three, maybe a  half dozen whites in the class.  All of them had moved further south to Willard School, to Burke School.  And then the next year it was so crowded we had a day shift and a night shift, and there were no blacks living, now if you're familiar with. well you are familiar, Indiana, Michigan, 43rd and Michigan [Chicago, Illinois].  Do you know where the [Chicago] Urban League is now?  That was one of the first buildings to go over to blacks.  At that time, it became the 'Bird Cage Tea Room' and then after that 'McGavick Mortuary'.  And the, let's see, the streetcars on the--come east and west.  They--on 51st Street they stopped at King, at Grand Boulevard, which later became South Parkway, and then now King, King Drive, Martin Luther King Drive.  And in 1940, after a lot of us got to talking about and petitioning for that 51st Street line to go all the way to Cottage Grove [Avenue], they finally did that.  And when they showed, when they showed up there with all the workmen, there was not a black on there.  We called--I don't know if you--does the name (pause) wait a minute, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the head of the communist party here, and--Lightfoot-- Claude Lightfoot.  Does that name mean anything to you?  Claude Lightfoot and--Claude Lightfoot and--.
Speaker 1: (inaudible) Lightfoot.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Lightfoot, Kimber--.
Speaker 2: I just lost that circuit.
Speaker 1: Oh, no.
Speaker 2: Say that again.
Speaker 1: Kimber--do you know what I want to ask you?  I want to ask--.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Wendell Phillips [Junior High School].
Speaker 1: You went to Wendell Phillips, all right.
Speaker 2: And the reason I went to Wendell Phillips, it was closer and that was the worst mistake I made.  They made me repeat a grade, because at Burke [Elementary School] they were extremely strict on doing your homework.  They were not strict at--I saw it, I don't say others didn't, but doing the homework at Wendell Phillips Junior High.  I was in junior high.
Story_ID: 13258
Speaker 1: I want to ask you what type of child you were.  I mean I know that experience in Oklahoma sort of frightened you, and everyone wanted--this was fine just to be here and you found Chicago [Illinois] was pretty--was--there were more things happening and all of that.  But what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: That's--I think other people ought to (laughs)--should say what type I was.  I--.
Speaker 1: Were you shy?
Speaker 2: No, I was--I was shy.  I felt shy, but I'd ask to do anything if I thought it, if, let me--when I was--let me go ahead.  In 1931 the [Great] Depression was in full swing then and at thirty--we lived, had moved then from--my grandfather had lost his place at 5417 [Indiana Avenue].  We lived at 638 East Oakwood Boulevard. It's two doors from the corner and that, you know, Northeastern University is there now.  It used to be--I've forgotten the name of the--Lincoln Center it was. And on 39th and Langley [Streets], there was a massive building, apartment building.  People didn't have any money to pay their rent and they, the sheriffs, would come there and set them out on the street.  And I was, you know, when I saw it, I went and helped, I was seventeen at the time, put them back in, put the people back into their place and the police came there one day.  Now, they were just setting these people out in that place maybe two or three times a week.  And I went over there and wanted to help put them back and the police came.  And I have a scar right here now where a policeman hit me, and all I remember was getting up and I went home.  And I knew my grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] was going to be angry with me.  Blood was all down here.  That's when I found out what a grandfather can do.  He did not--(crying).  He took me (inaudible), and I'd never been hit.  You know, grandfathers, lot of times they'd tell you to do things, they'd want you to do it and they know why.  And that's, that's when I grew up and I realized that he really, what he meant for me, and they never had anymore pride. I used to be a little problem.  I had a job and everything.  I was a problem child, but he never--it never happened again.  I mean my thoughts for him.
Speaker 1: So he came and aided you right then?
Speaker 2: No, I went home.  See we were right around the corner and I went there and he dressed--see he was a physician.  He--see--.
Speaker 1: Right.  He was your mother's father.  Now, how did your mother's father end up here?  You know, they came--
Speaker 2: They wanted to leave Oklahoma and wanted--they wanted a son to be a doctor, but he didn't like blood.  He was really--couldn't and he became an attorney, and that was the main reason they came here.  And they were not here six months before my grandfather had terrible headaches, and they didn't know whether it was a tumor or what.  And that--really they didn't know what happened, because the doctor who--they were staying with them when they came here.  It was a friend of his, but he's a doctor, putting leeches on the, you know, and my grandfather said it won't work.  And when a boy who had asthma came there and what did they do, they put a ruler on your head, punch a hole in it, and get some mud and put some of your hair in there;  and when you grow above that it's supposed to be gone.  My grandfather [said], "No, we've got to leave here."  Fortunately, his headaches went away.  He never had another headache.
Speaker 1: So you loved your grandfather and he was--he really was--he replaced your father [Elijah Wesley South], in some respects, when you moved here, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'd say 99 percent.
Speaker 1: And so were you a thoughtful child, or were you respective?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--yeah--oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was making four dollars a week after school in the summertime.
Speaker 1: Now, what age are we talking about here?
Speaker 2: 1926.  I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve.
Speaker 2: And I had forty dollars at the end of summer, which is a lot of money, and I bought my mother--I thought it was a big thing and it was big to her, but at the end of it and she kept that almost up until the end of her days.
Speaker 1: You mean the gift you bought?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the gift?
Speaker 2: It was a brooch, sort of like a--and I thought she'd like it and she wore it.  It was--I paid less than three dollars for it.
Speaker 1: So she must have loved it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 13259
Speaker 1: Junior high started sixth and eighth, sixth to eighth.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But high school started at ninth.  I said eighth.  It started at ninth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's what I--system I was used to, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Tell me what it was like.  Share any memories around that time period, any memories, any memories with your family, or with your friends, or --.
Speaker 1: Well, I went to--when I graduated from [Edmund] Burke [Elementary School]--I went to Burke, first, and Burke, as I later learned, was a very good school.  And one of the teachers there suggested I go to summer school in 1928.  She said, " Now what you have to do is study, you can do it. But get--."  See I liked to play,  play ball and other things.  And I went to summer school, and I met a teacher there.  I'm getting old.  I've forgotten what her name was.  Anyway, but she used to walk with me.  She was a Jewish woman, and she would walk about as far as 55th Street to the El [elevated train]. She would--I would get off at 55th Street and she would sit down.  The other teachers--you know, I mean she was telling you, you can go, you can do this and you should do that.  And I'd tell her about what we were going to do and it was--she was just a nice person.  She showed--like I'd tell my mother about her, and told her about my mother.  And I had Manford Byrd, when he was Assistant Superintendent, to look up to see if she still alive.  I was going to send--but he couldn't find her name, but that was fifty years later.
Story_ID: 13260
Speaker 1: Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois]--in 1935 I graduated from high school.  I was twenty years old, almost twenty one.  I had stopped--during the [Great] Depression I had stopped.  I was an usher at the Michigan theater, the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] and I realized I had to get back to school and I went back and I was out for, oh, a year-and-a-half.  But on graduation night, which would be the last of January of 1935, someone set fire to Wendell Phillips High School and it burned.  I mean it was 80, 90 percent destroyed.  They had to--they had begun working on Du Sable [High School] at 49th [Street] and State [Street] and Wabash [Avenue]--49th [Street] to 50th [Street] about two or three years later.  And the iron skeleton was just there, but because they needed--.
Speaker 2: [Off camera discussion]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went there and did fair, but I did--when I--and I didn't do fair at Wendell Phillips, and I failed.  I had to do that again.  That's why I had to go to summer and then went back to [Edmund] Burke [Elementary School].
Story_ID: 13261
Speaker 1: So you were saying that it was the [Great] Depression, so you took time off, but you knew you had to go back to school and so you were about--you said you graduated at twenty, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then what--tell me what you were doing at that point.
Speaker 2: What was I doing?
Speaker 1: 'Cause--.
Speaker 2: I was working.  There was--let me see, seven days a week.  There were no days off.  You'd make ninety-five cents to work from 1:30--no--1:15 to 6:00 and from 6:00 to midnight you made another.  You made a $1.90 a day if you worked that and most of the people in those jobs were a premium.  And maybe if nobody--one fellow got an extra ninety cents if he, and you could leave at 10:30, but he had to take the reports down to 520 North Michigan [Avenue]. And in wintertime when you had to walk across that bridge--I had to do it three or four times--it was brutal.  And once or twice a month you had--when they said, "Come pass out bills," you know, going house to house, say, what was going to be on to show, I wanted to be paid and they wouldn't pay.  And my mother [Mayme Waterford South] went there, so they just got rid of me.  And then I tried to start an ushers' union and I got back there then and it was never the same as it was before. I went to [Edmund] Burke [Elementary School].  Now, let's see, that's sixteen..  Now, I'm trying to think.  Oh, I worked at another--I worked at three or four theaters as--the Twentieth Century was at 47th and Prairie [Streets]. The Regal was at 47th [Street] and [Martin Luther] King Drive and the Vendome was at 31st and State [Streets] and the Avenue was at 31st [Street] and Indiana [Avenue]. I worked at all of those places, but it was never more than a dollar and a quarter.  It was ninety-five[cents] at one time, but if you made it--and that was fairly good money. Now, in 19--I went to Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois] in 19--well, I did something before that, but because I'm telling you, I went to the CCC.  Do you know what CCC was?  He's shaking his head yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my grandfather was in the CCC.
Speaker 2: What's this?  The Common--?
Speaker 1: No, it was Civilian--.
Speaker 2: Civilian Conservation Corps.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Have you ever been to Skokie [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do you ever see those lagoons up there?
Speaker 1: Aw, aw (no).
Speaker 2: Well, they have lagoons.  And I was one of the ones who pulled the wheelbarrow and I was there about, oh, a couple of weeks.  And I, and you had your physicals you'd have to take just like in the Army.  You had Army uniforms.  You just didn't salute, and that type of thing.  And they gave you injections, typhoid,  anything as if you were going overseas.  You got the same treatment, the same as they did in the Army.  And you had Army trucks.  They had barracks and everything.  But I didn't like that work, so I went and told--you're not supposed to do this, but I went to the commander.  I acted like I didn't know any better and told him I'd like to be in the, what do you call it, the dispensary.  And I said, " My father and grandfather's a physician;  my brother's a physician.  I have--know something.  I'm from high school."  "Well, oh, no, we have all we need."  They didn't.  I said, " You don't have any"--we called ourselves--"any Negroes there."  " No, no, I'm sorry."  Two days later I was put in charge of the canteen, and fellows who had been there for years, well, for months, because it was only--this was in '35 [1935].  Oh, yeah, in April of '35 [1935] and I had charge of the canteen.  We moved to Stockton, Illinois, which is about, oh, maybe thirty miles from Rockford [Illinois] in the Galena area.  And we built roads--many roads there, but I still was in charge of the canteen.
Story_ID: 13262
Speaker 1: You were talking about [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [now Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wilson.  And then I came back and I went to Wilson Junior College in 1936.  I wanted to get a job there at the college and they get NYA, the National Youth Administration, going to give me twenty dollars a month.  What am I going to do with twenty dollars a month?  I got myself--my grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] loaned me $7.50.  I had sold him on the idea.  I got ladies' hats and I went down to South Water Street.  That's all on Randolph from--Randolph and--no, no, Randolph [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] to Wacker Drive.  That was all they had.  That's all they sold there then.  That was a hat place and I got myself a dozen hats for a dollar. They were sixty-two and a half cents and I doubled that and I sold them for a dollar-and-a-quarter.  I never knocked on a single door, "Lady, would you like a hat?"  I could sell this lady and she would send me somewhere.  I was making $12 and $13 a day, which was when I was 16, 17, and I did that.  And I went to Wilson Junior College and I could only take --I didn't take a full course.  I took about two courses, but I went.  And that went on until 1930--that was '35 [1935],'36 [1936], '38 [1938]. And my aunt [?], the one who has--she had eight children.  The middle --I told you about Sadie Waterford and my mother.  Well, the other aunt [?], she had eight children.  Her husband was a meat inspector, a government meat inspector at the stockyards and their pay was almost identical with that, with the Post Office.  And with eight children that wasn't enough and they were always in financial crisis, as most people were.  She started--I went to a store on the northeast corner of 51st and Indiana [Streets]and they were selling Norridge refrigerators.  See, everybody had an icebox up till that time.  That woman, my aunt, starting make one and $1.50 a day.  She was a real salesman--saleswoman, so I said, "Well, I'm going to do the same thing."  So she got me in over there and I was there.  And I had to do something during the summer, because the hats--I was selling hats just so--I got to the point where they were--I was selling hats for $3.00 and $4.00 and I had good clientele.  And she took me over there to this place and the man talked with me. Fine, good.  I went out and during the summer of '38 [1938] I sold an iron.  That's the only thing I sold.  You know what I mean?  No--I couldn't sell hats, because for the woman, you know, the grease they had on the white hats, it ruined them. And so I learned then I was not that kind of a salesman, and that was in '38 [1938]. In '39 [1939], then the war was--things were beginning to get--and I got in the war plant and foot gear.  And they had me doing the--let's see, they were janitors, but I was educated, so I cleaned the toilets of the people who were in the offices.  I didn't--it was not down in (inaudible) and they had spittoons, and I took the spittoons and put them over somewhere else.  And, you know, "Why did you do that?" "Man,  I can't clean in the spittoons.  That smells.  I don't do that."  So they put me down that we'd better--he's not as smart as we thought he was.  And I was down there emptying the steel that was mixed with--you know, when they're making gears and they're winding there's a lot of taking it out, putting it, and bend.  It was going just almost like you'd wait for that big build up and you take it out.  No, no, I can't do this.  So I said all these other--the--all of the blacks were pushing wheelbarrows and all the whites were on different kind of presses.  So I went to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] at Chicago Avenue and that's still there and they were giving, training people.  I was there for about two months.  And I went back and we got--I started talking to them, you know, "Listen, if we're going to be here, we're going to join the union."  Well, the union came in and I helped 'em.  And instead of pushing in the, these wheelbarrows outside, I was transferred outside where it was cold where you had, so that made me mad and so I--you know, we started having--you couldn't strike.  So, finally, A. [Asa] Philip Randolph got the FEPC [Fair Employment Practices Committee] started.  And I went to the [Chicago] Urban League and told them what was going on and they came out.  And you might know the woman's name.  She's still--I've forgotten her name, but she's a person here in Chicago now.  The next day I was put on a machine, as were some of the other blacks, and I stayed there.  And in 19--in May of '43 [1943]--no, March of '43 [1943], around my birthday, they brought in a whole lot of women.  I said, " Uh, oh."  That meant that we were going--the men--all black, white, green, pink, polka dot, they were going to the Army.  And, sure enough, they began to leave, and my time came in July of 1943.
Story_ID: 13263
Speaker 1: As you know, there was two armies: the black army and the white army.  And we went--I was sent to Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri] to be an engineer.  Hot. Going to be an officer.  So they--my--they give you an I.Q. [intelligence quotient] test and I--100 is average.  I don't know if you know that and mine was 133.  So they put me in a class to prepare after, you know, after you had thirteen weeks.  Everybody had to take thirteen weeks, so that was over in, let's see, July, August, September, about sometime in October.  And I, you know, made an application.  They put me right in there and we were preparing to go to OCS, Officers' Candidate School, in Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  That's where the engineers were, and I was doing fine.  And one of the biggest dangers, the biggest casualties in the Army, in the military, is venereal disease among the young men.  And we were being taught what to tell, you know, how young recruits and young people how to avoid this and that type of thing.  Now, you've got to remember this is in Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri and it was the doctor who was lecturing us, came and was talking about venereal disease and that--I forget the name of it.
Speaker 2: Which kind of venereal disease?
Speaker 1: It's a venereal disease.
Speaker 2: Syphilis, gonorrhea?
Speaker 1: No.  Huh?  No, neither syphilis or, no, neither one of those.  It's another one.
Speaker 2: Gonorrhea.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: No, no, that's (inaudible) --
Speaker 1: Anyway, the name is significant, because--but, anyway, he was saying that that was a black disease among Negroes.  Well, I had a grandfather and I had a brother who told me otherwise, that it was a disease among people--among people who were not--where the sanitary conditions were not what they should be.  What was it?  But, anyway, it will come to me.  And so he says, you know, "It's true," he said, but this--. We had a sergeant, a white sergeant, who came back from Detroit [Michigan]--from St. Louis [Missouri] and he had whatever the name of this disease was.  And he swears to goodness that he was not with a black woman--a Negro woman.  And I raised my hand and I said, "So he wasn't.  He was married.  Maybe while he was gone his wife was with a black man."  And that officer from Mississippi turned--I'm not kidding you--the color of that chair.  And he--and every soul--he said after the class, "I'm surprised at you.  I thought you was a good man." Oh, he was berated and walked out.  On Thursday--now, this was about a Monday.  That's when they wash you out.  If you're good, you--you know, up and they call you out at reveille in the morning.  I said, "Well, I guess I'm going to get called out this morning on Thursday."  And they called five names, so and so, A.  We were there alphabetically, B, and then they got to Williams.  I said, "Oh, they didn't get South."  And then at the end, "South, step forward."  And they sent us back to the regular, you know, classes.  I was washed out.
Story_ID: 13264
Speaker 1: I went overseas, and I was in the Army for two years, two and a half years.  When I came back we went to Camp Claiborne and they had-- people were getting discharged then and I was waiting for my turn.  And I had to be the one--I was assigned to what they call CQ, charge of quarters.  You have to say anybody--so I looked at my record book they had, and it was available.  And I looked in there and that captain two years earlier: "poor discipline, not--no leadership character, immoral."  He had everything on there.  I'd be lucky to even be a private.  I was surprised they sent me overseas.  And I found myself a razor blade and took that and cut that thing out just like that and put it back.  And I was discharged maybe about two days later.  And when they--they said, "Now, if you wait about half hour we have a truck that will take you into--." I forget the place in Louisiana.  It was Camp Claiborne then.  I said, "No, I'll go on my own and get out of here."  And I got my things and ran and got the train.  But to get back to the Army, I landed in England just before D-Day [the day the Allied troops invaded Normandy during World War II].  It was June 6th [1944] and on--we went over, it was about--to France, to Normandy about the 15th of June, maybe between the 15th and the 20th.  It was about two weeks afterwards. Still fighting, right, not too far.  They were maybe five or six miles inside, but they were still confined to Normandy, the peninsula there.  And everybody, I mean, you lived in--if it rained--it was June, so it rained.  It just rained on you.  We had tents, but you couldn't put them up.  You didn't know where you were going. And so while we were there I happened to hear a major and you can--and there were no places where you couldn't stand.  He said, "Now, when we get into Valognes"[Cotentin Peninsula, France]--I'll never forget that--"We want to find the she--the chief"--oh, is it--?
Speaker 2: Go on.  No, I'm sorry.  I was listening.  Go on, continue.  I just thought it was the light bulb.
Speaker 1: "The chef de gare"--he was the chief of the railroad.  He said,  "Because we have evidence, we know that before the Germans took over here they--the Protestants who lived--the people had buried some of the railroad tracks in different places and we want to find those things. So--because [George  Smith] Patton [Jr.] was supposed to come, you know, we was [were] and, supposedly, that's where he's supposed to break out.  We've got to find somebody who--a Frenchman who can speak English and then we--."  So I go," Sir." I went up to him and I said, "I'm sorry, but I can speak French."  "You can speak French?" "Yes, sir."  I knew as much French as I think you know Chinese.  I did have some Spanish.  I went and got my--every company had a dictionary and I got that.  And when we got into the place we did find this man.  And with the little that I had learned and I found out then that many words in English were the same--spelled the same way in French in France.  And like our garage, anything that ends in t-i-o-n,  there were a lot of--and I did this, and we found those railroad ties.  They were scattered in different places.  And they were waiting for us, but we had m--"From now on you're the regimental interpreter". Ha, ha, ha.  I was moved out of a combat, well, not a combat, because we didn't do it--in a service regiment into headquarters where I stayed for two years.  That was the best gold brick you'd ever see.  You know, you'd work two hours and after we broke out--out of there and went into France and off into Belgium, but you always had twenty-four--see, you worked twenty-four hours one day and the next day you had the whole day off.  And the next day you worked half-a-day and then the next day you worked a full day.  There were three of us.  And then being a service company, they were not together.  One would be here, one would be five miles this way.  And on that third day I would go all around--go with the people to see the city--see the country.  And we went to Germany over--after the war was over, then I could see the whole--that's when I saw terrible, you know, stuff.  But we had a--all of our officers, without a single one, were all white; 90 percent of them, 95 percent were from the South.  And the Colonel was from Tuscaloosa, Alabama and we called him 'Alabama Red'.  Not to his face, of course.  And when we--that war was over, not over, but coming to--we were getting ready to go overseas.  We were going--coming back to the United States, and he got up on the--he was going to a different area.  Oh, incidentally, I applied--they were asking for volunteers who wanted to be off--who would like to be officers.  Now, see, I didn't know about what was in my--and I applied, and I was turned down.  I later learned why. But then when we got ready to leave the--I was telling my wife [Mildred] about this the other day.  The cap--the colonel called everybody and they called, the sergeants, called, "Attention."  He made a nice speech, "Nice to be with you boys and serve."  Someone said, "Well, there's no boys here, sir."  And he, "and I salute you."  And somebody in the back row--I don't know who it was said, "About face," and everybody turned around.  That was the biggest insult--the only insult we could do and he walked off.  And those were some of the things in the Army.
Story_ID: 13265
Speaker 1: My grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford]--I saw him Thanksgiving. Incidentally, before I went to--I was making good money at the, in the war plants.  And before--that was in 19--between '42 [1942] and '43 [1943] of Christmas.  I took him downtown and got him a suit and overcoat, and he was quite happy.  Then he died.  When I saw him Thanksgiving he says, "Your grandfather is not going to be here."--no, he's going--he's going to be here. For years he's always telling us at Christmas time, "Your grandfather won't be here in the next, next year." But this time he said he was going to be there.  " I'll be here when you get back," and I said, "Oh, oh".  He was looking bad then.  He was--he had uremic poisoning.  And I got home--when I got the word that he was--had passed. I got a pass and, to come home.  And in Virginia I don't care you can be a colonel, black colonel, you sit in the back.  I wouldn't sit in the back, so the man--the driver called MPs [Military Police] and I had to show my pass.  The fellow was very compassionate.  He says, " I'm from Wisconsin.  I have to arrest you because I'm ordered to.  Now, you're going to your grandfather's funeral.  Why don't you sit back there until you get past--past the line and you'll get to your funeral?  And it--and I don't--and then I won't have to arrest you." So I did.
Story_ID: 13266
Speaker 1: And when we were in Camp Claiborne [Louisiana] coming back, after we came back, the Nazi prisoners that were down there, you know, they were being held, some of them had better privileges as--than the--than we had.  And when we--now, I was not with them before they went overseas, and it was the 95th Engineers [a black regiment] and they were at Camp Claiborne and they were all from Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan].  They were denied entrance into the USO [United Service Organizations] Club and this was a matter of record.  They went to--got a half track and ran right through the wall of this place, and then scattered.  They never could get them.  Oh, getting back to these drivers--bus drivers in camp--what's--
Speaker 2: You say Clay.
Speaker 1: No--no--no.  Not Claiborne's there, the one outside of Washington [District of Columbia].  I just called it--but, anyway, where I was stationed, whenever they would--they could be very mean, and somebody hit one of them and ran, got off and ran.  If this happened once, it happened at least four times during the time I was there.  At 1:00--that's when you're coming back, see, and when he got back, he hit the man and ran.  We had to stand up so he could come see us.  And they never, as far as I know, never found out who did it and they were--and if anybody knew they weren't going to tell.
Story_ID: 13267
Speaker 1: When you finished the service you came back and you enrolled at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, what made you interested in journalism?  I mean what was happening, because the last time you were selling hats and things, but what made you decide?
Speaker 2: Hats was just a stop gap.  I had no intentions of--
Speaker 1: Right, I know, but I'm just saying--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know I was selling hats.  I was working--well, first, my first job--I went back to my old job, and I said this ain't for me, and I left.  And my aunt was a full Republican, and she was until she died.  And she got me a job--see, Wendell Green [sic, Dwight Herbert Green] was the governor then.  He was the governor, and I was with the Unemployment Compensation and that was where I met my wife [Mildred].  She was my--was a secretary.  She took care of us.  We knew each other nine days before we were married, and then fifty-five years it will be on May 18th. We were there, and I was there for a year-and-a-half.  Then they paid a bonus to the--to all the men from Illinois, and I was one of the lower executives in the place, the job I got.  And while I was there I met a fellow by the name of Lou Olsick (ph.).  He was a captain in the [United States] Marines, a very nice fellow.  He was a Polish fellow--Polish, and he was in charge of public relations.  And I had already, I had enrolled in Northwestern as--and I was taking accounting and--what's the other--economics and things.  And I saw that I would be stationary.  I like to get out. I like to see--like to see the world. And he was saying, "What you ought to do, why not include journalism classes?"  I was helping him--it was not my job, but, you know, he showed me some things and I thought it was good, and I followed his suggestion. That's how I got it.
Story_ID: 13268
Speaker 1: Did you get the writing bug at that point, because I know you were working for the State of Illinois, but you were employed by the ['Chicago] Defender'and I would say--.
Speaker 2: No, that was after I left.  See, we finished that in 1950--1949 and I worked there, a few of us, they kept us to where I--to wrap up things until about the 15th or 20th of January of 1950.  And so I went full-time for that, from February 1st until the end of the summer, that would be.  And then I went to the ['Chicago] Defender' and then I had to take part-time.  Now, it took me nine years.  Many people,  "Oh, I can't do it."  See that plaque over there?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That's from the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and they gave me that plaque.  And I happened to tell her it took me nine years and I heard snickering all over the place that I, it took me nine years to finish college.  But during that nine years--I have a picture I want to show you back here--I saw everything that happened.  Well, much of what would happen in the Civil Rights Revolution.  The killing of Emmett Till--I covered that story.  I was gone from 'Ebony' [magazine] two years for twenty-seven weeks, twenty-seven weekends and weeks, out of a year for two years straight.  I had my very first big assignment and I'll show you the picture.  I was with Adlai Stevenson when he ran for governor--or, ran for president against [Dwight David] Eisenhower.  For thirteen weeks I was all over the country meeting people and writing the stories.  I went and spent two weeks with Eisenhower, and then back to here.  I learned more at Johnson Publishing Company.  The '[Chicago] Tribune'--the ['Chicago] Defender' was alright, and it was a stop gap for this.  But when I got to Johnson Publishing [Company], that's where I really think I was able to find out what I was doing.
Story_ID: 13269
Speaker 1: What was happening at Johnson [Publishing Company] at that point?  You know, was--it was--it had been in existence for how long?
Speaker 2: His--November of 1942, 'Negro Digest.'
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: And he [John H. Johnson] started 'Ebony' [Magazine] November 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you worked and you joined, okay, so seven years.  So what was it like at that time?  What was it like working at Johnson Publishing?  Was it like a big family or was it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  Yeah, it was family.  I would think so. We ate.  I had a nice big--I weighed 145 pounds. In a year's time, I was weighing 160.  You know, we'd eat.  He fed us the--you paid for it.  No, I guess he did pay for it, but lunch, and the lunches were really dinner. And if you've ever seen John [H.] Johnson, he's big and that's why he was big.  And I hadn't been able--you can't take this--when you get old, you can't take it off with a chisel.
Speaker 1: So now who--did you admire Mr. Johnson?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why?
Speaker 2: Because he did what I wanted to do.  One of the biggest disappointments I had when I got home and saw this black magazine, 'Ebony'  I was going to call it 'Now' and I'll show you some--when I left there, I started a magazine by the name of 'Now.'
Story_ID: 13270
Speaker 1: What did you learn about yourself during that period?  You know, you were saying, "I was at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] taking some accounting courses."
Speaker 2: Oh, I just--I'll say I learned.  I don't know how to measure your learning.  I was involved when the Birmingham [Alabama]--no, when the Montgomery [Alabama bus] strike [1955] came.  I was sent down there and I was the only person that he sent out other than the managing editor, Herb [Herbert] Nipson. You want to talk with him, too, who had a camera and a pen.  Usually, you send a writer and a reporter.  And I went down there and I was sending back the stories with pictures.  And during the day, you know, they didn't ride the bus, boy, either.  I had a what do you call it?  A Hertz car. And I went all--would drive those people where they wanted to go.  You see everybody was walking, not just somebody.  And you'd raise your hand and they'd--"Where are you going?"  "I'm going such and such a place.  Are you going that way?" I said, "I can't go in that direction as"--I did that for thirty days.  I was there about a month--about a week I was there. And [John H.] Johnson would send me 'Jets' and 'Ebonys' [magazines], you know, and we got 'Jets' every week and 'Ebony' once a--but at this particular time, the week, I got both, 'Ebony' and I filled up my trunk with 'Jets'.  And on the back seat and on the floor of the back I had 'Ebony'.  And I was driving, around the center of town, and I got to a place where you had to stop, a policeman, I think.  He looked in the back of the car and he said where are you from?  I said, "Chicago." " Is that where 'Ebony's from?"  I said, "Yes, it is." "'Ebony's not a bad--it's a pretty, not a bad magazine, but that 'Jet' magazine, it got a little--."  I've been on radio.  Down there is where I started my radio just talking about what was going to happen.  "But there's a little nigger down here from--who's got that 'Jet' [magazine].  If we ever catch him, he's going to be glad to leave here."  Yeah, okay.  And I told Rev.[Dr. Martin Luther] King, [Jr.] and Rev. [Ralph] Abernathy.  What did they say?  "You leave here. Don't you spend another night here."  And I had to drive 135 miles after eleven o'clock at night and go to Birmingham [Alabama] where I got--got a place.  I did that for three weeks and--except when Arthurine Lucy--do you know her?  She's the woman--I don't have a picture of her, but I have a picture of him where he--Thurgood Marshall got her into the University of Alabama.  Did you ever hear of Bob [William Robert] Ming?  All right, Bob Ming was down there at the time.  Now, those are the types of things that I was involved in--Florida. Do you know J [Joseph] H. Jackson?  He was the--he was the president of the [Progressive] National Baptist Convention.  He lived right here on Kenwood [Street], 49th [Street] and Kenwood from 1953 until about 1985, and he was very controversial.  I--when I left 'Ebony' I was doing his public relations for him.  And his church is at 31st and King Drive.  It was 3101 South Parkway.  It's still there.  He's dead now.  When they named that street [South Parkway] King Drive, he immediately let it be known.  He changed it from 3101 King Drive to 401 East 31st Street.  And now he was--he was--he was--I can't--I can't criticize him too much.  Even the Urban League and others, they helped in a degree, and in his way he helped to further the cause of equality in this country.
Story_ID: 13271
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about several people that you met in that time period like [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]  What was your--what are your--I mean how much did you interact with Dr. King, or was in his presence?
Speaker 2: I saw him many, many, many times.  He knew me by name.  He knew me by sight.  I can't say that I was a friend of his.  As a matter of fact, Gus Savage took him on a retreat when he was here in Chicago [Illinois].  Now, Gus would know him better than I did.  But I thought he was, he was it.  He was sincere, clear thinking and I don't know what else to say.
Speaker 1: You had talked--what about the whole covering Adlai Stevenson [Democratic presidential nominee, 1952, 1956]?  Is there anything that you'd like to share about that whole experience, because you were with him for--.
Speaker 2: Thirteen weeks.
Speaker 1: Thirteen weeks?
Speaker 2: One thing I thought he was a nice fellow.  He was very aloof.  I talked to him three times during those thirteen weeks.  The first time was in Los Angeles [California].  It was still in September. It was warm, and he had a cocktail party for the press.  I was with the press.  There were two plane loads of press and he had his plane with his staff. And he talked with all-- everybody. And I was drinking Coca Cola, gingerale. I said well, "I'm not old enough to drink the other."  He said, "Why don't you try a vodka?"--a vodka and I think it was orange juice.  Is that--
Speaker 1: Vodka and orange juice?
Speaker 2: Huh?  Huh?
Speaker 1: A screwdriver?
Speaker 2: Yeah, screwdriver.  Yeah, he said, "Try that."  And I took it, and it taste good.  I drank another and only once the floor did that and I laughed and he laughed about it.  "So I didn't mean for you to drink that much." and that was--that was all we had.  The next time he was on the train, and he--they allowed us to go up there to talk with him to get a--and I was given about five minutes and I couldn't do anything in that time, but I asked him a few questions I had prepared.  And the last time was the picture you'll see I have here when I said goodbye to him the day after the election he lost, and he was quite amiable then.  But on that train, everywhere we went I saw him.  He had a staff there who would prepare his speeches to give them to him and he would read, you know, most of them.  A--you've seen these people with the teletype, well he had a man who could take it in long--in shorthand with, you know, the pencil.  And he went and he, you know, talked to people.  But when we went to Harlem [New York] and he went there, Adam Clayton Powell [Harlem's Congressman, 1945 to 1971].  You remember him?  He was there and they greeted him and he was out in the open.  It was warm.  He came up there.  Well, you know, "You folks know me.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm going to do this."  He did not have a prepared speech, and it was platitudes. Four or five days later we went to Hyde Park [New York] where FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] is buried.  We had a man--Oh, it was Smith-- was his first--last name.  He worked at 'Ebony' [magazine], and he had interviewed Mrs. [Eleanor] Roosevelt about--early in the week and he died suddenly.  And when I went there, I didn't know if she knew it or not, so I made it my business to edge over where she was.  And I go, "Mrs. Roosevelt," and she says," Yeah," and I introduced myself.  And I said, "You know, Smith,"-- whatever his first name was, you know, "he--" And before I could mention it, she said, "Oh, that--oh, that was terrible."--and then she knew.  And I was saying, "Yes, well, he died such and such a day," and we talked for two or three minutes.  "What do you think of our candidate?"  I said, "He's alright, he's okay."  I said, "But I was disappointed. He was--he gave a prepared speech everywhere we've been in this country, but when he comes to Harlem and this was the only place he's been before a group of blacks, he gives an off-the-cuff platitude."  She said, "Well, he'll learn; I'm sure he'll learn." About six weeks ago, I don't know if you saw it on Channel 11, Mrs. Roosevelt--they had this thing on Ms. Roosevelt.  Did you see it?  Well, they had it, and she was talking about what she's done and she talked about Adlai Stevenson.  And she talked about she was with Adlai Stevenson when he went to Harlem and when he got there he didn't--he asked her, "I don't know what to say these people."  She said, " I knew he was, you know, that he was ignorant and he wasn't the person that we wanted in that--in that place."  Now, she says this and I see it fifty some years later and I think she must--you know, when I told her what I had said, I just wondered what impact that may have had on her.
Speaker 1: What do you think of her?  I mean, really, she sounds like a very--she sounds like a very unique woman.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Very important to the black community.
Speaker 2: She was the conscience of FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] wherever you might--FDR was a great man, but he had--and I realize in order for him to achieve what he did, he had to play footsies with the southern cabal, the senators and so, oh, I can't think of any of their names, but you know who they are.  They were all--all alike with one or two exceptions, and we suffered for--from that.  Maybe he couldn't.  I think he should have done more, which made me think.  People talk about John  [Fitzgerald] Kennedy, and as the Lord is my witness, but I'll tell you I'm telling you the truth.  When I walked into that polling place on election day, and it was between Kennedy and [Richard Milhous] Nixon, I didn't know who I was going to vote for.  But I voted for Kennedy because he was a Democrat, the only reason.  His--what he had done in previous years was counter to what I had believed.  Now, I know Nixon was going to be--he was always counter, too, but it was which was the worst.  How bad one is or how, you know, so--. I say the same thing about Roosevelt, but Roosevelt did a--no doubt about it, he was--he did some very good things.  And that's one reason I say thank God for Randolph--A. [Asa] Philip Randolph, because you know what he did.  He made him, threatened him at FEPC  [Fair Employment Practices Committee]. That's where it started.  You know, he was going to bring a half million, but he said one hundred  thousand, blacks to demonstrate during the war [World War II] in Washington [District of Columbia]. And Roosevelt, he knew it, and he threatened to have him jailed for sedition if he did.  And he said, "Well, I'll just have to go jail." And the next week FEPC [Fair Employment Practices Committee] came up.
Speaker 1: And Randolph was--he was a very important person, right, A. Philip Randolph?
Speaker 2: One--yeah, I would put him almost--not that he didn't know as much, but just because of--but he was--I would put him in the same class with Martin Luther King [Jr.]
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, he was fearless the way he fought the railroads to get the Pullman porters.  It took a long, long time to get them on the payroll.  And he was a good strategist.  I had--in his last year or so, I had breakfast with him in many--1959 I think it was it.  I had breakfast with him--with us.  I was not the only one.  There were about five or six.  I was with the 'Chicago American' [magazine] then.  And I liked what he--what he said, and I liked his philosophy.
Story_ID: 13272
Speaker 1: You had been let go [from 'Ebony' magazine] twice--that's what you were talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was let go in July of 1954 as were about  twenty-five of us at the time.  And I made contact with a Jewish entrepreneur who had a black magazine in Fort Worth, Texas called--I've forgotten the name of it-- and I asked him if he wanted to--I'd like to help with it.  I went down there and rearranged it--did some things.  [John H.] Johnson found out about it.  He hired me back in November.  And then things got--I stayed there until things sort of went bad in 1957--the latter part of '56 [1956]--the first of '57 [1957]. And he let everybody know--he just had got rid of some of his top people at that time: Sylvester Watkins, who was head of circulation; some other writers; some of his salesmen in New York City where all the money--most of the money came from.  And then I went to the 'Chicago American' and that was the ['Chicago] Tribune's' evening paper.  You may not remember that.  And he wanted to hire me back, but once is--what is it?  Trick me once, shame on you.  Trick me twice, shame on me.  I said, "No."  I said, "I appreciate it," and we've been friends ever since.  And I realized then that, you know, somebody had to go and I'd been faced with the same thing over at WVON [radio station].
Story_ID: 13273
Speaker 1: You were writing a weekly news column, right, at this--.
Speaker 2: No, no--three times a week.
Speaker 1: Oh, three times a week, that's right.
Speaker 2: Three times.
Speaker 1: And how did that come about that you were--.
Speaker 2: I went down with some writings and I'd say, "Now, this was--I'd like to put in your paper." Well, "Let us look at it." Next day I got a call, "When can you start?" and I said, "Yesterday," and I was there.
Speaker 1: You know, what I find surprising about that, I had gone to the ['Chicago] Tribune' recently to ask about their former archives, and the archivist told me that there are years [inaudible].
Speaker 2: Say that again.
Speaker 1: That they had a policy not to even cover the black community.
Speaker 2: But that was not the--.
Speaker 1: But this--you said it was the--it was the--it was the evening newspaper.
Speaker 2: The 'Chicago American,' yeah.
Speaker 1: But that was owned by the ['Chicago] Tribune'
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was owned.  Well, it was a [William Randolph] Hearst paper at first and then it became ['Chicago] Tribune', but they covered it and that's why they wanted me there.  And when they got rid of me, they got rid of me.  I mean I was fired, but they had a cutback.  But they still kept--brought in a couple of street reporters.
Story_ID: 13274
Speaker 1: Explain how, you know, you started your program on WHFC, and WHFC became then WVON.
Speaker 2: WVON.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, you--did you hear that incident?  Leon, the tape.
Speaker 1: I have it on the tape.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had been working at the 'Chicago American' for three years, and I was donating time to the local branch of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] as their press officer doing their public relations.  That was a big name, press officers, really, getting their names in the papers.  And if you recall about ten years during the '50s [1950s]--late '50s [1950s] a television station in Jackson, Mississippi had vilified blacks, the NAACP, many, many, many people--and would refuse to allow any blacks to come in for equal time.  According to the rules of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] that was a no-no and that's one of the major no-nos .  The NAACP and others brought suit against this man.  It took about two years.  They have to wait--.  At that time, you renewed your licenses every three years, I think.  I'm almost positive it's every five years now.  And you--the only time you can challenge someone--you can challenge them anything, but the action comes by the--by the commission when they--at renewal time.  They had a hearing, the commission did, on the conduct of the--of this--of the management of this T.V. station, and they found that he had violated one of their cardinal rules and they stripped him of the--the owners of the ownership of that.  You don't own it.  You call--you can't say you own a radio station, you're the steward.  The stations and airways belong to the public and he no longer was there.  The same thing happened under different circumstances, not racial, in Boston [Massachusetts]. That frightened many of the stations around the country, and alerted all of the, the lawyers who are FCC lawyers in Washington [District of Columbia].  Every station in this country--radio, T.V., AM, FM--they're foolish if they do not have a lawyer because the rules are subject to change.  And if you violate it, you are in jeopardy of losing that station.  So they--what you do is give a thousand dollars a year as a retainer and then you--they get that automatically.  And if they do anything for you, then they'll charge you the regular rate. That--the man who owned WHFC had gotten word from his lawyer in Washington that because of these two landmark decisions, the one in Boston and the one in Jackson, Mississippi, it was advi--he said he's advising all of his clients--and he had maybe a couple hundred--to, if you have a significant number of minorities, particularly blacks, in your listening area, it is imperative that you give them some sort of air time in order to fulfill what the FCC says is equal time.  And so the man was Richard Hoffman who owned it, and he called the FCC--he called the NAACP on a Thursday.  I tried to tell you exactly as I said it on the air, on that tape.  And he asked to speak to someone about giving time--radio time to--on his station. And we had another volunteer there, a young fellow, who was answering the phones, and because I was that person, he gave the call to me.  And the man said, "My name is Richard Hoffman.  I own radio station WHFC and I would like to give you fifteen minutes of time on Sunday."  And I said, "Well, thank you."  (inaudible). "What is your name?"  "My name"--I gave my name.  "My name is Wesley South."  "Well, thank you," and we hung up.  Literally, within three or four minutes the phone rang again and it was this man.  And he says he'd like to speak to Mr. South.  He said, "Are you the same South who write--wrote for the--?"  At that time, it was '61 [1961].  Yeah, I had no--I was no--not longer--who wrote for the--for the 'Chicago American.'  I said, "Yes, I was."  "I read what you've written many, many times, and I like what you write.  I'd like for you to do--." No, no, no, I'm getting ahead.  "When can--I'd like to talk with you," and I said, "Fine."  And I said, well, here's another one of these do-gooders who's going to tell me how to--.  "When can--can you come over this afternoon?"  I said," No, I have to prepare for my--some other things there."  "Well, what about tomorrow?"  "I have to prepare for my Sunday column."  "Monday?"  "Okay, Monday.  I'll be there.  What time?" He gave me the time.  And that's when I went in there and he said,  "You know, I have read your column, and I like what you've done.  And I'd like to hire you to do a program for me, and I'll pay you for it."  I said, "Oh, fine."  To myself, "I should have been here on Thursday," (laughs) and that's how I got started.  And I had took these half hour programs. And I went to--I had to go to Washington [District of Columbia] with Dr. J [Joseph] H. Jackson, so I got some of my old programs to play while I was gone, and I listened to them.  They were the worst things I'd ever heard.  And I said, "Mr. Hoffman, why, I know you didn't--why didn't you tell me so?"  "Well, I knew you'd--you'd catch on.  He said, "What you were saying was all right."  I was doing a lot of stuttering and that type of thing, and I went on and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Tell me, what did you like about hosting?  You know, that was a new experience for you and I mean--.
Speaker 2: It was fun.  I liked it.  That was--that was the best job I've ever had, including being the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] over there.  And if I go back, and I've got some other ideas, I think--I don't know if I'm as sharp as I was then. They say that the victim is the last one to know.  That may be so, but I'm going to try it again, and I liked it.
Story_ID: 13275
Speaker 1: So talk about how you actually formed the group of investors and--well, except you became the editor of the 'Chicago Initiative' of Pittsburgh Courier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that--I mean that--.
Speaker 2: That was--that was in 1965-- July 1st, and I was there.  I mean Fred Wall (ph.), I don't know if you've heard of him.  He--you've heard of William L. Dawson [Illinois Representative, 1943-1970].  Fred Wall was a schoolmate of mine at Wendell Phillips [High School] thirty years earlier.  And he was very competent, and he became William L. Dawson's major-domo. And some things happened where people--in order to, excuse me, to get jobs, employment in many of the departments of the city and the county they had to go to the--to Dawson.  Any--if any black--.
Speaker 1: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 2: Okay.  And they were taking money for giving these jobs.  I know--I knew he's dead now.  I knew Fred Wall.  He died in 1971.  And he swears he didn't take it, but he took the fall for Dawson, and Dawson repaid him by getting him a nightclub.  I won't say Dawson, but he got a nightclub and he got this--he was able to--S.B. Fuller owned this--owned the radio--owned the--what do you call it--the newspaper, and he was a friend of--you know, he's a Republican, staunch Republican.  He was a friend of Dawson's. I had had Fred Wall on my show numerous times.  Excellent talker and he was a good--you know, he knew what he was talking about.  And he asked me if I'd be the editor and he'd be the general manager.  I said, "Yes," and we made a pretty good team, I thought.  He did, too.  We increased the circulation, and there were a lot of things that I felt that should have been in there that other, you know, other papers were missing, and it was a success.  And while I was there quite a few people suggested to me that I run for  [United States] Congress.  That was in 1968.  So I talked to Fred about it and he said, "Well, you ain't going to win (laughs), but it's--it will be a good thing.  But I said, " I think I can win." And I went and I announced that I was going to run.
Story_ID: 13276
Speaker 1: In 1958, if you remember Little Rock [Arkansas]--that was September of '58 [1958] when these children was escorted to school by the--by the Army.  And I had been a stringer for 'Time' magazine while I was working at the 'Chicago American.'  I don't know if you know a stringer is a contributor.  They sent all of their, literally, all of their employees--all of their reporters down to Little Rock.  And I was there as a stringer, and they sent me around as far north as Madison, Wisconsin to do stories.  And while I was doing stories, I did one on Ahmed Jamal, a piano player.  Do you know him?  And he was a Muslim.  He was a regular Muslim.  And he was telling--he told me of a group of blacks who were Muslims and they called themselves Black Muslims.  And he was not part of that, and he thought I--and so I tried to find them.  And I talked to the man who was in charge of 'Time' and he said, "If you can get the story, well, I'll submit it."  So I went and I found a fellow by the name of Elijah Muhammad. And he talked to me for about three days, like you and I are talking now, except without the camera.  And I made what I thought was a very good story on a piece of American life in the black community.  And the reason he--this man had the views that he had, and it was submitted to 'Time' in New York.  And the man who owned 'Time'--I know his name as well as I know my own, but I can't call it.  But he read it and said--it had to go before him because it was controversial.  He said, "This magazine will never as long as I'm here print a story like this," and they put--threw it away--put it up. A year later, almost within a week or two days, Elijah Muhammad, and Malcolm X, and about a half-a-dozen other blacks came back from Mecca [Saudi Arabia].  And when they got off the plane the news people wanted to find out who these blacks, you know, at that time, blacks didn't, you know, they were well dressed and had on their hats, the little kind of caps that they wore, and they wouldn't speak to them.  So the reporters from 'Time', they went to the man--to the airlines to see the man who they--these people were, got the manifest, got their names.  They went back to their--to the office, and found out they had a story on this man.  Eleven o'clock that night I got a call from 'Time' magazine.  I mean from, yeah, 'Time.'  "You have submitted us a story on such and such date.  Will you finish it?  We'd like to run it."  I said, "Okay."  I got up and I read.  They didn't have any, not one black.  They had one photographer, a fellow who worked for 'Life' [magazine], and that was it.  And I submitted it and they ran it the next week. But in the story what I didn't put in there and they had found out that Elijah Muhammad had gone to prison.  First, for not going to the Army, getting away from the draft, and they--and then because he did not send his children to public school, but to his private school.  And they said--to use his--their words, he was convicted for contributing to the delinquency of children, but they said it in such a way that it sounded as though it was sexual.  I called him and I said, "What--why would you do this?"  "That's true, isn't it?  You don't--nobody tells us what to do."  I said, "This is not what--but the way the emphasis you're putting on there," and I went to Mr.  Muhammad and told him what they said.  And from that day to this, I ain't done nothing.  You know, I told him, "You can forget it.  I will not--I won't write for you anymore."  About three or four weeks later another story came out on--because of that story--came out in 'Reader's Digest' on Malcolm [X]--on Elijah Muhammad.  And then it was getting to be time for his annual speech that he gives, his Save the Day speech, and he's giving it in Indianapolis, Indiana, at a Baptist church.  And the people there and the papers were so incensed that this man was going to come there, the Baptist minister got chicken and cancelled him.  But an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church said, "Come on in," and he packed the place. Now, I had dinner with Elijah Muhammad about one Thursday for about three or four years every--once a month, twice a month.  I met all of his people that had come in, knew Malcolm X and all of them.  And when I announced that I was running for, for [United States] Congress, he sent for me.  I'm not telling you how much he gave, but he gave me enough money in hundred dollar bills to run for Congress, enough to burn a wet mule if I'd set him on fire.  And he and I were friends up until he died.
Story_ID: 13277
Speaker 1: I want to talk about you forming, you know, in 1975 when you formed the investor group for the--you know, to go before the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] for the ownership of--.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, we just--Pervis [Spann] and I were both working at WVON.  At that time, you could get what they call, oh--.
Speaker 1: Construction license?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It's an Internal Revenue.  You get your K-1s.  I forget the--but it's a section of the, of the code, where ten people can come in, and whatever money you put into it, if you lose it, if there are losses in the corporation, they come back to you.
Speaker 1: Subject risk.
Speaker 2: Subject, that's it, yes.  And we--at that time, it's ten.  I think it's over thirty now, whatever it is, so it wasn't difficult.  I find--I got myself.  You know Darryl Grisham (ph.)?  Dr. Herbert Jackson, do you know him?  Do you know the woman who has the--Bac--Harriet Jackson Bacon [sic, Gloria Jackson Bacon] out at--you won't know her.  She was on the board of the University of Illinois in Champaign.  She's on that, she won--she's not appointed, she was elected.  Her husband, then husband, they're divorced now.  That's four.  And then the woman who hired me with--for WHFC and was with Mr. Hoffman, Florence Somers (ph.).  We needed a woman on the board--on the area, and we needed someone who had--who had expertise in running a radio station.  And with that and with black--with the help that you could get because you were black, we felt that we'd be successful.  I got those five without any hesitation at all.  Do you want to--Vernon Jarrett, myself, Herbert Jackson, Darryl Grisham, and Florence Somers.  Pervis Spann got himself, Clay Evans.  You know Clay Evans.  Caesar Collins and Gwendolyn Hayes (ph.), and himself.  That's five.  There were ten of us. I did the work.  In order to qualify we had to get a minimum of  fifty names of the general public, and interview fifty people of the--of who are leaders.  I got about maybe six, seven hundred leaders all over the country--all over the city.  The license is allocated to Cicero [Illinois].  I don't know if you knew that, Cicero, Illinois.  And when Mr. Hoffman was a Congressman from Cicero, he was friend of [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower, and Eisenhower, I'm told by Mr. Hoffman, had the FCC to pass a rule that you could put your antenna like two miles from where, you know, from the edge.  As long as it covers the prime area, you're legal.  If we were four hundred or five hundred yards further east we would be illegal because of the--and that's why it's in Chicago.  And so I had every one of the little municipalities there.  I interviewed the mayors, schools, churches, labor unions, community organizations. And then I learned, because I was sent down there and didn't know it for a while, everything in Illinois--in any, all states, all of them are--all of the radio and T.V. stations are granted their renewal on the same, you know, in the same year.  Like whenever this--whatever year it is here, everything in this state will be the same.  And in order to fulfill the then requirement, which they don't do now, I--the big stations got all other stations.  You paid fifty dollars.  You rent a room at the Continental Hotel which is next door to the ['Chicago] Tribune'. At the time it was called the Continental, and the Sheraton. I don't know what it is now. And then you invite everybody--all of them. I've sent people there and we had [James R.] Thompson who was the governor-elect and [Richard J.] Daley wouldn't come.
Story_ID: 13278
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about WVON when you got the station?  You know, the group of ten competed and won, but what were your--what were the thoughts about what you wanted it to be?
Speaker 2: I wanted it to be a talk station.  Pervis Spann was "The Blues Man," he wanted it to be a blues station.  We never even made Arbitron while it was there.  And he had the--he had six votes.  I only had four.  And then I had five and he had five, but nobody wanted to just leave it like it is.  We didn't make a nickel.  He was stealing.  I had prove--I have proof of his stealing.  I'm not saying like my lawyer said, converting corporate funds to his personal use, I say he's a thief.  And he went and bought a station with much of the money down in Memphis [Tennessee]--built it from the ground up.  The only black person in this country to have a 50,000 watt station, and lost it.  And I had to go to the Quincy, Illinois where he bought the engineering, you know, the engineer equipment and the--let's see, then I had to go to a head--a person in Missouri sued us for a fence that he put around the place and charged to WVON.  And I--so, finally, I convinced the pe--he threatened to kill me and I--this was back in 1981, I'll let you see that where I wrote to the people there if you're interested.  But in 1985, it was five and five and I convinced--I had bought some of the other sta--people out there got tired of it.  And if I had Vernon Jarrett on my side, I would--I would have--have--. He said, " Okay, I'll go along with you" and we started talking.  We started--well, the first thing we did, we had nothing but--no blues, but we had gospel.  Then on May the 12th of 1986, we started talk.  We've been talking ever since, and we made--began to make money.
Story_ID: 13279
Speaker 1: In 1988 my daughter [Leslie Elaine South] ran for judge and she lost.  And I got a call from some of the people who said, you know, the legislature has just passed a bill to add twenty-six additional associate judges in Cook County [Illinois] and they'll have to be elected by the judges.  I don't know if you know Blanche Manning.
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You do?  She's a--she was a judge.
Speaker 2: A judge.
Speaker 1: And myself and Bill Cousins (ph.) at separate times went to see [Harry G.] Comerford, who was the Chief Judge.  I wanted to get half of those--half of those.  I said, "We've been getting--whenever there's a--associate judges are elected, we get one or two.  Seldom do we get as many as three."  He said--and I said, "Now, we can help you if you help us."  And he says, "I was told by Comerford--and he'll tell you that--." He says, "I can't get you thirteen, but I think I can get you eleven."  "That's fine."  When I was leaving, he says "I understand your daughter's running,"  I said, "Yes. I wasn't there to get her, I wanted her."  And he said, "Good luck."  And with my contacts and other contacts we went to most of the judges, and she won with--he didn't get us eleven, but he got us nine.  We ain't never had that many judges put on the list in this city since it's been a city.  Now, that was in September--October of '88 [1988]. Election for president was the first Tuesday of November of '88 [1988].  Ten days before that--and he's a friend, that was a friend then--Eugene Pincham got on my radio station and was telling everybody, don't--he was up--Comerford was up for retention.  Do not vote for him for--what do you call it, for--to be retained.  He's no good.  We want [Earl E.] Strayhorn.  Now, Strayhorn's a friend of mine.  I'd like to see him there, too.  I thought that was bad.  I said here's a man that's gone out on the limb and got us nine judges.  And I wrote on Thursday, I started a commentary telling--asking people to disregard what [Eugene] Pincham or anyone else is saying and to vote for this man and I told why.  I said, "Now, he went out on the limb.  If we don't do--fulfill--help, then we--then I think we are derelict in what we are doing."  He won big in the black community. Oh, but before election, on Sunday, I got a call from Vernon Jarrett.  He said, "Judge Pincham didn't like what you're saying and he thinks you ought to stop this."  I said, "Well, I can't stop it."  He said, "Well, you could do me a favor and stop."  I said, "Well, I'll tell you what I'll do. Instead of playing it every hour, I'll play it every--every--what do you call it--for every show."  That was cutting it down from fifteen hours to four hours during the day, because we're only on for fifteen hours, and he didn't say anything. Well, our shareholders' meeting is on the last Thursday of--of January.  And three or four days beforehand, I got a letter from the woman there. Mrs. Gwen Hayes who was one of--who wanted to get out before, and Vernon Jarrett--that he was going to change his vote.  Well, I knew what that meant.
Speaker 2: (off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: I was saying just before we were cut off that Vernon Jarrett had said that a former appellate court judge, Eugene Pincham, had asked him to come--to call me and to discontinue my commentary which was in opposition to what he was asking people to do regarding not voting for Judge Comerford to be retained.  When I spoke with--years later, 1997, nine years later, when I spoke to Judge Pincham, he denied very strenuously that he says it never happened.  Now, I have heard since then that Vernon Jarrett had said that had I included him in the visit to Comerford which would have given him some exposure, we may not be in--in the position that we're in now.
Story_ID: 13280
Speaker 1: We want to talk about Manford Byrd, and maybe any recollections that you have.
Speaker 2: No, Manford Byrd--I asked during lunch and you were up here. I told her to ask me about Manford Byrd.  Manford Byrd was a principal of Wendell Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois] and he later became-- when [James] Redmond became--I forget Redmond's first name--from New York to replace [Benjamin] Ben Willis.  He chose Manford Byrd to be his deputy superintendent of schools.  And Manford and I were friends--very good friends from then on. The reason I wanted to speak with--of Manford, which he later became the very, I think, an excellent superintendent of schools, but it was short-term.  But in 19--1982, [Lutrelle] Lu Palmer conducted a referendum--what do you call it--to pick a black candidate to run against Jane Byrne as mayor.  And without any prompting whatsoever, the black community overwhelmingly--.
Speaker 1: (ringing)
Speaker 2: Well, you're saying that the black community overwhelmingly--
Speaker 1: Voted for Harold Washington to be the candidate. Second, was Manford Byrd.  In the summer of 1982, just before the annual congressional affair that the black congressmen put on in Washington [DC], I was--I met Harold Washington, who just lives right around the corner--lived right around the corner and I asked him, "Are you going to run, why don't you run?"  He said, "I don't know if I--." He says, "I've got all kinds of problems and baggage that I will not even talk to you about and I don't think I'd run." He says, "But let's--what are you doing today?  Can you drive, you know, go to Washington with me?"  I said, "Sure, I'd like to talk with you about this."  We got on--we got on the plane and he was telling me why he didn't think he should be the one to run, but we might be able to get Manford Byrd to run.  So when we got at his congressional office in Washington, we called Manford Byrd and told him we'd like to meet with him on Saturday at my house here [in Chicago], and my wife would cook, you know, cook dinner for us.  He said, "Fine, I'll be there." He came and we talked to him about running for mayor, and he says he just couldn't do it.  He had two sons--teenage sons he had to put through college and he did not--did not have enough time to be--to resign.  And if he couldn't win, he would be out at his--his pension at that time was $40,000 a year.  And so we talked, "What about you, Harold?"  Harold said, "Well, I just can't do it."  So we showed him where he--we thought we were showing him--where he could do it. "Now, you can do this; you can do that.  You'll have to chan--you can change different positions and appoint the superintendent of police.  He knew all that--knew it better than we did, but he said, "So," and we--it was 1:00 when they walked out of here.  We got here around 7:00. That's six hours.  Now, when he walked out, he said, "Yeah, you know, you might have something.  Let me get back to you."  Now,  Manford and I were the ones who--we found out later we were the ones that finally convinced him.  Now, I never saw him again in any meetings, but I did--after he announced his--his candidacy I drove him many, many, many places, to meeting, to restaurants where--down next to the Hyatt [Hotel].  When we walked in there and the owner of the restaurant gave--gave him a bottle of wine and people stood up and clapped.  So he--and then he, Harold Washington, after he won, was on WVON twice every month if he was in town, which helped him, and helped us to increase our listenership.  And he was--after he was elected--re-elected in '87 [1987], he decreased it to once a month.  But for three years all of the black radio managers--there were about five or six of us at the time, WGCI, WV--not VAZ, WBMX, WJPC, VON, VEE, and there's one other station.  And we would have lunch in his--right behind the mayor's office.  There was an anteroom and he had dining room tables and he served us very good lunches. And we were supposed to meet with him, I think, it was the 21st of November on a Wednesday, always on Wednesdays.  But at this time it was on Wednesday, and he--and I was the one that would set them up, and tell everybody when we were going to be there.  So he called me on Tuesday and said, "Because the next day is Thanksgiving, I would--let's make it the next week" and I called everybody and we didn't go.  And if you remember at 12:30 [P.M.] on Wednesday [November 25th, 1987], the day before Thanksgiving, he died of a heart attack.  Had we been there--had that lunch, we'd have been sitting there at his desk at the time.  And that was an end of an era.
Story_ID: 13281
Speaker 1: I want to ask about [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.]
Speaker 2: Oh, I was telling her about Jesse Jackson, and she said would you tell me that on the film.
Speaker 1: What did you tell her about Jesse?
Speaker 2: I'll go over it.  I had a radio show called 'The Hotline'. And in 19--it started April 1st--April Fool's Day in 1963.  And my very first radio show I had was supposed to be [Edwin Carlos]  "Bill" Berry.  He was--I considered him a friend.  He's now dead.  He was the executive director of the [Chicago] Urban League.  And whenever I needed anyone--(ringing)  Now, don't pick up.
Speaker 1: Hold on for a second.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: In 1965, Bill Berry, head of the [Chicago] Urban League, was always--and from '63 [1963] to '65 [1965], whenever I needed anyone on the program--it was someone didn't show up or I didn't have anyone and I wanted to have something special, I could call him and he'd come in.  I called him--and this was in the winter of--early winter of '65 [1965] and he said he couldn't make it.  He says, "But, wait a minute, there's a young fellow by the--." Cut it off.. (inaudible). Now, where was I?
Speaker 1: You were talking about how he wasn't available.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. So he said, "There's a young man here at the University of Chicago Theological Seminary by the name of Jesse Jackson.  He's a student there, and you should give him a call, 'cause I think he's going to be one of our leading leaders here in the next few years."  I said, "Okay."  So he said, "I'll call him first, and tell him to expect your call."  I called, and he said, "Oh, and you're going to have to pick him up because he doesn't have a car.  He's got four children--small children, but no automobile.  He lives in the--one of the dormitories there that they provide for students who do have children." So I called Jesse and I told him I'd pick him up at no later than 10:30 [A.M.] because we had to go on the air at 11:00 [A.M.] and you cannot go on the air at 11:01 if you're supposed to go on at 11:00 [A.M.]  There's no excuse.  So he said he'd be ready.  So before I left in order to get him, to pick him up, he--around 10:25 [A.M.], I said, " I'm on my way."  He said, "I'll be ready."  I said, "Can you be downstairs?"  "I think so."  And I said, "Okay."  It was snowing and had been very high snow--deep snow. And the street where he lived was a one-way street, so I go there.  There's nobody behind me and I picked--I go to the house and I tell him that I'm there and he says, "I'll be right down."  By that time there was a car behind me and I'm sitting there, and they're blowing their horn.  After a while there are two more cars there.  And contrary to what I should be doing, I got out and rang the bell and there's no answer.  By that time there were six or seven cars and I got--had to leave, and I left.  It was about twenty-five minutes to eleven then and there was snow on the ground.  And where I can make it in fifteen minutes, with the snow and ice, it's going to take longer.  I got there on time.  Got--went to the station without Jesse Jackson.  Halfway through my show the door from the studio opens up and this great big, tall, "My name is Jesse Jackson.  I was supposed to be on your--," I said, "Well, I'm sorry, I could--couldn't wait for you."  And I sat down and we talked and let him be on the show.  When I called Bill Berry the next day I said, "Man, what do you mean this man's going to be a leader?"  I said, "He lisps and he--he's--the way he talks."  I said, "No, I think--I think you missed it this time", and he said, "Well, maybe so."  But a few weeks--very few weeks later, because on July sometime, about 1st of July, at the same time, I had started my--with the radio show, I mean, with the--being the courier editor.  I was the--got a T.V. show in conjunction with my radio show at Channel 26.  And we--one of my first guests was Jesse Jackson, and he was good.  And Jesse started--after that, very soon, he started [Operation] Breadbasket and then he--he was--went on and on.  And then he started at--he moved to another place and then I got on his board and I was vice chairman.  And we noted he was doing a lot of going around the country.  And I don't care whether he was out of town, we had a special line he could call where he could get in on Friday nights and we'd talk.  And they noticed if he didn't call, his crowd wasn't as large as it was if he did call, so that went on for four years.  Oh, longer than that--'67 [1967], '8 [1968], '9 [1969]--about seven years and he--he went on.  And we came to the parting of our ways in 1975.  He said one thing.  He said he didn't--I was just--hadn't said anything about it.  I mean I didn't mean to and he called me a liar on my show.  You don't do that to me.  And I let him--we didn't speak for about a year, but then we got back together when he was running for president [of the United States].  We've never talked about it.  But whenever he introduces me, he always says that I am the first person to put a microphone before him before.  And I used to kid and tell him whenever Jesse comes over, even if you open your icebox, no light shines on him and he grins.  He thinks it's a T.V. camera.  That's one of our jokes.  What's the next one there?
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you what did you think of the turnaround from when you first met Jesse Jackson, [Sr.] to what he turned out to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought it was tremendous.  He was--he was a good man.  If he never does another thing in his life, he should make a chapter in history.  In 1984, when he ran for president, he caused to be registered seven million black people, especially in the South, who were elected with [Ronald Wilson] Reagan who was a Republican.  And those people vote, and he took a lot of people in on his coattails.  Those seven members--seven million helped to cut off those coattails and defeated him in '84 [1984], '86 [1986] and '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 13282
Speaker 1: Julie had written something here about when the lines were jammed at [W]VON.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--what was that story?
Speaker 2: On June, well, let's see, June the 12th.  It was a Tuesday. June the 10th--it was the 10th.  So on June the 8th, which is Friday, 1963, four months and seven days after I had gone on the air, I was speaking to a fellow by the name of Medgar [Wiley] Evers.  You know, he was on my show.  I had met Medgar Evers in Mississippi the year before and we had become friends.  And we had talked other times, but this time we were talking about the problems he was having with the people, the bigots in Mississippi.  And he stated that he felt--you know, he--he said, "If they hurt me, they just hurt me," but he was not going to quit.  And the reason I remember it was [June] 12th--the night of the 12th, he was shot as he--as he was getting out of his car, and he was killed. And the next day, I guess, no, that was the eleventh--the next day on the twelfth--and I--we--I had heard about it right after midnight.  Someone had called me from Mississippi to tell me what had happened.  I thought they were kidding at first, and it was on the radio.  And I went over to WVON to prepare a show for that night, and I happened to think I--.  At that time we used tape--two tapes, I mean, two machines.  You record it here and it goes, loop, and it's broadcast over here.  That gave you the six second--the required six seconds that the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] requires you to do in order to broadcast a talk--live talk show.  And I looked and there was that tape and it hadn't been erased.  So we announced every half-hour, and more than that, we're gonna re-play that, "We talked to Medgar Evers the night before--about three nights ago."
Story_ID: 13283
Speaker 1: But you were saying you played the tape Medgar Evers was on the night before.
Speaker 2: And I said, when we--when I found out that we had the tape, and we announced it and when we came on the air all of the lights--all eight of them were flicking which meant we had people who wanted to talk.  And we played the tape and we talked to his widow [Myrlie Evers-Williams]. First, we talked to his widow and then we played the tape and then we took calls.  And that jammed the--what she's talking about is a letter that she has, I mean, that I gave to her from the telephone company.  It said there were so many calls that had anything happened--any in that area, they would have--couldn't have known about it, because the lines they called.  They said fifty thousand people had to dial at once in order for that to happen.  And that's what made many people realize, well, hey, maybe these people have got some listeners, and that happened.  That was in 1963.
Speaker 1: '63 [1963].  I'm going to have a few more questions, but they're mostly, not necessarily stories, just what your reactions and what you're thinking of.  Why do you think talk radio is important?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it is--it gives the public out there release.  It does not--people, you know, become frustrated when they can't talk, and it's one of the vehicles for releasing the emotions that are within them if they have it.  And it gives a person who probably sits around and doesn't do anything to talk about it.  To hear someone else talk, and to talk himself it sort of keeps, I think, the community in contact with itself and I think that's good.  And we try to get the right people, the right officials, the elected officials, the appointed officials, the churches, any and everybody who has something to say to be on--be a guest on our show.
Story_ID: 13284
Speaker 1: And what do you think the legacy of WVON is going to be, either nationwide or for Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, as long as we have--we are a part-time station and as long as we have only one thousand watts, it will have a legacy among just a few people.  Not--not a few, but just a limited number of people in this city.  We don't reach the entire city, because it's the smallest major station and I call it a major station in the city.  We are one thousand watts and we are on only fifteen hours a day, from 10:00 o'clock at night until 1:00 the next afternoon and off all day Sunday.  Now, you can get your message out, but does--it cannot compete with a twenty-four hour station, and a station that has fifty thousand watts, which can reach, and it's like WGN in thirty-nine--it can be heard in thirty-nine states.  We can't be heard all over Chicago, but we do reach the black community.  But now many--over one hundred thousand blacks have moved to the south suburbs, and they're out of touch where they can't hear WVON.  But I think those who hear will remember us for what we are doing, and which will prompt us to try and get another station.
Speaker 1: Now, are the limitations on the station just because of the license?
Speaker 2: No, the limitation is because where you're located on the li--on the vi--on the vibe.
Speaker 1: Oh, with the frequency?
Speaker 2: Dial, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We are down what you call the garbage pit.  If you ever want to go to find out where minorities are, you go to the higher numbers--fourteen.  We are 1450, 1500, 1390, 1600.  You can't hear it in certain areas, but we do have one advantage others don't.  We have what they call a non-directional antenna, which means we broadcast just as much to the east, or to the west, or the north, or the south.  And most, if not, 99 percent of the stations like that have two, three, four, five, and six sticks.  A stick being an antenna.
Speaker 1: Now, why do you think--I don't know if you've heard other radio stations that are similar to this in other--other cities or do you think that WVON is pretty much--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  First of all, we were among the first in the country, and I think we were the first African American station to broadcast.  Not under us, not under my--but when it began in 1963, it was--it had only one hour of talk and we were--and that was--I'm the one that conducted that hour and for a while we were the only one in Chicago.  Now, let me see this. WBBM was doing it when we came on the air, and WMAQ had done it for--from midnight to, oh, I've forgotten, maybe an hour or so a few years later, but they discontinued it, and WBBM discontinued it after we--when we started--but WIND came on about four years later.  But now you've got maybe four, five, six, I don't know how many stations doing the same thing.  And maybe over five hundred, I'm told, I haven't read this--stations, AM and FM, that do nothing but talk around the clock.
Story_ID: 13285
Speaker 1: I think that things are getting better, and we take two steps forward, and one step back.  Again, you take another two steps forward, and another step back.  But, unfortunately, there are hundreds of thousands of people in this city alone who don't take that one step forward, and very often they're going backwards and I'm referring to the African American community.  And for that reason it's the schism between the haves and the have-nots getting wider.  And, unfortunately, there are too many of the haves who forget that they--from whence they came and that they are--were once the have-nots.
Story_ID: 13286
Speaker 1: We have to have the right leaders.  We have to have cooperation from everybody.  One of the biggest things, the largest factor--big factor, or major factor in our decline in some areas is crime.  And I'm told that 75 to 80 percent of the crime is because of drugs.  Now, we've got to do something about stopping this, the drugs, and it's very difficult to do that when so much money is involved.  People you wouldn't think would take money if they were offered a million or two million dollars to turn their heads at a checkpoint coming across the border.  So what I would do--I've thought of this many times.  You didn't ask this question, but I would--if our president and our [United States] Congress--I would suggest to them and highly recommend that everybody in this country on January the 1st of 2001 or 2000 and whatever date they pick, that anybody who's here regardless of how they got here: crossing the border, swimming ashore from vessels, coming in boxes, however they got here, overstaying their visas, they'd be allowed to remain here.  But on that date you would have a restriction on who can come and cut it down much further than what it is now.  I would--from the Pacific Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico every inch of that border between the United States and Mexico, I would move my Marines training there, the Army training, and the Marine training, both at the Gulf and into Mexico, to see that nobody came over.  And those who are here, if they did not bring in some contraband when they came, they could stay or if they didn't commit any crimes.  And the man--a person who came in and his wife and children didn't come, they would come, and maybe mother and father, but not brothers and sons--and sisters.  We're getting too many poor people here, and we already have poor here, and it's becoming overwhelming, and one of these days it's going to explode.  And I foresee another century from now that this country with all of our top soil being--much of our top soil being washed away in these floods, and things that we're going to be like China: a lot of people, difficult to feed, and difficult to find work for everybody.  We have enough poor people here now, today, that we could train.  Now, I realize that once a person sniffs cocaine once, it's very--it's very likely that they will never get over it, so you're going to have do something.  But stop and make the penalty for those who bring it in extremely rare.  Now, the people who pay for it, most of them, don't ever see it--see this cocaine.  They'll give somebody fifty thousand dollars and make a million off of it--off of it when it comes.  And if you make it worth the while of those people who are accepting the money to tell who they are and--and get them, and throw the key away.  Put them in jail.  You do that, I think crime will go down.  And I think if we have jobs here for all of these people we can do better.
Story_ID: 13287
Speaker 1: And one final thing, I've got to say this.  I think it was obscene and deliberate in 19--I think, it was '91 [1991], when Clarence Thomas was picked by President [George Herbert Walker] Bush to replace a man like Thurgood Marshall on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  He did it deliberately, and I think he--if he's not punished, his son--I don't think much of his son [George W. Bush]. Now, this is not--I know this won't get out, but I want it to be known that he did it deliberately.  He said he's got the best man for the job.  Judge--former Appellate Court Judge [Robert H.] Bork--I forget his first name--said the same thing about him.  He was not the best man, and it was--he says it was deliberate, and I think it was deliberate, and other people think it was deliberate, too.
Speaker 2: Just to get Thurgood Marshall out of the Supreme Court, or to just get him--.
Speaker 1: No, to put Clarence Thomas on the Supreme Court.  No, Thurgood Marshall had to leave because his health, and he died just a few months later after he left.  But this man is--he's pathetic to go from one extreme to the other.
Speaker 2: You think that Clarence Thomas was put up there by Bush to make a mockery of black--?
Speaker 1: That, and to cut back on many of the gains made by blacks in the courts.  And if you've noticed that they don't pull any bones about it; he's in the back pocket of--oh, what's the Italian fellow's name?  He's a judge there and he's right wing, and he used to be at the University of Chicago [sic, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia].
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Whatever.  But those who knew him follow it.  They'll know who I'm referring to.
Story_ID: 13288
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy should be if someone looks back on what you did in a hundred years?  What would you like them to know or think about you?
Speaker 2: That I did what I could to change things for the better and to make, without distinction, black or white, I'd like to make this country what the [U.S.] Constitution say there, which I don't think they've lived up to, but what--and but I think I'd like to help it to become what they say.  They made some pretty words there, and I'd like to make--make them accurate.  And I did what I could do and I did it with dedication.
Story_ID: 13289
Speaker 1: If your grandfather [Robert Howard Waterford] could see what you had done, or know your accomplishments, what do you think he would think of you?
Speaker 2: Oh, he'd be proud and he--he was very demonstrative.  He would show it, and he would be--like to say, "This is my grandson."  Because when we did things that was--.
Speaker 1: That was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  When we--he did things--get As in school, he was glad to see it.  And when his son became a physician--became a lawyer, he was very proud.  And when you were born into slavery, and see what has happened to so many people who didn't make it because of the conditions were under which they were living, then you know that it--it was really moving.  I think it moved me just as much as it would move him.
Story_ID: 13290
Speaker 1: [Wesley South in a publicity photo, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13291
Speaker 1: [Wesley South with others, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13292
Speaker 1: [Wesley South in a publicity photo, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13293
Speaker 1: [Wesley South in a publicity photo, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13294
Speaker 1: [Wesley South and others outside a storefront, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13295
Speaker 1: [Rev. Jesse Jackson, ca. 1960s. From the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13296
Speaker 1: [Funeral ceremonies for unknown person. From the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13297
Speaker 1: Left to right, Arthur Jackson, my son-in-law married to my daughter, Appellate Court Judge, Leslie Elaine South; Cook County Board President, John [H.] Stroger [Jr.]; the City Clerk of Chicago [sic, Chicago City Treasurer Miriam Santos], recently released from prison and she's going on trial in just a few months; the alderman--I've forgotten her name--of the 8th Ward [Lorraine Dixon].  That's John Stroger's ward.  Next to her, the late [United States] Congressman Charlie [Charles] Hayes.  Next to him is George Dunne, Ward Committeeman of the 42nd Ward, and former longtime president of the [Cook] County Board.  Next to that was--is Wesley South, and I don't know--never--the person on the end I do not know.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with prominent Chicago political figures, (from L to R): Arthur Jackson, South's son-in-law; Cook County Board President John H. Stroger, Jr.; Chicago City Treasurer Miriam Santos; Chicago Alderman Lorraine Dixon; U.S. Congressman Charles Hayes; Chicago Ward Committeeman George Dunne; Wesley South; unnamed person, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13298
Speaker 1: We're on the street at 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois] during that Saturday night after the assassination of--of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and we're trying to stop these youngsters from continuing to set fires.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with Chicago youths in the aftermath of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr's assassination, Chicago, Illinois, April 1968.  From the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13299
Speaker 1: This is you and Elijah Muhammad.
Speaker 2: Elijah Muhammad.  Wesley South and Elijah Muhammad's on the left.
Speaker 1: What year was this?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: This was in 1968.
Speaker 1: 1968.
Speaker 2: During my campaign.
Speaker 1: [Wesley South (right) with Elijah Muhammad, Chicago, Illinois, 1968. From the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13300
Speaker 1: Wesley South and a group of youngsters who were invited.  We used to have tours.  I don't know from where they came.  This was about 1986, maybe '87 [1987].  They're in our music room where we store our albums.
Speaker 2: That's WVON?
Speaker 1: WVON.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with children on a field trip to WVON radio station, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1986. From the collection of Wesley South.]
Story_ID: 13301
Speaker 1: When did--,
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: Mayor [Harold] Washington [of Chicago, Illinois] give this you?
Speaker 2: The date on there is--.
Speaker 1: Oh, '85 [1985], yeah.
Speaker 2: September the 18th, 1985--Mayor Washington.
Speaker 1: [Wesley South's autographed portrait of Mayor Harold Washington of Chicago, Illinois, 1985. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13302
Speaker 1: Do you know when this was approximately from?
Speaker 2: About '8--1987, '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: [Publicity photo of Wesley South, ca. 1988. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13303
Speaker 1: Wesley South and Senator--U.S. Senator Carol Moseley Braun of the State of Illinois about 1996 in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Any idea what function this is at or--.
Speaker 1: It was a community meeting.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (right) with U.S. Senator Carol Moseley Braun (left) at a community meeting, Chicago, Illinois, 1996. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13304
Speaker 1: This Wesley South outside of WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station] and that was in color and it was for the 'Citizen' newspaper and it was printed in color, 19--oh, maybe '91 [1991], maybe '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: [Wesley South outside of WVON studios, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1992. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13305
Speaker 1: This is the throng at the beginning of the parade.  A half a million people if you'll see the headline of the paper we bought that day coming down Peach [sic, Peachtree] Street in Atlanta [Georgia] headed--after the church services.  They're on their way to the open service which is held on the campus of [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: [A parade down Peachtree Street, Atlanta, Georgia, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13306
Speaker 1: Bernadine Washington to the left.  She was a member of the staff at WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station].  Bern's--I forgot what the title of her show ['On the Scene with Bernadine'] was.  In the center is Senator Charles Percy and Wesley South to my left.  This is the night he was elected the senator from Illinois.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year this was approximately?
Speaker 1: 1966.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (right) with radio executive Bernadine Washington (left) and Senator Charles Percy of Illinois (center), 1966. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13307
Speaker 1: Wesley South.  I don't know the name of the lady, but she was the representative from the Alph--AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] Sorority [Inc.] and she was bringing me notification over at the station [WVON radio station, Chicago, Illinois] in 1992 that I had been selected by them to be honored for the contribution I'm supposed to have made to the community in the past few years.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (right) receives a community involvement award from an unidentified Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. representative (left), Chicago, Illinois, 1992. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13308
Speaker 1: This is a photograph made while I was a columnist for the 'Chicago American'. And part of my beat was to go the nightclubs and this was taken at The Blue Note, which is no longer there in Chicago [Illinois] in 19--, oh, '60 [1960], 19--no, about 1950.  Anywhere between '58 [1958] and '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: [Wesley South in a portrait taken at The Blue Note nightclub, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1960. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13309
Speaker 1: That's me.  It was taken in 1992 by Ray Simack (ph.), a friend of mine who has a photography shop in Broadview [Illinois].  It was taken at the same time that he took some pictures of my daughter [Leslie Elaine South] who was running for Circuit Court [of Cook County] judge that year and she was successful.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Wesley South taken in Broadview, Illinois, 1992. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13310
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1968, probably in mid-March.  We had owned--left to right is Leslie Bland (ph.), who's a real estate operator here in Chicago; Handy (ph.) is his last name, the next fellow.  He was the pilot who ran a company.  We had six planes and he was the--huh?
Speaker 2: You can go ahead.  Hold on for a second.
Speaker 1: And the next one is myself and then there's a clerk.  This was to deposit and turn in my petitions.  I was running for [United States] Congress in 1968.  We flew down in one of our planes to Springfield [Illinois] and that's the depositing them with the clerk.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with other Chicago, Illinois figures during his campaign for U.S. Congress, Springfield, Illinois, 1968. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13311
Speaker 1: This picture was taken May 18, 1954 during the celebration of the Topeka versus Board of Education [sic, Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas].  Left to right is Roy Wilkins, who was the Deputy Secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; next to him is Walter--the late Walter White who was at that time the director or the president of the NAACP.  Next to him was Wesley South, myself.  To my left is Thurgood Marshall who is the one who had called me the day before to tell me that the Supreme Court would be rendering a decision the next day and this is that evening after the--it was done.  Next to him is his second assistant, I don't recall his name, but he's now a federal judge who--and is about to--it's time for him to retire. 1954.  And the last is Alan Morrison of 'Ebony' magazine.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South and others at a Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas event, 1954; from left to right, Roy Wilkins, Walter White, Wesley South, Thurgood Marshall, Marshall's unidentified assistant and Alan Morrison. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13312
Speaker 1: Saturday night after the assassination of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in the Woodlawn area [Chicago, Illinois].  There were bands of young people who were setting fires to stores and to automobiles.  This was one of the ones that we found and the police got there in time before it exploded and spread the fire to the nearby structures.
Speaker 2: Do you know who that is standing with or is it just someone--?
Speaker 1: No, it's just somebody who happened to be.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South observes unrest after the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Woodlawn area, Chicago, Illinois, 1968. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13313
Speaker 1: When was this?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Not the slightest idea.  See I had hair, so it had to be before 1960 I would think.  Maybe '63 [1963], '62 [1962], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: [Portrait of Wesley South, ca. 1963. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13314
Speaker 1: Wesley South shaking hands with [Illinois] Governor Adlai Stevenson the day after he lost his bid for the presidency to General [Dwight D.] Eisenhower, 19--that would be about November 7 or 8  of 1952.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (left) with Illinois governor and presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson (right), 1952. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13315
Speaker 1: Left to right, that's Verlene Blackburn, Mrs. Hartigan, the wife of the Neil Hartigan who at that time was running for governor, state of Illinois and that was 1992.  Wesley South and my daughter, then judge of the Circuit Court [of Cook County], Leslie Elaine South.  That's--Verlene Blackburn  was one of my assistants.  She was there with us from WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station].  This was at the Conrad Hilton.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Wesley South (second from right) with his daughter, Leslie Elaine South (right), his assistant, Verlene Blackburn (left), and Mr. and Mrs. Neil Hartigan (third, second from left), Chicago, Illinois, 1992. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13316
Speaker 1: To the left, Al Johnson, Cadillac.  He owns a franchise [Al Johnson Cadillac].  Mildred South and Wesley South.  We were at a meeting at the--oh, incidentally, Al Johnson's known as 'Cadillac' Al Johnson and he was the vice, no, he was the treasurer of Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] and, also Operation Breadbasket before PUSH  was formed.  Mildred South was a volunteer.  Wesley South was the first-second vice chairman of PUSH and Breadbasket.  And this was at the fundraiser that we had.
Speaker 2: [Wesley (right) and Mildred (center) South with 'Cadillac' Al Johnson (left) at an Operation PUSH/Breadbasket fundraiser, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13317
Speaker 1: This was when I was running for Congress in 1968.  It's our headquarters.  We had a fundraiser there.  I'm shaking hands with Jim Hutchinson who was my assistant campaign manager.
Speaker 2: What year was that again?  What year again?
Speaker 1: 1968.
Speaker 2: '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: About April.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (front, left) with assistant campaign manager Jim Hutchinson (front, right) at a fundraiser during his bid for U.S. Congress, 1968. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13318
Speaker 1: Wesley South and Muhammad Ali.  He was--.
Speaker 2: Cassius Clay.
Speaker 1: Cassius Clay.  He was Muhammad Ali then.  He was on my T.V. show and he was frequently a guest on my shows.  And I think this was the time we were on Channel 26 which is on the top floor, about forty-five--fifty floors above the sea--above the street.  And when we were going down on the elevator we heard something crack and the elevator--it looked like it was falling and he said--oh, he's a Muslim.  And he said,  "Oh, Jesus," and it broke and we went all the way down to the sub-basement.  No one was injured.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (left) with Muhammad Ali (right), Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13319
Speaker 1: '66 [1966].  The cultural exchange.  We're in the Kremlin [Moscow, Russia]. This is the church that's inside of the Kremlin.  And left to right is our guide from Russia.  I've forgotten the name of the lady who was from San Francisco [California]--all of them are artists.  Margaret Burroughs is next.  She's the founder of the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]
Speaker 2: DuSable Museum.
Speaker 1: And next to her is her husband, late husband, Charles-- Charlie Montgomery--Charles Burroughs.  And then the next, oh, I've forgotten his name.  I can't forget the next one, that's me.  And then there's Sylvester Britton with the plaid jacket on.  And next to him is one of the guides with us.  And then the next fellow is Margaret Burroughs's fifteen year old son and I've forgotten the name of the other artist.  On the end is Geraldine McCullough who at that time had been covered by 'Time' [magazine].  She's an artist and was head of the art department at Rosary College [later, Dominican University, River Forest, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Rosary College.
Speaker 1: And that's the church inside the Kremlin.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with American artists in a cultural exchange program at the Kremlin, Moscow, Russia, 1966; from left to right: unidentified Russian tour guide, unidentified San Francisco, California artist, Margaret Burroughs with husband Charles Burroughs, unidentified man, Wesley South, Sylvester Britton, unidentified guide, son of Margaret Burroughs, unidentified artist, and Geraldine McCullough. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13320
Speaker 1: Left to right Verteel Malsby (ph.), that's my wife's sister who passed in November of 1994.  Next to her is my--he was--this was Christmas of 1980--1967.  And that's my nephew, Earl, that had just come from Los Angeles [California] and Wesley South, my younger brother, Robert South known as Jules South who's now--who passed in 1992, and my sister is Thelma Shaw who is still living--she's ninety-three--in McAlester, Oklahoma.  And that's my mother Mrs. Mayme Alston (ph.) and these were her last days.  She died, too.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South with family members at Christmas, 1967; from left to right: sister-in-law, Verteel Malsby, nephew, Earl, Wesley South, brother Robert 'Jules' South, sister Thelma Shaw, mother Mayme Alston. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13321
Speaker 1: The cover of the 'Crisis' magazine. 'Crisis' was formed about 1914 or '15 [1915] by W.E.B. DuBois.  And this is the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Brown versus [Board of Education of] Topeka [Kansas] the landmark decision won by Thurgood Marshall [1954].
Speaker 2: [Wesley South and others celebrate the Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas decision (1954); from left to right, Roy Wilkins, Walter White, Wesley South, Thurgood Marshall, Marshall's unidentified assistant and Alan Morrison. Cover of 'Crisis' magazine, 1979. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13322
Speaker 1: The biggest crowd ever in Atlanta [Georgia].  It hasn't been equaled since then.
Speaker 2: Are you in this particular photograph?
Speaker 1: I thought I was, but I don't know.
Speaker 2: It's hard to tell with that newsprint.
Speaker 1: Because who I thought was me, was not.
Speaker 2: ['The Atlanta Journal' article on Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s funeral procession, Atlanta, Georgia, 1968. From the collection of Wesley South]
Story_ID: 13323
Speaker 1: I'm shaking hands there with Alderman--.
Speaker 2: Somebody?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just called his name.  He was an alderman.  He's now the [Illinois] Appellate Court judge and just ran for [Illinois] Supreme Court and lost to [Thomas] Fitzgerald by a very narrow margin.
Speaker 2: William Cousins?
Speaker 1: William Cousins.
Speaker 2: And it says he was 8th ward alderman [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: 8th ward alderman, that's right.
Speaker 2: And that's when you were running for Congress.
Speaker 1: That's--yeah, that was in 1968.
Speaker 2: [Wesley South (left) with then-Chicago, Illinois 8th ward alderman, William Cousins (right), 1968. From the collection of Wesley South]
