Story_ID: 344421
Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry and I'm doing the interview, and Scott Stearns is doing our camera work.  Could you please tell me your full name, your first, middle and last name and spell them for us please.
Speaker 2: My name is James Alfred Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], J-A-M-E-S, A-L-F-R-E-D, S-M-I-T-H, and I should have said, I'm James Alfred Smith, Sr. because there is a James Alfred Smith, Jr., who is also a pastor.
Speaker 1: That's correct. Okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he's my son.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Could you please tell us your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born May the 19th, 1931, in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date is?
Speaker 2: April the 6th, the year 2006 in Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: Right.  And could you tell us the location of this interview, the address please.
Speaker 2: This interview is taking place in the Family Life Center of the Allen Temple Baptist Church, 8501 International Boulevard, Oakland, California, zip code 94621.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I am the senior pastor of the Allen Temple Baptist Church.  However, I also serve as distinguished professor of preaching and church ministries at the American Baptist Seminary of the West [Berkeley, California], and the Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley, 2606 Dwight Way, Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: My, you're a very, very busy man.
Story_ID: 344422
Speaker 1: We're gonna start with some questions just to kind of relax everybody.  They're kind of People magazines questions, so if you just bear with me, okay?  Could you please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Well, I love just about any kind of bean or peas.  I love black-eyed peas.  I love butter beans.  I love good southern food, corn bread.  I love okra.  I love vegetables.  I love baked chicken and I love baked fish.  I try to stay away from pork.  I work hard to do that, and however, I may yield to temptation on special holidays.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well you're making me very, very hungry.  Could you tell us your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: (Whispers) (Unclear) I hadn't thought about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the month of August because during the month of August, my wife and I can get away from the hustle and bustle of hard work and have a chance to renew ourselves and to recharge our batteries and come back fresh.  In August we love to get away and we love to go to places like the Caribbean and most recently, we've been going to Mexico.
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Oh, wonderful.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Could you please tell us your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I love blue.  I really love the color blue.
Speaker 1: Do you?
Speaker 2: Someone said that blue expresses excellence and I'm in pursuit of it, but excellence is so elusive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I understand.  Could you please tell us your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody knows me by my favorite trademark, I wish I could make it plain.
Story_ID: 344423
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna explore your family background, okay?  So, first we're gonna start with your mother.  Could you please tell us her name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother was named Amy [Amy Gates Smith], A-M-Y, Gates, G-A-T-E-S, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Could you tell me where she was born, where she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in the Mississippi Delta, in and around Clarksdale [Mississippi] and Jonestown, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know her birthdate?
Speaker 2: I can't remember her birthdate.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: I can research that.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll talk, next time we come we'll, you can let us know, okay.  Could you tell us, do you know anything about her background and her growing up?  Did she tell you any stories about when she was a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, my mother grew up in segregation, so did I, but she grew up in segregation in Mississippi, which was terrible, and so as a little girl she left the State of Mississippi with my grandmother [Martha Henry], her brother [Charles Beamon] and her sister [Louise Smith Simms], endeavoring to get to Chicago [Illinois].  At that time, Chicago was the promised land, but we ran out of, they ran out of money and so they ended up in Kansas City, Missouri, where I was born.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is an indescribable beautiful woman.  A very poised, one that had poetic elegance in her speech, one that spoke poetically, one that wrote poetically, a very spiritual woman, one whose spirituality overshadowed me and overpowered me and helped me to be the person that I am.
Speaker 1: I see.  Do you have any stories about when you were growing up with her that you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother used to read to me all the time, and she read bible stories, so when I went to seminary [Western Baptist College; Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri] I discovered that when the professors in Bible would give assignments, the students had to read the story because many of them weren't as familiar with the story as I was. (Background noise) So instead of reading the specific biblical story, I would move ahead and read the critical commentaries on the biblical texts.
Story_ID: 344424
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to tell us about your mother [Amy Gates Smith]?
Speaker 2: My mother was denied a good education because when she grew up in Mississippi she had to work in the fields part of the time, and of course, the schools were very separate and very unequal.  So when she came to Kansas City, Missouri, she ended up working as a domestic.  She was like a maid in the homes of well-to-do people in the upper crust sections of Kansas City, Missouri.  But she loved me and she helped me to have a healthy self-image and she inspired me to be best person that I could be.
Speaker 1: She sounds like a wonderful person.
Speaker 2: And she introduced me to the lady that I married, my wife, JoAnna [JoAnna Goodwin Smith] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh really? Oh really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Would you like to tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother said, "Son, you see the picture of this girl?"  At that time, my wife's picture was in the Kansas City Call [The Call] newspaper and she, her picture was there because she had won an academic scholarship given by the Pepsi-Cola Company [PepsiCo] and my mother said, "Now this is the kind of girl that you should relate to."
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--so you did later on.
Speaker 2: I took her seriously.
Story_ID: 344425
Speaker 1: By reading your book ['On the Jericho Road: A Memoir of Racial Justice, Social Action and Prophetic Ministry,' Rev. Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr. and Harry Louis Williams II], I understand you didn't know your father very well. Could you tell us something about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, oh no.  Because I'm born, I was born out of wedlock, society would say that I'm illegitimate.  I don't think of myself as being illegitimate, and my mother [Amy Gates Smith] didn't treat me like I was illegitimate, but because I don't have my father's name, that stigma was placed upon me.  My father was named, his name was Clyde Anderson, C-L-Y-D-E, capital A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, and my dad came from Shreveport, Louisiana, and I got to know him after I became an adult and developed a wonderful relationship with him, with his family, namely his uncle, his brother who was named James [James Anderson], my Uncle James, and my Uncle James and I became very, very close.  I met my dad's mother and it was very good for me to meet my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us, you know anything about his background?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad came out of a wonderful family that had worked, all of them, for the railroad.  Some were Pullman porters.  You know there is a glorious chapter about the contribution that black men made to the train industry as Pullman porters, and my grandmother worked in the segregated part of the train station in Shreveport, Louisiana, as a ticket agent.
Speaker 1: You know her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Betty Bennett [ph.], Betty Bennett, and she used to live in Shreveport, Louisiana at 1642 Murphy Street.
Speaker 1: Oh my.  You do know a lot.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father was quiet and unassuming and very charming.  He was gifted in an area where I do not have gifts, great mechanical skills, very good with his hands, had the ability to repair anything and the ability to make anything.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was a remarkable person.  Do you have any stories to tell us about him, you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember learning of his passing and so therefore, I said to my family here in California, I have to go to dad's funeral and I flew American Airlines to Dallas [Texas] and from Dallas to Shreveport and when I arrived in Shreveport, I discovered that they were not having the homegoing service in one of the Baptist churches because in those days, the churches did not have services for non-church members.  So they were having the service in the mortuary.  I went to the mortuary, the minister there felt that we weren't very good people because we were having a service in mortuary, so he wasn't very professional about conducting the service.  And so when he asked for the obituary several times, and my uncle didn't know the difference between the obituary and the dictionary, and the preacher was sarcastic and said, "I said is there an obituary?"  I became somewhat incensed, but I covered it up with sophistication and said, "Yes there is an obituary," and I gave it and had great delight in going on an oratorical flight in talking about my love for my father.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Thank you for sharing it.  Could you tell us about what year this was that your father passed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness, I'm not very good--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father died in the latter part of the 1970s (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 344426
Speaker 1: Have you studied your family history?  Do you know anything about your ancestors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know much about my family history and I'm not proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you tell us something about your grandparents, you know, your mother's [Amy Gates Smith] parents, her family.
Speaker 2: I'm deeply indebted to my mother's mother because she saw a lot of good in me. The first year I was in school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School; Leeds-Dunbar Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri], I was failing in reading and they were going to hold me back so my grandmother was my advocate.  She said to the school, "Allow me to work with him this summer and I will assure you that when September comes, he'll be up with his class."  So my grandmother during the summer months, would have me to sit on the front porch with her and she would sit in her rocking chair and I would sit in another chair and we would have to read the Bible, and I learned how to read by using phonics, by pronouncing the syllables, and sure enough when fall came, I not only could read, I was not only up with my class, but in some ways, I was one of the front runners in the class.
Speaker 1: She sounds like a remarkable woman. What was her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A strong woman.
Speaker 1: What was her name please?
Speaker 2: Martha Henry.
Speaker 1: Martha Henry.  Do you know anything about your maternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: I don't, I wish I did, but I don't know anything about him.
Speaker 1: And you did mention that you knew your--
Speaker 2: I did meet my grandfather, yes, I did.  I met him in Memphis, Tennessee when I was a little boy.  During those months we would go to Memphis, Tennessee on the Missouri Pacific Railroad and when we would get to the Mason and Dixon Line [Mason-Dixon Line], of course, all of the blacks had to get up and move to the back of the train, but I could remember him as being a wonderful man, a quiet man, a very handsome man.  Could have been a movie star.  And his hair was white, but he was a very (background noise) handsome man and could have given Denzel Washington a run for his money.
Story_ID: 344427
Speaker 1: Could you tell us, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I can remember growing up in Kansas City, Missouri, enjoying the summer months and being fascinated with nature.  I loved the trees and loved the flowers and loved the beauty of nature and the animals.  I was fascinated with God's created universe.
Story_ID: 344428
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family life?  What's your home life like?
Speaker 2: Well, there were only two of us, my brother Joseph Smith, who's dead now, a younger brother.  It was my job to look out for him and take care of him, but we ate well, and we lived well, although we were poor and I didn't know that we were poor because of the excessive love that was given to us.  We enjoyed life, enjoyed our family, enjoyed good food, enjoyed playing, enjoyed even going to church on Sundays.  When we went to church on Sundays we had to go all day and we enjoyed that.  We participated in playing softball.  Very interested in sports.  We'd get a chance to go to see major league Negro baseball [Negro Leagues].  We would get to see Satchel Paige pitch and, and Willard Brown play centerfield for the Kansas City Monarchs.  We enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: You were so lucky.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was lucky.  And I remember when Jackie Robinson played second base for Kansas City.
Speaker 1: Oh, he did?
Speaker 2: I remember Larry Doby when he left Negro baseball to play for the Cleveland Browns [sic. Cleveland Indians].  I had a great life coming up.  Had, the schools were segregated, but the teachers really cared, and they connected with the home, and they would stay after school and go to our homes and tell the teachers if we were not doing well.  In those days, the home, the school and the churches worked hand-in-hand to help us be the best possible.
Story_ID: 344429
Speaker 1: You mentioned you had a brother [Joseph Smith].  Could you tell us something about your brother?
Speaker 2: My brother was younger, a lot of fun, very smart, but great sense of humor and when we would go places, my mother [Amy Gates Smith] would say, you know, "You're responsible for him, and he'd better not get any scratches on him.  You better bring him back home just the way that he was when he left."  But my brother was very mischievous.  He would start a fight and I would have to fight the person and tell him to run.  Sometimes if the person was larger than I, I'd have to do my best to hold 'em off as long as I could, then I would run.  But my brother and I both loved music.  He played bass and I played E-flat alto sax.  My brother was also a Golden Glove boxer and I used to go to see him fight.  He was a happy person, a jovial person and the life of the party.
Speaker 1: Oh, sounds wonderful.  You must miss him a great deal.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 344430
Speaker 1: Could you describe the street that you lived on?  What was your neighborhood like, your community?
Speaker 2: It was a segregated community in Kansas City [Missouri], in what was known as the Leeds Addition [Kansas City, Missouri].  It was a black working class community.  In those days, they had outdoor toilets.  I can remember that.  Even in those days of public school in Kansas City, Missouri, the blacks had outdoor toilets.  It was separate but unequal.  But it was a happy community where you could hear good music and excitement.  In those days the neighbors loved each other.  Nobody locked their doors.  In those days everybody watched out for each other.
Speaker 1: Did you play outside a lot with your friends (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We played outside a lot.  It was good, it was healthy.
Story_ID: 344431
Speaker 1: Are there any sights or sounds or smells that when you come in contact with 'em it immediately takes you back to childhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I walk down the sidewalk and the aroma of barbecue comes out, I can smell the ribs or the hot links or whatever.
Speaker 1: That's a good memory.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Speaker 2: Or if I can hear some good Count Basie or some good Duke Ellington, some Jay McShann or hear Jimmy Rushing sing 'Sent for You Yesterday and Here You Come Today,' hear Duke's 'A Train' ['Take the A Train'] or to hear Johnny Hodges play 'Do Nothin' Till You Hear From Me.' Yes, the jazz, the food, remembrances of the culture, a picture of A. Philip Randolph, who was head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, or to see a picture of Walter White of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Those brought, those sights bring to my mind memories of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Kansas City [Missouri] was a wonderful place, it had this, even though parts were segregated, you had this wonderful culture.
Speaker 2: Yes, great culture.
Speaker 1: The music, and just, what you were saying, the baseball, there was this dynamic center of black culture (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. That's right.
Speaker 1: You were very fortunate to grow up there.
Speaker 2: I grew in that, and in fact, I played a saxophone.  I wanted, I wasn't planning to be a minister.  I wanted to be a jazz musician.  And in high school [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri] I was good enough to be a union musician.  I belonged to the Local, local number 627 [Colored Musicians' Local 627].
Speaker 1: Wow, you must have been very good.
Speaker 2: They said I was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 344293
Speaker 1: And you were talking about growing up in Kansas City [Missouri].  I knew you grew up du- during the Depression [Great Depression].  Was this event, did it have a big effect on your life, the Depression?
Speaker 2: Well, as I reflect back on what transpired then, I am amazed at the fact that we were able to come through tough times because we were a community.  If my mother [Amy Gates Smith] ran out of flour, she could send me across the street to where Mrs. Grimes lived, and I could come back with a cup of flour or a cup of sugar, and people traded back and forth like that.  The people were in it together and there was a great sense of sharing, a great sense of community, so I look back on those days with a sense of pride and nostalgia, wishing that the good old days would come back again where we had real community.
Speaker 1: I, I kind of agree with you.
Story_ID: 344294
Speaker 1: We're gonna talk a little bit about your elementary school.  Could you tell us the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went to the Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [Leeds-Dunbar Elementary School] in Kansas City, Missouri, in the Leeds Addition.  It was an all-black school.  The teachers were all black, but the teachers loved us, the teachers pushed us, and the teachers were audacious enough to say with no sense of hatred toward white people who were the dominant power structure of that time, that if we were going to succeed, we had to be better than the white community, and so they drove us to academic excellence.  Very strict, very rigid, and our families supported the teachers.  The teachers were always right--
Speaker 1: They certainly were.
Speaker 2: --no matter, when they, if they were wrong, the family stood by the teachers.  It's a different situation today because if my mother [Amy Gates Smith] would come down to the school, my playmates would say, "James Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.] you are in trouble, your mother is here."  Whereas today in many situations, if the mother comes, it means that the teacher is in trouble, not the child.  But I came out of a kind of caring, and the caring was so strong that they would follow you from elementary school to junior high, and follow you from junior high to senior high.  And I'm going to get very emotional as I tell you this, by the time we got to senior high, we appreciated those elementary teachers and we would go back and see them.  And go back and thank them for the rigidity that they had and for the pressures that they placed upon us for the drive that they gave us, for the motivation.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Names that stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Mrs. Stokes [ph.] was my fifth grade teacher.  Mr. Williams [ph.] was my principal.  Raymond Marshall [J. Raymond Marshall] was my scoutmaster.  I remember those people just like it was yesterday.  And they introduced me to Langston Hughes, along with my mother, they introduced me to Countee Cullen.  They introduced me to Margaret Walker, the poets, and it was rich culture then, and children don't get that today in school.
Speaker 1: I agree, I agree.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were very, very fortunate.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now that you look back on it.
Speaker 2: And I, and I shed tears when I think about it.
Speaker 1: Very, very lucky (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because they touched my life with beauty.
Story_ID: 344295
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you?
Speaker 2: A good student.  Good, not in the sense that I was brilliant, but good in the sense that I would work hard.
Speaker 1: You didn't get into trouble?  You weren't--
Speaker 2: I was afraid to get into trouble because if I got into trouble at school in those days they believed in corporal punishment.  In those days, the principal had a paddle. In those days when we took shop, we made paddles, and the, the paddle, so they would use a paddle on us.  And then when we got home, we'd get another spanking.  So I was afraid to act crazy and I didn't wanna, want to be called a bad boy.  I wanted to be called a good boy.  I wanted to please.  I wanted to please my mother [Amy Gates Smith], I wanted to please my [maternal] grandmother [Martha Henry].  I wanted to please my cub master.  I wanted to please my scoutmaster [J. Raymond Marshall].  I wanted to please my coach.  I wanted to please my physical ed.  I wanted to be an achiever.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: There was a passion and in Kansas City, Missouri, there was an older boy by the name of Odell Sylvester.  Odell Sylvester came to Oakland [California] and became a deputy chief of police, and then left Oakland and went to Berkeley [California] and became the chief of police.  He was a campus leader, he was a school leader.  And my mother used to say, "Why can't you be like Odell Sylvester?"  In those days they would point out achievers, and say, "Now boy, why can't you be like that boy."  That's the culture that helped shape me.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful culture.
Story_ID: 344296
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were in elementary school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School; Leeds-Dunbar Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri], what were your dreams, what did you think you were going to grow up to become?
Speaker 2: I didn't think I would be a preacher.  I thought I'd be a musician, and I still love music because in this office I have pictures of Miles Davis and John Coltrane.
Speaker 1: You liked to listen to them?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved great music and loved jazz and I loved classical, and we had one of the best musical programs here at this church [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California], and we have a music school at this church.  Well, my minister of music participated with some of the black expatriates who went to France.  And the, they were musicians there during the era of Josephine Baker and Betty Gatlin [ph.], she was the greatest, and so to me music invigorates and music inspires and music motivates, and music sets the tone.  Music helps you to get over, music says you can, music stirs your blood, music helps you to have a staccato step, music helps you to have rhythm.
Speaker 1: Music is wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: It's a wonderful language. It's a wonderful way to communicate.  I agree with you.  Church was very important--Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and when I preach, I try to preach musically, try to be a lyrical preacher, try to let my sermons sing.
Story_ID: 344297
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, was the church important in your family life?
Speaker 2: The church was very important, not only to my family, but it was important to our community because it was the church where the pastor would announce that we're going to have a membership campaign for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP].  It was the church where they announce that Walter White of the NAACP is coming to town.  It was the church where I heard them say, "You gotta get out and vote."  It was the black pastor who could take City Hall [Kansas City, Missouri] to task and speak out against injustice because his salary was being paid by black people and he was the freest black man around.  It was the church that gave us hope when hope unborn had died.
Speaker 1: That was very, very important.  Did you go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the church that inspired the young people.  It was the church was I first heard that I could be somebody.  It was the church where I learned that I had talent.  It was the church where the older people would say, "James [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], you're gonna be somebody someday."
Speaker 1: So it was a very motivating part of your life, very important.
Speaker 2: Very motivated.
Speaker 1: The center.
Speaker 2: And that's all I know.  And as I look back over it all, I, I can say like the old people, I would take nothing for my journey.
Story_ID: 344298
Speaker 1: When you finished elementary school did-, was there a junior high school or you went to senior high school?
Speaker 2: How did we go?  We went from Paul Laurence Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School; Leeds-Dunbar Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] to R.T. Coles High School [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School, Kansas City, Missouri].  And when I graduated from high school, I was not only the class president, but I was the president of the student body of the school and president of the all city student body of Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Oh my.
Speaker 2: So, God was using me then to develop my leadership skills.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in high school who were very influential?
Speaker 2: Coach Isaiah Banks.  He's dead now.  English Teacher, Marla Banks [ph.] who is still living.  Leo Davis, my bandmaster who's dead now.  Gertrude Bardwell, still living.  A master of world history, and who set my soul on fire so much so that even to this day I'm a history buff, and many of the illustrations that I use in preaching come from that.  And I still keep in touch with her.  So I'm indebted to these people because I stand on their shoulders.
Speaker 1: That's right. We do. Stand on their shoulders, I agree.
Speaker 2: You're touching such a sensitive nerve with me and so that's why I'm shedding tears because these people cared (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's good. Well, I'm glad, I'm glad that you were able to share this with us.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'm always reminded of the African myth, you know, if you, if you know my name, I haven't died.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's, it's good that we're able to recall people's names to keep them alive.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 344011
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing are the Reverend Bernestine Smith and the Reverend Dr. Martha C. Taylor.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: James Alfred Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], better known as J, period, A-L-F-R-E-D, Alfred, S-M-I-T-H.  I should have said J. Alfred Smith, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Five, nineteen, thirty-one [May 19, 1931], Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am pastor emeritus of Allen Temple Baptist Church, 8501 International Boulevard, Oakland, California, and professor emeritus of the American Baptist Seminary of the West, 2606 Dwight Way, Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: It's the fourteenth, I think.  December 14th?
Speaker 2: December 14th, 2015.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we are the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my office at the Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland.  When I retired, they gave me an office as an emeritus.
Story_ID: 344012
Speaker 1: Now we're finishing an interview that we started probably in 2011 [sic. 2006] I believe, and so we left off with you at Coles High School [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School] in Kansas City, Missouri, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  R.T. Coles High School. It no longer exists.  It's been a long time.  I graduated in 1948 as the president of the class, and from there I studied at Western Baptist College [Western Baptist Bible College] in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Now did you already know that you wanted to be a reverend when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, the call came to me on July the 4th, 1948, when I was playing in a jazz band in Vinita, Oklahoma.  We were traveling from one place to another playing for dances in the State of Kansas, in the State of Missouri and in the State of Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Now what was your instrument?
Speaker 2: E-flat alto saxophone, first chair.  And when the Holy Ghost hit me, I knew that my jazz days were over.
Speaker 1: Describe what happened.  How did, how did the Holy Ghost hit you and what happened?
Speaker 2: It was not just simply a Pentecostal explosion of emotion, but while I was reading the notes in front of me, my history lessons began to match with my biblical lessons.  Mark 8:36 says, "What would it profit a man to gain the world and lose his soul?" I thought about a history lesson.  Alexander the Great, who had conquered the world at thirty-three, and then sat down and cried because he had no more worlds to conquer.  He had the world in a jug and the stopper in his hand, and yet his life was without fulfillment and meaning, and I began to say, "Is this what you want to do the rest of your life?  No, God has greater things in store for you."  My decision was made like that.  The next morning I got up before day and got on a Greyhound bus that brought me back home to Missouri and when I arrived home, I didn't let the grass grow under my feet.  I went to the parsonage of my pastor, the F.D. Robinson and explained to him what had happened to me, and he saw to it that I would work under his tutelage and become a student at Western Baptist College in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the name of your church in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: It was the Pilgrim's Rest Baptist Church [Pilgrim's Rest Missionary Baptist Church], located at 35th [Street] and Hardesty Avenue in Kansas City, Missouri.
Story_ID: 344013
Speaker 1: This is summer of 1948, you're studying under Pastor Robinson [F.D. Robinson] and he's, could you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had been very active in the church.  He had a six a.m. bible class for men.  I was not yet twenty-one but because of my interest in the Bible, he permitted me to study, so I had a beautiful relationship with him.  Be it a very poor young man, supported only by a mother [Amy Gates Smith] who had a humble job as a domestic cleaning houses, and a [maternal] grandmother [Martha Henry] who worked in the kitchen at Central High School [Central Academy of Excellence], which was the segregated all-white school, high school in Kansas City [Missouri].  I did not have many resources in terms of funds and the like.  So the Mission Society of the Pilgrim Rest Baptist church [Pilgrim's Rest Missionary Baptist Church, Kansas City, Missouri] raised money to help me get into the Baptist College [Western Baptist College; Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri].  There was a sainted lady, now with the Lord, named Mrs. Bozier.  She was heading the Mission Society that raised funds to help me go to school.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name, Mrs. Bozier?
Speaker 2: Capital B-O-Z-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, I take it, was your mother pleased that you were gonna study for the ministry?
Speaker 2: My mother was pleased and so was my grandmother.  My mother related to me a story.  She said that when she became pregnant she went to the Lord and dedicated me, and so she was not surprised that I had become a minister, although I thought that I was going to spend the rest of my life as a musician.
Story_ID: 344014
Speaker 1: Now while you're in training for the ministry, you got married, right?
Speaker 2: I married my third year in college [Western Baptist College; Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri] to JoAnna Goodwin Smith, a young woman who was at the college studying to be a missionary.  She had planned to be a missionary in Africa, but I persuaded her to team up with me and we would have African Americans and she could fulfill her missionary commitment that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Lord gave us three sons [James Alfred Smith, Jr., Ronald Smith, and Anthony Smith] and two daughters [Amy Smith Jones and Shari Smith-Rigmaiden].
Story_ID: 344015
Speaker 1: You were ordained in 19, was it, '51 [1951]?
Speaker 2: January, 1951, at the Pilgrim Rest Baptist church [Pilgrim's Rest Missionary Baptist Church] in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I can even give you the names of the men who ordained me.
Speaker 1: Please.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was ordained by Dr. Maynard P. Turner [Maynard P. Turner, Jr.], Ph.D. and president of Western Baptist College [Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri], and by Pastor McCormick [ph.] was another one that helped to ordain me.  Pastor McCormick and there was Pastor Robinson [F.D. Robinson], Pastor Rubin Fields [Rubin Fields, Sr.].  These were the main men that helped to ordain me.  One or two more whose names I cannot remember.
Speaker 1: Was Pilgrim's Rest a large church?
Speaker 2: It was not considered a large church.  It was more of a neighborhood church.  The large churches were the Paseo Baptist Church [Kansas City, Missouri] and the St. Stephens Baptist Church [Kansas City, Missouri]. St. Stephens Baptist Church pastored by Dr. John Williams [John W. Williams] and Dr. D.A. Holmes [Daniel Arthur Holmes] who mentored me at Western.
Story_ID: 344016
Speaker 1: I've interviewed a lot of people from Kansas City [Missouri] and I know that Kansas City is famous for music, and, so did, when you became a reverend, did you give up music altogether?
Speaker 2: I gave it up altogether.  I was a member of the musician's union [Colored Musicians' Local 627].  They had a black union and a white union [Musicians Local 34] during the era of segregation.  And I played for the municipal band [K.C. Municipal Band] of Kansas City, headed by Mr. Leo Davis, who was my high school music teacher, and who got me a job with the union and with the municipal band.  I could read music well, so I not only played jazz, but I played concert music as well.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you were asked this before, but before we move on, I just want to ask you why do you think it is that Kansas City produced so many musicians.
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I cannot answer that, but the great musicians would come and play at the corner of 18th [Street] and Vine [Street] in a hall called, in a hall.  They would be playing at the top floor and you could hear the trumpet hitting the high C.  Charlie Parker came out of there.  And when the great musicians would come to town, like Count Basie, and Jay McShann, and Duke Ellington, they would practice there, and I would go and hear those fellows, and they would have jazz, what do they call it, they would have, after they would finish playing their gig at a joint, they'd go to another place and just jam all night long.
Speaker 1: Right, jam sessions, yeah.
Speaker 2: Jam sessions. I was looking for that word, jam session.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And I was in that culture, and in that ma- loop.  They still have some of it left in Kansas City, not as strong as it was during the days of my upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know we interviewed in Chicago [Illinois], Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know Phil Cohran?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know he played with Jay McShann and he went to Lincoln University [Lincoln University Laboratory High School] in Missouri.
Speaker 2: Yes, Jefferson City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: That's right, right.  And he turned with a band all over.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He's the man that trained Earth, Wind and Fire, you know.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: But he, he talks about the Kansas City musicians and there's an exhibit ['The Fine Art of Jazz'] in Wilberforce [at the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center, Wilberforce, Ohio] right now, a photograph of Kansas City musicians from that era.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just saw it last week, so, a lot of history there.
Story_ID: 344017
Speaker 1: Now do you remember the Kansas City Monarchs? Did you--
Speaker 2: The Kansas City Monarchs?  Yes.  I saw Satchel Paige pitch.  I would go to the Blues Stadium [Municipal Stadium] in Kansas City [Missouri], and watch the Kansas City Monarchs.  I saw Jackie Robinson play for the Monarchs.  Papa Bell played.
Speaker 1: Cool Papa Bell, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I saw the Birmingham Black Barons play there.  Many of the great musicians [sic.].  I can't remember the name of the home run king.
Speaker 1: Oh, Josh Gibson.
Speaker 2: Josh Gibson.  I was in awe of Josh Gibson.
Speaker 1: Did you play any baseball yourself?
Speaker 2: I played sandlot baseball over sandlot teams.  My position was center field.
Story_ID: 344018
Speaker 1: After your ordination, it wasn't too long before you graduated from Western Baptist College [Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri], right?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.  When I, before I graduated, I was a pastor of a very small church in a suburb of Kansas City [Missouri], north of Kansas City, a town called Parkville [Missouri].  It still exists.  And I pastored the Mount Washington Baptist Church [Parkville, Missouri].  It was a very small family church made up of about six members, and I would go there faithfully and preach to them as if they were six hundred, and when I left it had grown to thirty-six members.
Story_ID: 344019
Speaker 1: Now tell me this, I know what you do here in San Francisco [sic.] and you know, what Reverend Cecil Williams does in San- I mean in Oakland [California], and Cecil Williams does in San Francisco [California] is you do a lot of ministry to people who, who need help and is a lot of community involvement.  What was the role of the church in those days?  What was, was Pilgrim's Rest [Pilgrim's Rest Missionary Baptist Church, Kansas City, Missouri] involved in the same kind of service to its members (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we took care of the community, but my social justice passion was fueled by the flames of Dr. D.A. Holmes [Daniel Arthur Holmes], an outspoken prophetic justice preacher and great orator of Paseo Baptist Church [Kansas City, Missouri] and a professor at Western Baptist College [Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri].  From him I received great inspiration, and also from Dr. Emerson Ezekiel Chappelle, who was the pastor of another great church in Kansas City [Missouri] named Second Baptist Church.  He would bring in giants like Mordecai Johnson, who was the president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays [Benjamin Mays] who was president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Listening to those giants helped to cultivate and nourish the fire and passion for prophetic justice, speaking out on behalf of the race and pointing out social ills and social injustices.
Speaker 1: Now were you going to the meetings of the National Baptist Convention in those days?
Speaker 2: Just as a spectator, I wasn't, just a spectator, but I was mesmerized by one of the great black preachers of all times.  His name was--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --you were asking me if I attended the National Baptist Convention.  I heard some of the greatest preachers, Williams Holmes Borders, Wheat Street Baptist [Wheat Street Baptist Church], Atlanta [Georgia], comrade of Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr. [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would slip away to Wheat Street to hear Williams Holmes Border.  But the silver tongued orator that would bring any, even his enemies and his opposition to their feet was Dr. Joseph Harrison Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson], pastor of the Olivet Baptist Church in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dr. Joseph Jackson.  Now he was, was he the president of the Baptist--?
Speaker 2: He was the president and he didn't like Dr. King, so the riff occurred between him and King and the younger social justice pastors like Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] pulled away and gave birth to Progressive National Baptist Convention.
Story_ID: 344020
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about that in detail (cough) when we get to 1961, but we're still, we're still in 1952 right now, so I'm just wanting to, so when you finished your B.D. degree, oh no, not the B.D., but when you finish your bachelor's degree from Western College [Western Baptist College; Western Baptist Bible College, Kansas City, Missouri]--
Speaker 2: Then I went to serve some rural churches.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I served in a small town called Keytesville, Missouri, served in another small town called Armstrong, Missouri, and I went to Huntsville, Missouri.  And it was at Huntsville, Missouri, where I enrolled in Columbia, Missouri, at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] and the Missouri School of Religion [Missouri School of Religion, Columbia, Missouri; Mid-America Center for Ministry, Jefferson City, Missouri], studying sociology at the University of Missouri, and theology at the Missouri School of Religion.  And I graduated from the Missouri School of Religion with a bachelor of divinity, nowadays they call it a master of divinity, and then a master of theology in church and community.
Story_ID: 344021
Speaker 1: Now, how were you treated there [Missouri School of Religion, Columbia, Missouri; Mid-America Center for Ministry, Jefferson City, Missouri], cause this is, this is a like an all-white kind of school, pretty much, right?
Speaker 2: I, it was an all-white school.  The faculty was very Christian.  For example, some of the students were chosen to travel to Marion, Indiana, for the all-seminary conference.  Students from all of the nation's seminaries were there to represent their seminary. I was chosen to go with the delegation from Missouri.  As we traveled en route to Marion, Indiana, the dean, who was with us, who was named Thomas Shrout [Thomas R. Shrout], he said, "Let's stop at a restaurant outside of the airport here." We were traveling by car but we went to the airport to find a restaurant near the airport because we, of segregation, thinking that the airport would be more liberal.  So when we walked into the restaurant, and I was the only black in the group, I knew we weren't gonna eat because of the body language of the black custodian who was holding a mop.  That, he didn't say a word but his body language told me that I was in for trouble.  So the dean said, "Come on James [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], don't act like you're scared."  So I pulled my shoulders back and walked straight with him and sat down at the table with the group and he said, "Sorry, we don't serve colored in here."  And so I got up to go, and the dean got up and a few students start following him.  Some of the other students kept their seats.  He said, "Get up, we are Christians, we're not gonna eat here."  Now that tells you about how racism was alive and well there.
Speaker 1: Right.  And it tells us also something about Thomas Shrout, right?
Speaker 2: Thomas Shrout. That's right.  He passed this past year.  And the family asked me to have words and so I told the story that I just related to you about him.
Speaker 1: Right, so he was not, was he typical of the teachers at the University of Missouri [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember eating in one of the university places, and I was sitting there with a professor from the university who had taken me there.  When we arrived, another professor was sitting on a stool.  We walked over to the stool to shake his hand, and when I gave him my hand, he just kept his by his side.
Speaker 1: So this is I mean, I realize this is Missouri, 1950, what, '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.  It was very, very racist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, well, did you have a, was Dr. Shrout your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: He was one of my favorite teachers.  He was trained at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in New Testament and he taught me to ask hard questions and questions that would make you think I was an atheist, but he was trying to teach me how to be a free thinker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did it work, did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm that way now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do my own thinking, and maybe if I were to be ordained today, some of the men that ordained me in '51 [1951], would vote against my ordination.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause they were pretty fundamental.
Speaker 2: They were fundamentalists.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, but you said that Dr. D.A. Holmes [Daniel Arthur Holmes], like set a model (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He set a model.
Speaker 1: --in Kansas City [Missouri].  So you received now, when did you receive your master's degree in theology?
Speaker 2: I came to California, I think in 1960.  I must have received it in 1961 in absentia, because I finished some of the written requirements in, in California.
Story_ID: 344299
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].  Now here we are at the pivotal year in the Nation- the history of the National Baptist Convention, I mean 1961, this is when the conference was held in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) National conference.  And this is when the conflict between Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Gardner Daley [sic. HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] came to a head right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell us about that, your eye witness account of that.  What you saw and what you thought was going on.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I was not physically present when they had the big blow down.  But I was in contact with the progressive preachers like Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker].  He and I had been friends and had been close, and the progressive people who are not only concerned about the sweet by and by, but the nasty now and now were colleagues of Dr. King.  I met Dr. King's parents [Alberta Williams King and Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] in Green Lake, Wisconsin, at the American Baptist Assembly [Green Lake Conference Center] where I was a speaker, and was drawn to them and they were drawn to me, and I developed a very close relationship with the family.
Speaker 1: Now, had you, had you followed the Montgomery Bus Boycott closely?
Speaker 2: I followed the Montgomery Bus Boy- closely and I had read his book, 'Strive Toward Freedom' ['Strive Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story,' Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and had baptized my mind in his Ph.D. thesis ['A Comparison of the Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman,' Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] where he made a comparison of the philosophical thought coming out of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] that dealt with processed theology over against the theology that he embraced which came out of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], called personalism.  And his mentor was Edgar Sheffield Brightman, and I had studied Brightman at the Missouri School of Religion [Missouri School of Religion, Columbia, Missouri; Mid-America Center for Ministry, Jefferson City, Missouri] and had embraced that for myself.  But I was impressed with not only the education of Dr. King, where he had studied people like Brightman, and had studied the interpretation of the New Testament that put an emphasis on the Synoptic Gospels, rather than the eschatological theology of Pauline writings and had embraced that for myself, and had I been close to Dr. King geographically, I would have asked to be a part of his team.
Story_ID: 344300
Speaker 1: Now there are a couple of people I didn't ask you about and we haven't mentioned yet and I just wanted to know if you, what you thought of them or had, or if you had met 'em, and one is Reverend Samuel DeWitt Proctor.  Have you met him at any early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had followed Sam Proctor from afar.  I followed him from his academic prowess at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and was impressed when he went to work for one of the Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. I think it was the Peace Corps, and Dr. Proctor was the shining star of American Baptists [American Baptist Churches USA].  It was American Baptists who brought me from the pastorate of the Second Baptist Church [Second Missionary Baptist Church] in Columbia, Missouri, to Oakland, California to do social justice work out here.  And I worked out here doing social justice work and trying to get Baptists to get involved with Cesar Chavez, as well as with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  I had one foot in that endeavor and the other foot in the movement of Dr. King out here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I want to ask you also about Reverend Vernon Johns who preceded Dr. King in Montgomery [Alabama] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness, I'm going to blow your mind.  I, I listened to Dr. Vernon John speak and when I came here I discovered that his daughter worked for The Clorox Company.
Speaker 1: Here in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Toni Johns [Toni Johns Anderson], and she still lives in Oakland.  And when she found out I was a fan of her father, she joined Allen Temple Church [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California] and introduced me to Robert Shetterly who was instrumental in putting the youth center [East Oakland Youth Development Center, Oakland, California] on the corner of 82nd Avenue and East 14th Street [International Boulevard], and we leveraged that presence to get HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] to build a housing for Allen Temple, known as Allen Temple Arms [Oakland, California] diagonally across the street from the youth center.  It came from that relationship.
Story_ID: 344301
Speaker 1: Let me ask you too, so in '61 [1961], you said the American Baptists [American Baptist Convention; American Baptist Churches USA] brought you here to Oakland [California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  Let me say the American Baptist, predominately white, which Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] worked with, split in 1845 from Southern Baptists [Southern Baptist Convention] on the issue of slavery, and they gave birth to black colleges [HBCUs] like Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina, and also Shaw and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and Florida Normal [Florida Baptist Institute; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida] and in 1881, it was a girls school [Atlanta Baptist Female Seminary] that they started at Friendship Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia, out of which Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] was born.  This is the DNA of the American Baptists.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  I'm just in awe of your answers.  You're really given me more than what I've even asked for.  That's good.  Another pastor I want to ask you about is, of course, Howard Thurman.  Was Howard Thurman here when you came out?  I know he was in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].
Speaker 2: Howard Thurman came to the Bay Area to retire from being dean of the Chapel [Marsh Chapel] at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and when he came here he was tapped on the shoulder by the Urban Black Studies Center [Center for Urban Black Studies], which no longer exists, but was a part of the GTU, Graduate Theological Union, a consortium of eight seminaries that exists in Berkeley [California].  And when they brought him out here to teach, I said, "Boy, here is your opportunity," so I enrolled in school and took three of his courses, and so he preached at Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California] at a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration that we held, and in our sanctuary, we have stained glass windows dedicated to black she-roes and heroes of our history.  We call them our black saints and there is a window in honor of him, and before I had my stroke, I was teaching a course at the GTU, Graduate Theological Union, on the spirituality and ethics of Howard Thurman and Martin Luther King, Jr.  So I'm a Thurman student and a student of the ethics and spirituality of King.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm wanna come back to the windows, well, let's get on the stained glass windows before we leave that.  Those were installed in what year?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year that we built (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it in the '70s [1970s] or the '80s [1980s], or, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the exact dates. I've been doing well with dates.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Well, when we went into this new building, must have been in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: --in Chicago, St. Edmund's Episcopal Church established similar windows in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they had a Marcus Garvey window, Frederick Douglass.
Speaker 2: We have Frederick Douglass also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And from what I understand, Allen Temple was the first black church to do that.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: I won't take that, but I will brag about the fact that we have been a pioneer here in the West.
Story_ID: 344302
Speaker 1: So you came out from Kansas City [Missouri] to Oakland [California] to become the pastor of Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: No sir.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came out to do the social justice work trying to get conservative Baptists with the right-wing leaning, to know their American Baptist [American Baptist Convention; American Baptist Churches USA] DNA, which is social justice.  Trying to get the churches in the San Joaquin Valley [California] where the sun of summer seldom sets and the frost of winter seldom comes, to realize that the Mexican farm workers were human beings and needed to be treated as such.  And trying to get them here in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] to line up with the movement of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so that justice run down as waters of righteousness as a mighty stream.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when this church became vacant, then they asked me to come as interim pastor.  I didn't think about coming, but as a result of working as an interim pastor here, and seeing the silent muted voices of black preachers on justice issues at the same time that the Black Panther Party was getting under way, and they were saying preachers were a part of the problem rather than a part of the solution.  Then I became very active and felt that God wanted me to be a pastor here.  I took this church.  It was very small.  They told me that they had seven hundred members when I took the church, I had given up a good-paying job with American Baptists.  They didn't have seven hundred paying members.  I found only seventy-seven envelopes in the offering plate.  But I stayed the course, kept working and kept preaching and as a result of being out front, not being a Panther, but supporting the Panther call for justice, the church started growing.  People started joining.  Things took off and you may be surprised to know that before it's over the Black Panther sold us their property on the corner of 85th Avenue and East 14th [14th Street; International Boulevard] where the Family Life Center now stands.  It was their headquarters.  They sold it to me and the family of Huey [Huey P. Newton] joined our church.  They are still members.  Melvin Newton is Huey's brother, so when Huey died, I performed the eulogy here at this church, and I baptized Hubey, Huey at this church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I gotta get my questions together here.  The, so, now did you, was this the site of the breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program] that the Panthers started?
Speaker 2: They had breakfast programs in West Oakland [Oakland, California].  This was one of the sites where people would come to get breakfast before getting on the bus to go to Soledad [California] to see their Black Panther relatives that were locked up.  This church.  And Huey used this church as a site to register people and vote so we can get our very first black mayor, a judge by the name of Lionel Wilson.  And I gave that kind of support to the Panthers.
Story_ID: 344303
Speaker 1: When you came to town [Oakland, California], now you were working with United Farm Workers union [United Farm Workers of America] with Cesar Chavez.  Tell us a little bit about that work before we, you know, go too far away from it.
Speaker 2: Before I get too far away from it, I want to say that the same farm workers, the growers as they were called, they called themselves the growers.  That's the spin they put on it using a positive term, rather than a pejorative term.  They were the ones that would hire the growers.  They were the ones that were mistreating the growers, but yet they were going to Baptist churches on Sunday because they had a dichotomy between their faith and between their daily living.  The gospel is about getting people ready to go to heaven, not to deal with social justice issues here.  And so I had an uphill journey, an uphill battle trying to bring about a synthesis between faith and works, or faith and action.  My past was to remind them that they could not have a high blood count of creed and anemia of deed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I don't think I've, we've interviewed anyone else that's worked closely with Caesar Chavez.  What kind of person was he and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a Roman Catholic.  He was not a Baptist. We can't claim him.  But he was committed to justice, committed to his people and very humble, a humble saint.  The Bible says to love mercy.  He did that.  And he did justly and he did walk humbly with his God.  That was the kind of man that he was, but you can't, as Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] says, "Justice denied anywhere is justice denied everywhere" ["Justice denied anywhere diminishes justice everywhere"].
Speaker 1: Is there a, when you got here, was there a close working relationship between the Chicanos and the black community?
Speaker 2: No. We have developed that relationship so now the strongest Hispanic Baptist church in the City of Oakland [California], in Northern California, is here, and the pastor that started out with me is Reverend Ruben Hurtado.  He just retired and his son [Isia Hurtado] is now the pastor, and we did a lot to bring the two together, and at this church [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California] I tried to have Spanish speaking classes taught here by the faculty from Merritt College [Oakland, California], trying to get our people to understand that one day they will outnumber us, and they already outnumber us.  They're the largest ethnic group because the black population in Oakland and in San Francisco [California] has diminished with the large exodus back to the South.  So the Hispanic group is the largest.  And if blacks, and I'm saying now, like a voice crying in in the wilderness, like a John the Baptist, we had better build some healthy coalitions with Hispanics because they will have the political power in this state in a few years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm speaking prophetically now.
Story_ID: 344304
Speaker 1: Was Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California], well tell me a little bit about the history of Allen Temple. Like who was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Allen Temple was founded in the year 1919 on the corner of Seminary Avenue and International Boulevard [14th Street; International Boulevard] by James L. Allen [James Lewis Allen], who was a graduate of what is now Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  It was an academy, Howard Academy [Washington, D.C.].  He was sent out here by Henry Morehouse, the secretary of the Home Mission Society of American Baptists [American Baptist Home Mission Societies] to establish churches for American Baptists starting all the way north to the Oregon border where Mt. Shasta stands cap with the diadem of snow, all the way to the flatlands of the San Joaquin Valley [California] bordering Bakersfield [California], and he established American Baptist churches in all of those cities and came to Beth Eden Baptist Church, the oldest Baptist Church in the City of Oakland [California] and pastored, and in his retirement, he came here and started up Allen Temple in a storefront, where he had to borrow twenty chairs and he had fewer than twenty people.  And the church later was named after him--
Speaker 1: Now was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because of his work.  So that was American Baptist [American Baptist Churches USA] influence going all the way back.  So when I came, I just picked up that foundation and built on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do you see now?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: You see our connection to American Baptist?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  And the Morehouse of American Baptist, is that the same Morehouse?
Speaker 2: It's the same man for whom Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] was named.  Morehouse College was not founded as Morehouse College.  It was founded as a Baptist academy [Augusta Theological Institute; Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and some years later out of respect to Henry Morehouse, they named the school after him.  And in 1881, in Dallas, Texas, he met a few ex-slaves who had purchased the land in Marshall, Texas, about eighty acres and that's how Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] was, came to be.
Speaker 1: Bishop College, of course, is made famous by the movie 'The Great Debaters,' right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 344305
Speaker 1: Who preceded you as pastor at Greater Allen [sic. Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: A young man by the name of Charles Christopher Bailey.  He was Dr. Bailey, who left this church and became a professor at Aptos College [sic. Cabrillo College, Aptos, California] near Santa Cruz [California].  I picked up the mantle from him and pushed it forward.  He was a John the Baptist that prepared the way for me like Vernon Johns prepared the way for Martin Luther King, Jr [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were basically on the same page (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --just a continuation of the work that he (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  I tried hard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to keep that tradition alive and well.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: One of the remarkable things that he did was to work with a man by the name of Louis Sullivan [sic. Leon Sullivan].  You remember him?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Louis Sullivan started OICs [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] and Dr. Bailey brought Opportunities Industrialization Centers to Oakland [California] with the help of Louis Sullivan.  And I served on that board as a board member of the local OIC.
Story_ID: 344306
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the American Baptist Seminary of the West [Berkeley, California].
Speaker 2: The American Baptist Seminary of the West was founded predominately by white Baptists, but in recent years, it is now predominately African American and Asian in the student body composition.  They have their first African American president.  His name is Paul Martin.  The seminary offers the master of arts degree in leadership and they offer the master of divinity degree and they offer a doctor of ministry degree with an emphasis in womanist theology.  The womanist theology came from the womb of some of Dr. James Cone's [HistoryMaker James H. Cone] women students like, my memory is giving me a bad time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jacquelyn Grant [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jacquelyn Grant] is one of 'em and some of the other people that come behind her, like Emilie Townes at Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut] serving now as dean, and I'm in the room with Dr. Taylor [Martha Taylor], who is a womanist scholar, and historian.
Story_ID: 344030
Speaker 1: We have here that you were a dean at--
Speaker 2: I was dean at the American, I was the interim dean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's at the American Baptist Seminary [American Baptist Seminary of the West, Berkeley, California].
Speaker 2: Yes, I served as a interim dean.
Speaker 1: This is in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started teaching there in 1976 and when I had to step down from teaching about two years ago, the faculty, the board of trustees gave me the honor of being professor emeritus.  So I carried that title also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when did you begin your association with the Progressive National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: Have you ever heard of Dr. Thomas J. Kilgore?
Speaker 1: I have not, but no.
Speaker 2: He was the first black man to be president of the American Baptist Convention [American Baptist Churches USA] and he was also president of Progressive National Baptist Convention, and one of the right arms of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and he was president of the board of trustees of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] during the Mays [Benjamin Mays] era.  He recruited me to become a member of Progressive Baptist Convention around 1976.  And I became a member under the mentorship of the giant, Tom Kilgore, who also was pastor of Second Baptist Church, Los Angeles [California], and he brought me to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to preach in the Shrine Auditorium next to USC [University of South California, Los Angeles, California] for one of their conventions, at which time Dr. Thurman [Howard Thurman] also spoke.  And from then on, the people in the convention started looking at me.  So in 19, and, I think it was, 1985, I went to one of the conventions in Cincinnati, Ohio, just to be in attendance, but people like Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] and Dr. Charles Gilchrist Adams had other plans.  They recruited me from the floor to run against the establishment's slate.  They, I think it was Dr., Dr. Adams made a speech and they put my name in nomination from the floor and when the vote was taken, I became second vice president.
Speaker 1: This is 1986?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986].  And I worked my way up from second vice president to being the national president.
Speaker 1: When did you become national president?
Speaker 2: Let's see. Eighty [1980], must have been '86 [1986], '87 [1987], around that.  I think around 1988, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 1988.
Speaker 2: This is just from my memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I may be off.
Story_ID: 344031
Speaker 1: You were a member [of the Progressive National Baptist Convention] just a short period of time before you actually became second vice president, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I became president, I moved fast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't go to be the president.  I arrived at the convention a day late and when I got there they were at the door fussing at me, "Why are you just now getting here, we want to put you in office for the second vice presidency."  That's how you get to be president.  When that spot's open, everybody tries to get there.  And, official slate had someone out of New York on the ballot. I said, "I'm not gonna run against the establishment's candidate.  I don't have a snowball's chance in hell."  And so, there was a guy out of Los Angeles [California], I'm trying to think of his name.  He grabbed me in the collar and said, "You're going to run James [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], and we're gonna put you in."  And so they put me in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. So, and then it was shortly after that that you became the president of the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was, at that time, the term was only two years, so I served two years of second vice, two years of first vice, and then I came in as president for another two years.  So I'd actually gave the convention six years of service.
Story_ID: 344032
Speaker 1: Well tell us what, what was the disposition of the organization [Progressive National Baptist Convention] when you became an officer and what things did you do as president to, you know, make the organization better?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came in they were having a financial problem.  So we corrected that.  And we had a campaign to raise money for black colleges [HBCUs], trying to get denomination to start some of the struggling black colleges.  That was one of the things that we did.
Speaker 1: Okay. The--
Speaker 2: We are, went to Sierra Leone, West Africa, and developed a mission there, so we have a mission there and a church, and on my desk are some books.  I can't reach them because they are behind me.  We started promoting black pastor scholars to produce books and if my wife [Bernestine Smith] could reach me, some of the books on the desk, I'd like for her to do so, and I can explain in greater detail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are some of the books--
Speaker 2: Well this is 'For the Facing of This Hour' ['For the Facing of this Hour: A Call to Action,' J. Alfred Smith Sr.], published by Progressive National Baptist Convention.  This was published by Judson Press of the American Baptist [American Baptist Churches USA], 'Speak Until Justice Wakes: Prophetic Reflections from J. Alfred Smith' ['Speak Until Justice Wakes: Prophetic Reflections from J. Alfred Smith, Sr.,' J. Alfred Smith, Sr.]. 'On the Jericho Road' ['On the Jericho Road: A Memoir of Racial Justice, Social Action and Prophetic Ministry,' J. Alfred Smith, Sr.]. This was published by InterVarsity Press.  These are all respected press, so we tried to push Christians to higher education.  We pushed that, we pushed Africa, we pushed social justice.  While in office I represented the convention by speaking in Seoul, Korea.  I talked about social justice there.
Speaker 1: What's the, what's the relationship between, is there a decent relationship between the Korean community and the black community in Oakland [California]?  I know there are tensions in Chicago [Illinois] and other places.
Speaker 2: Well, Allen Temple Baptist Church [Oakland, California], when I was pastor, not such much now, would host at Christmastime, a joint African American/Korean Christmas service, and we would end up singing the 'Hallelujah Chorus' [George Frideric Handel].  And during the rest of the year, we would work together on projects to improve relationships between Koreans and African Americans.  But I have retired now and some of the other people who worked collaboratively and cooperatively, has also retired, and it is not as strong as it used to be.
Story_ID: 344033
Speaker 1: Now in 1989, it says here that you testified before the United Nations [UN] in New York [New York] in an effort to end apartheid in South Africa (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: Tell us about how that came about and what you said.
Speaker 2: Well, the national Free South Africa Movement, largely involved clergymen through the leadership of Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker].  He called me up one day and said, "J. Alfred [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], you to speak at the UN," and another young minister was invited to speak at the UN through the effort of Wyatt Tee Walker, Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts].  So Calvin Butts and Wyatt Tee Walker and I lead a march armed in arm to the United Nations.  And there I spoke and gave a passionate appeal for divestment asking churches and colleges and other entities with conscious to divest, take their money out of banks in South Africa.  And I also helped to host fundraising that brought Desmond Tutu here, and he preached at an all-city rally here in the Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California] pulpit.  That was part of some of my efforts.  I even went to jail for the Free South Africa Movement.  I went to jail in San Francisco [California], and Free South Africa paid my bond.
Speaker 1: So you were demonstrating, now is that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Demonstrating, yes.  Not just a talker but a doer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: You understand?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: That's the kind of man I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A man of action, not just words.
Speaker 1: Now those are the days when Nelson Mandela was still incarcerated on Robben Island [South Africa]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] was fighting to help get him released.
Speaker 1: The issue of freedom in South Africa was very much in the news.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Nightline' every other week would have something about it.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I paid the cost for it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance, when, how did you feel when Nelson Mandela was released?
Speaker 2: Well I saw it by accident.  I got up early one morning 'cause I couldn't sleep, turned on the television and got a chance to see him walk out of that prison on Robben Island and tears streamed down my face.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet him when he toured the U.S. about a year later?
Speaker 2: He came to Oakland [California], but I didn't get a chance to spend much time with him because the preachers were shoved aside by the Hollywood, California, movie stars and celebrities.  We had done the hard work, but the politicians and the movie stars, since this is history, we have to tell the truth.  They pushed us aside.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever get a chance to go to South Africa and see what, see what it was like first hand.
Speaker 2: I haven't, I never got to go, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Struggling to hold this institution together.
Story_ID: 344034
Speaker 1: Also in 1989 in, and this is part of trying to hold the, the institution together, you established the Allen Temple Housing and Economic Development Corporation [Oakland, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We have housing for the elderly, we have several housing complexes, but the one that I'm the most proud about is the housing for people who are HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive.  It is the only one in the City of Oakland [California] that provides that service.  The idea was not mine.  I wanna give credit to whom credit is due.  My son [James Alfred Smith, Jr.], who is now the pastor of the church [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California], complained about the fact that Mother Teresa [Saint Teresa of Calcutta] had to come to the City of Oakland and give a speech and chide Oakland for having done so little in this area.  It's largely under his conviction.  He never blows his horn, and I wish he'd blow it more, but since he doesn't blow it, I'm blowing it loudly in this interview.
Story_ID: 344035
Speaker 1: Now you became the president of the American Baptist Churches of the West at some point. What, when was that?
Speaker 2: It must have been in the early '90s [1990s].  I'm not impressed with these titles because sometimes you can lose sight of what God has called you to be with these titles.  So many people want a title but they don't want a title.  Jesus got on his disciples because they wanted to sit in the chief seats, one on his left and one on his right, and he took a basin of water and a towel and washed their feet and said this is what it's all about.  It's not about a title, it's about washing feet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And I didn't do much as president there.  It was a titular kind of office.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me go back.
Speaker 2: Figurehead job.  But at PNBC [Progressive National Baptist Convention], I was president.  I lead a convention and lead them in doing initiatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And just before we leave it, at the, in terms of the, how do you pronounce it?  ATHEDCO [Allen Temple Housing and Economic Development Corporation, Oakland, California].  Was that the thing you say?
Speaker 2: ATHEDCO.
Speaker 1: ATHEDCO.  Quite a bit was done with ATHEDCO, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was established.  Tell us about some of the things that ATHEDCO did.
Speaker 2: We have Allen Temple housing project one and two and a large one not far from here near the Oakland [California], San Leandro [California] border, up around 99 [99th Avenue] and 100th Avenue.  This is very effective work.  And the thing that I want to point out is not buildings that warehouse seniors and put 'em aside, but we have a living, hospitable, warm community that provide services, and where the church is concerned about their holistic welfare, their total welfare.  And the Reverend Bernestine Smith served as a number of years as their pastor until I became, until I went into retirement.
Story_ID: 344036
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about the, the Leadership Institute of Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: The Leadership Institute is designed to provide lay education to help people get up out of the rocking chair of lazy religion to become active participants in community transformation.  People who study here take courses in leadership, they take courses in community organization and they have fieldwork assignments that takes them to the board of supervisors in the city hall to be advocates for burning issues, the most recent one is that the planning commission allowed a crematorium to get license to relocate out here which it would have put all of the pollution in the air in a community that already has excessive pollution coming from the Port of Oakland [Oakland, California] and from factories that close down that were never required to clean up the mess before leaving.  And so, through community activism, as a result of being trained at the Leadership Institute, they were able to stop that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there have been people who are second career ministers who came to the Leadership Institute and worked off academic deficiencies so that they could be admitted into an accredited degree program at the American Baptist Seminary of the West [Berkeley, California].  It is to try to help people to not just say that they are church members, but disciples of Jesus to be active for social justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And we have received funding largely from The California Endowment [Los Angeles, California] to address these kinds of issues.  We have accredited faculty people.  We have a Restore to Justice course taught by [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis' sister, Dr. Fania Davis [Fania Davis Jordan].  This is something of our activism.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now you're involved in, did you mention the housing part of it?
Speaker 2: I did talk a little bit about housing, but I shifted gears and went into talking about LIAT, the Leadership Institute at Allen Temple that started out at Allen Temple and we also have campuses now in Richmond [California] and Pittsburg, California.  One of my mentees, Dr. Brenda Guess, who has a seminary master of arts and biblical studies and an earned doctorate of education, is the chancellor of the Leadership Institute.
Story_ID: 344037
Speaker 1: Now a couple of weeks ago, I think it was Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] invited a lot of black pastors to come together and eat and so he could talk to them.  What is the, I know that most cities' politicians always courting pastors and some pastors court politicians, what's the disposition of Allen Temple [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California] towards politics in Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we would lose our 501(c)(3) status you know, having non-profits and use our status as a church and our tax-free status as a congregation if a pastor endorsed a candidate, so we cannot do any endorsing at all.  But, we have had here at the church forums where all candidates could come and speak and then be grilled by people from the audience on their position.  But we have always tried to take a position to seek justice for the last, the least of these, and the lowest.  That's what Jesus taught us to do.  And to speak for justice, like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] did, who, by the way, never endorsed [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson, although he courted him heavily to pass the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  But you have to be careful about getting in bed with a politician because you can't agree with him on all the issues.  You have to have your freedom to speak like Dr. King did when he told Lyndon Johnson that killing is wrong in Vietnam just as much as it is wrong in the black ghetto.
Story_ID: 344307
Speaker 1: --Some pastors believe in weathervane ethics.  Weathervane ethics.  Whichever way the wind is blowing, but that's not the ethics of Jesus.  It's not the ethics of the prophets.  Not the ethics of our ancestors.  And so one should be true to one's self and one's conscious.  And not be influenced by weathervane ethics.
Story_ID: 344308
Speaker 1: What year was it that you retired as pastor [of Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Okay. And why did you retire?  Were you, how old were you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't know?  (Laughter) Okay, but you were feeling like you ought to pass the torch at that time?
Speaker 2: My time was up.  Had no more gasoline in the tank.  And I couldn't run the car on fumes.  The gas was gone.  It was time to pass the mantle on to somebody else.
Speaker 1: So you had, had a, had you groomed your successors?
Speaker 2: I had tried to groom my successor [James Alfred Smith, Jr.], but I did not appoint him.  The church voted him in by a congregational vote, and according to the constitution, he had to get two-thirds majority of all who were voting, which is a big majority, and he was able to do that.
Story_ID: 344309
Speaker 1: What would you say is key to becoming or being an effective pastor in a church in a city like Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: You have to love the people.  You love the people when they're right, you love the people when they're wrong.  You have to love the people.  You get hurt sometimes, you get hurt many times, but if one is true to one's calling, that's why it's dangerous to take up the ministry.  If you don't have a sense of call, do something else.  Do anything, but don't be a minister unless you are called because if you are called, you'll get a taste of Calvary.  You're gonna get a taste of the cross.  You're gonna get a taste of being crucified, of being misunderstood.  People will be with you today and tomorrow you can't find them.  And you can't serve because of what the people say, but it's a commitment.  If you've been called, you open your mouth to the Lord, and once you say yes to God, you cannot go back.  And if you excuse me for preaching a little bit, in the end I have to meet my Maker.  I want to be able to say to Him, I fought the good fight.  I didn't win many times, but I didn't lose the faith, I kept the faith.  That's what I wanna be able to do, and in the end I want Him to be able to say, "Well done, well done."  If I could just get his approbation, if I could just get his authentication (crying), my living will not have been in vain.
Story_ID: 344310
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the, I guess the meteoric rise of these megachurches all over the country with thousands of members and prosperity ministry?
Speaker 2: I have to go back to what Jesus said.  Because Jesus is my role model.  Jesus is the one that called me.  He said, "In as much as you've done it unto the least of these, you done it unto me.  If you visited me when you were, when I was in prison, if you fed the hungry, you did it to me.  If you looked out for the widows and the orphans (crying), you did it for me," [Matthew 25:35-40]. Christianity is not churchanity, and I've tried to be true to Christianity and not churchanity.
Story_ID: 344311
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I wish that we could learn one thing from the Jewish community.  And I'm not putting them up as the model of ethical perfection because I don't like the way they treat Palestinians.  Palestinians are people.  But Jews stick together.  You got the Orthodox Jew with the beard and the hat and the long black coat, long black suits, the Orthodox.  Then you have what is called the Reformed Jew and you have the Liberal Jew.  They run the spectrum to conservatisms to modernism, but Jews stick together.  If we could get blacks to stick together, the Ph.D. and the no-D ought to stick together.  And my prayer is, Lord, we don't need no more giants, we just want to elevate the masses.  We not, today there's a self-elevation.  This is a giant.  That is a giant.  This magazine will say this is the greatest.  That magazine will say that one is the greatest.  This one will get an Emmy [Emmy Award], that one will get an Emmy because of the money that he has.  No more giants, just elevate the masses.
Story_ID: 344312
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Amy Gates Smith] and [maternal] grandmother [Martha Henry] get a chance to see your successful ministry?
Speaker 2: My mother got a chance to see part of it.  My greatest joy is when I could take her to the Holy Land and see her praying in the Garden of Gethsemane [Jerusalem] like she did at home (crying).  And get happy like old-fashioned black women would do in church.  I saw her do that in the Holy Land.  That's my highest satisfaction to see her happy there.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother died before she could see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about your family, your children, your wife and--
Speaker 2: My first wife [JoAnna Goodwin Smith], the mother of the five children died of Alzheimer's, but she was faithful to God up until the very end.  And when she died, I was ready to die, all hope had gone.  But the Lord pointed me to a woman [Bernestine Smith] who wasn't interested in marrying me.  There were others that were interested.  I don't know whether they wanted me for my title.  I didn't have any money.  They may have thought I had it.  You know what I'm trying to say?  For what a perception that I was really somebody, the perception that I was a history maker, but I needed someone that would love me because I'm Amy Smith's boy, (crying) Martha Henry's grandson, just a struggling guy trying to do God's will, so I ran after a, a wonderful Christian woman.  When she, when she couldn't run no longer I grabbed her.  She put the sun back in my sky.  And my oldest son [James Alfred Smith, Jr.] is the pastor of this church [Allen Temple Baptist Church, Oakland, California], trying to keep the ministry alive in very difficult economic times, at a time when many California professionals are leaving California, going back south, going back to cities that seem to be more, more lucrative and more able to accept their talent, but he's being faithful.  And then I'm blessed with my oldest daughter [Amy Smith Jones] who lives here.  And she is gainfully employed and is, was very faithful in helping me take care of my first wife.  Then I have a daughter [Shari Smith-Rigmaiden] that's married to a minister who is a Ph.D., a educator, and she's an educator, and she's multilingual, and they're in public education in Modesto [California].  And then I have another son [Anthony Smith] who is an energy corporation executive up in Seattle [Washington].  He's high up, doing well.  And my youngest son [Ronald Smith], he's the youngest, but he made his money well.  He was a high tech executive, and he's retired and is living the good life on the beaches of Florida, lives in the city called Sarasota [Florida].  So God has blessed me with wonderful children and grandchildren and great grands, and I'm just trying to get ready to meet my Maker one day and I exercise the muscles of my mind trying to study and read all the time because Fuller Theological Seminary in Pasadena, California, has asked me to mentor a young doctoral student and I'm, that's what I'm doing, I'm helping to groom him and there are younger pastors that come and just ask me to pray with them and to use me as a sounding board, and I give them the best that I know.  I let them know I'm not speaking for God, but I'm speaking from my heart to them, and I love 'em and I pray with 'em.
Story_ID: 344313
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Yes.  If I could live my life over, I'd put no in my vocabulary.  I would have been more selective about the meetings that I attended and I would have given more time to self-care.  If you're no good, you can't help somebody else, that God didn't call me to be another messiah, but just to be another servant.  You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And to spend more time with my family.  That's where I erred.
Speaker 1: So, you recently had a stroke, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  I had a debilitating stroke that paralyzed me on the left side and I couldn't walk.  I had to learn how to walk and I go to therapy on Tuesdays and Thursdays with the help of my good wife [Bernestine Smith] and therapists are helping me to walk better and to gain use of the left hand, and to gain use of the left arm.  I couldn't do this (extends arm).  I can do this now (raises arm).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're making progress?
Speaker 2: Making progress.  Making my health and my wife and ministers who believe that I know something.  There are many who feel that an elder, an old man can't do anything but get out of the way and give them room to do what they think they know to do.  So I don't bother them.  I get out of the way like they want me to.  And my life is a happy life--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I got a happy wife.  And I want to keep her happy.  A happy wife, a happy life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything that we haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I want to thank you for having been such a gracious interviewer and for your artistic ability to bring up from my memory bank things that had been latent there, and things that I thought that I had forgotten.
Speaker 1: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 344314
Speaker 1: The last question is sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Not as Dr. J. Alfred Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. J. Alfred Smith, Sr.], (crying) not as Pastor J. Alfred Smith, but as a loving caring person that made no distinction between the Ph.D.s and the no-Ds.
