Story_ID: 466443
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: David Lloyd Steward [HistoryMaker David Steward, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is July 2nd, 1951, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Chicago, Illinois, okay.  But you've lived most of your life in Missouri, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I've lived most of my life in Missouri and I was born in Chicago and a month or two later, my parents [Dorothy Massingale Steward and Harold Steward] moved to the garden capital of the world, Clinton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is about sixty miles southeast of Kansas City [Missouri].  A town of about six thousand people.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently founder and chairman of World Wide Technology [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we--oh what is today's date?  I'm sorry.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: It's December the 18th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently at my headquarters at 60 Weldon Parkway in Maryland Heights, Missouri, at the World Wide Technologies in my office.
Story_ID: 466444
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably I love fried chicken and I love a good steak.  It always have to come with mashed potatoes and, and gravy.  And I love green beans along with greens.  And I like a good, good wine every now and then with, with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Probably the spring and the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably one of the most exciting places I think I've been is probably going to Hawaii.  However, I've spent some great time in California and we have a, a lake home as well which I enjoy immensely because it's solitude and, and the water and the, the trees in the fall are just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  And I can't, I can't think of one right now.  One of the favorite passages that I remember, I'll always remember is, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all of His righteousness, and everything else will be added unto you" [Matthew 6:33].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm reminded of that every day.  Other passage is that at the end of the day, I, I give--ask myself this question:  am I living my life worthy of the sacrifice that was made on my behalf?  Many generations of sacrifice for--to have the opportunity to do the kinds of things that we're doing today and technology that we're involved in and the scale of the business that we're involved in as well.  The many people that we have connections and ties and relationships with.  The service that we provide around the globe.  Are we respecting and honoring those many men and women who, who sacrificed their lives for me to have the opportunity to do this?  I think specifically about my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] and father [Harold Steward], but also think even generations well beyond that.  The sacrifices made on my behalf on the cross.
Story_ID: 466445
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Harold Steward] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Dorothy Elizabeth Steward [Dorothy Massingale Steward].  However, her maiden name is Massingale.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-A-S-S-I-N-G-A-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's sort of an unusual name.  Is there a story behind that name that you know?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  I know they were--they have, we have generations of family that grew up and lived in Clinton, Missouri, believe it or not.  And the--what I know of my family, especially my grandparents, I didn't know my great-grandparents on my mother's side.  But they were very enterprising.  From every town, most small towns have a town square.  And a town square, you know there's always all the businesses until obviously what's happened with, with Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] kind of coming in and capturing most of the business market.  But most towns have had a town square.  In the town square there was a, a--there--the first hair dresser and black or white, was one of my relatives, a person of color.  I remember very vividly my grandfather [Fred Massingale] own, owning a number of properties in Clinton, Missouri.  Even though we weren't wealthy people.  He owned a number of properties in, in Clinton.  During the war years my grandfather went to Chicago, Illinois to, to get work during the--in a war factory.
Speaker 1: Now, now is this your grandfather on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side. On my mother's side
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me just go back a little bit and--can you give us your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is March the 10th, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was she born in Clinton, or--
Speaker 2: She was born in Clinton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, Clinton.  Now how far back can you trace your mother's ancestors and what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Probably only a couple of generations.  My mother, my mother talks a lot about it and she has written about it and she has, you know, a family tree that goes back as well.  I know bits and pieces of, of some of the family members on both my, my mother, my grandmother's [Martha Massingale] and my, my grandfather's side.  But--
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories that go back to slavery days, or would they--
Speaker 2: No, I really don't.  I don't have any stories that go back quite that far.  All I know is that I remember her talking about my grandfather's father who acquired a lot of property and he was a--he worked for the railroad.  He was a, a porter on the railroad.  And he worked for the old Frisco Railroad [St. Louis-San Francisco Railway].
Speaker 1: So this is your, your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  A porter on the Frisco Railroad, okay.
Speaker 2: And him and my grandfather acquired a number of properties.  He acquired a number of properties in Springfield, Missouri as well as in Clinton, Missouri over a long period of time.
Story_ID: 466446
Speaker 1: So you say there's, there's an entrepreneurial tradition on your mother's [Dorothy Massingale Steward] side of the family.
Speaker 2: I think so, I think so.  I think they were not only enterprising, they kind of worked outside the box.  I, I remember my grandfather [Fred Massingale] having a truck and, and I remember he talking about this same thing.  He was always hauling something.  Obviously coal for our stoves and so forth, for their home and our home.  But also hauling trash for, for others and so forth, as well as you know, using a truck to, to, to handle yards, to you name it.  He was kind of a--what you would consider an enterprising kind of hustling kind of--did whatever it take to provide for his family.  I remember a smokehouse that he had where he, he actually had cured meat.  I remember him always having dogs, hound dogs and bird dogs and all kinds of dogs that he used to hunt from rabbit hunting to coon hunting to--he loved that.  He loved fishing and he did a lot of fishing and so forth as well.  And he had gardens that, that he had and he had--always had cows and pigs.  In fact I, I remember in the morning before I went to school, I was always--one of the, the jobs that I had was to, to milk the cow in the morning.  And to, and to make sure that we, we fed the hogs.  Now him and my dad [Harold Steward] had a, had worked out something where they had so many hogs apiece and you know.  And I think that some of the hogs were used for, for paying taxes and other hogs were used for, for buying a piece of property and other, and the other calves that were, were gotten were used for food, you know.  And so they always had it kind of carved out and counted out as to, to what it was gonna be used for to, to support the quality of life that they had.  I, I remember him always having a toolbox with, with hammers and saws and tools and so forth to, to--whether it's fixing cars to, to, to fixing on the, on the house that he lived in.  I remember him also being a, a chauffeur for--in fact he worked for Peabody Coal Company [Peabody Energy Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri].  My grandmother [Martha Massingale] and my grandfather worked for Peabody Coal at--near the Montrose plant [Montrose Station, Clinton, Missouri].  There was a, a lodge there.  And they were the caretakers.  My, my grandfather would take care of the outside and keep the lawn mowed and, and keep the, the lodge cared for on the outside.  My, my grandmother was the person that, that took care of the inside of the house and was a tremendous cook, you know, as well.  As the executives came in for Peabody that served and supported Kansas City Power and Light [Kansas City Power and Light Company, Kansas City, Missouri] at the Montrose plant, they were (unclear).  During that period of time, Peabody Coal had tremendous strip mining going on in that area.  And so that was their way of entertaining their client, Kansas City Power and Light at that lodge.  And so the executives used to come in there quite a bit, and that was their retreat and, and my grandfather used to, to take 'em out on the boat.  There was a dock and there was a boat and there was a lake and so forth there as well, supporting that, I mean that plant.  And they'd take 'em out fishing and used to take 'em out hunting and, and, and so I saw this kind of people who were, were enterprising, people who were committed, people who were doing what it took to support their family outside of the norm.  They, they would not have had--my, my, my grandfather had a third grade education.  My, my grandmother had a, an eighth grade education.  But I remember vividly my, my grandmother was extremely intelligent.  And she, she read a lot.
Story_ID: 466447
Speaker 1: And they were great baseball fans as well.  I remember my [maternal] grandfather [Fred Massingale] and grandmother [Martha Massingale] taking me to Kansas City [Missouri] to, to watch the, the Monarchs [Kansas City Monarchs] to the Kansas City A's [Kansas City Athletics; Oakland Athletics] in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  The Monarchs being obviously the Negro League, but also I'm sure that's what happened because I don't remember exactly.  But I remember going to also Metropolitan Stadium [sic. Municipal Stadium] there in Kansas City and going to see the, the old A's when Finley [Charles O. Finley] had the A's in Kansas City.
Speaker 2: Did you see Satchel Paige make his comeback?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: It was like in '66 [1966] or something.
Speaker 1: You know because when you're a young boy and you're, you're going on this great trip.  All I can remember is gosh you know after the baseball game, we're gonna get to go to Gates Bar-BQ in Kansas City and have a great barbeque.  And--but I remember when I got a little older, the innovation of Finley with the ball coming up that the balls that the umpire needed coming up from the, the ground right by the umpire so he could get his balls.
Speaker 2: It was a rabbit.  I think he had a rabbit.  They would serve the balls.
Speaker 1: See, I--yeah, it used to come up out of the ground, right, right.  It was something, something unique and it was in a--and I remember a kind of a glass case then you--the umpire would get the balls and in order to, to keep the ball game going.  But it was just an interesting ambiance and environment and, and exciting to be in because you know, growing up in Clinton, Missouri, there's obviously not a lot of things going on.  I know they were interested in baseball, but I also--they interested in, in football as well.  Kansas City, they're big Kansas City Chiefs fans and over the years and I remember occasionally having an opportunity to, to, to go and, and see that as well.  And they used to, to come to all of our baseball games as well when we were playing in Little League, especially my older brother [James Steward] who was a little older.
Story_ID: 466448
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandfather [Fred Massingale] about died at, at--I think it was, I think it was sixty-one years old.  You know, when you, when you, when you work as hard as he worked, but also the, the diet with, with--there was a lot of fat in our diet.  You know when you had, when you had bacon, you always cooked the, the, the eggs in the, in the grease of the bacon.  And you always had you a, a, a bacon can on the, on the stove to cook everything else.  And so it was a tremendous amount of fat in the diet and so forth.  And they didn't exercise outside of the work that they did around obviously the work that they did.  And so--and then of course we had all the milk products and so forth as well with, with the, the fresh milk that we would get to the, the butter that would come from that and the, the buttermilk that would come with that as well as, you know, we used in not only our diet, but we would drink it and eat it and so forth.  And so I'm sure that was a, a big part of, of the challenges he faced health wise later on.
Speaker 2: So about what, what year did he pass away?
Speaker 1: I think 19-, I think, I think 1961.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he was born 1898, something like that I guess.
Speaker 1: I think he was born in 19--I know he was born, he died at sixty-three because he was born in 1998--1898.
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898] okay, yeah, all right.
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898] when he was born because my grandmother [Martha Massingale] was born in 1909.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well you have certainly vivid memories of your grandparents.  And did, did they ever talk about growing up in Clinton [Missouri] and what it was like when they were growing up?
Speaker 1: I was eleven when my grandfather passed away, so I, you know I--bits and pieces.  I, I'm, I'm not clear on, on him growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they didn't talk about family history (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember, I just remember him getting me on, getting me on his knees, knee, and, and to give us a, a horseback ride on his knee.  Up and down.  He used to sit on a little can on, on, on the inside of our home and do that for all, all eight of his grandchildren.  So you can imagine how tired he was by the time he, he got finished riding all of us (laughter).  And he was a, he was a real short man.  He was about probably no more than 5'6, maybe, maybe 5'7 at best.  He had--but I think one of the things that I remember probably most vividly about, about him is that he was a diligent worker.  And he loved his family, he loved his daughter, his only daughter, my mom [Dorothy Massingale Steward].  And provided tremendous for her.  I mean she is a, she is probably the smartest person I know.  But she's musically inclined as well.  She plays the piano beautifully and she sings extremely well as well.  And so I think that she was his pride and joy.
Story_ID: 466449
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] have a chance to go to school in Clinton [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: She went to school in Clinton, and she finished her high school in Chicago, Illinois.  That's where she met my father [Harold Steward].
Speaker 1: Now do you--now what, what school did she go to in Clinton?  'Cause from what I, I've read about you, I guess that she went to a segregated school in Clinton, right?
Speaker 2: Went to a se- segregated school.
Speaker 1: What was it called?
Speaker 2: Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lincoln School [Clinton, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if I'm not mistaken, I think that school went all the way up to the eighth grade and I think later on then it became a, a high school too.  And there was a--and her teacher was Mrs. Wilson [ph.], who I knew, you know when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because she taught also my older brothers and sisters in the segregated environment.  I was the, the first person of color to go to the all integrated school from grade one through twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'm gonna ask you about that later in some detail, but so your mother went to Chicago.  Did, did you have relatives in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No relatives.  My father was looking--as far as I know.  I don't know if they knew somebody up there, but usually that's what's happening, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somebody--were there friends that your mother was sent to stay with or something in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Actually, I'm not sure.  But there must have been somebody there my grandfather [Fred Massingale] knew to make this connection for him to work in the war factories.
Speaker 1: Oh so your, your grandfather went with her to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, yeah, my grandfather, my grandfather was actually recruited to go work in the war factories in Chicago.  So he must have known someone in Chicago, a relative or someone, that asked him, you know, that there was great opportunity in Chicago.  And so they packed up and they moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what high school did she attend in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Does Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] sound right?  Phillips is one of the--in those days Phillips and DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], most of the black students went there, but not--
Speaker 2: It sounds right.
Speaker 1: Not exclusively, but--
Speaker 2: It sounds right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you're familiar--very familiar.  He was on the South Side of Chicago.  Vernon [Avenue], all I remember is a street called Vernon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that sounds like that might be near Phillips, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think Phillips is right.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was born in Providence Hospital [sic. Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, that's the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yep, Providence Hospital where I was born (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 466450
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] talk about growing up in Clinton [Missouri]?  Did she have any stories to share about Clinton and her impressions of growing up there?
Speaker 2: I think she lived kind of a--which is kind of unusual--one child.  She didn't have any brothers and sisters.  So kind of a, kind of a storybook kind of childhood to a degree.  I mean since that--she didn't have siblings to share with.  She didn't have, you know, that kind of environment.  I think that she felt secure because one of the things that she talked a lot about when, when I was beginning to rear our children, she talked about the two things that children need and that's love and security.  You know and no matter what you, you don't, think you don't do or don't have, or what you can and cannot provide for them, if you provide those two things, they can reach great heights.  And so I think that that kind of secured kind of comfortable environment my grandparents [Martha Massingale and Fred Massingale] provided for her.  But I think they also were, were very strong on, on academics.  I understand she did extremely well in school.  And I--you can tell just from, you know, I remember her sitting down with us and helping us with our homework and kind of recall all the, all the things that she, she, she knew.  But, but also she was also my music teacher as well.  And music teacher for my brothers and sisters as well on the piano.  She took years of, of piano lessons and, and so forth over the years.  And so that's kind of unheard of when you think about, when you think about during that period of time that my, my grandparents could afford for, to spend money for, for her to have music lessons.  You know, which is kind of, kind of interesting during that period of time because they thought education, music and, and those things were, were important.
Speaker 1: Did she have a piano at home to play (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a piano to play, yeah.  So they provided that for her and, and so my, my grandmother was a little younger than my grandfather and so I think him being a little more mature had a lot to, to do with that.  And being born in 1928, my grandfather would have had to have been thirty years old.  Which is, I guess at that time a little older for most men 'cause they were having their children usually much younger than that if I'm not mistaken.  And my grandmother at the time obviously was, let me see so that, that would be--put her at what, seventeen, eighteen years, eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so she, so she had, she benefited from a lot of attention from these two very industrious parents.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Story_ID: 466451
Speaker 1: Let me get, get your father's full name.  Can you give me his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father is Harold Lloyd Steward [Harold Steward].  L-L-O-Y-D is the middle name, L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, okay now you know the fa- there was a famous actor named Harold Lloyd.  Was he named for Harold Lloyd the, the silent film actor?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so, I don't think so.  I don't know where that came from.  But my--I was named after my--partially after my father.  His middle name is the same as mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They originally were talking about naming me Harold Lloyd Steward, but they--my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] insisted that it be David Lloyd Steward [HistoryMaker David Steward, Sr.] because she was, she said that she was led and she opened up her Bible.  And she was led to somewhere in Psalms and she was led to the name of David.  And as it ends up, you know, you say David Steward, beloved servant.  And so--
Speaker 1: So is there, is there a story about Steward instead of Stewart?  Is there--was it a--'cause I know oftentimes black families change the spellings of names for different reasons.  But was it always Steward with a D?
Speaker 2: Always Steward with a D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't know what the story is behind that on my father's side.  My, my grandparents [Beatrice Steward and Wiley Steward] came up from Mississippi to Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Let me get his date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: My father was born in Chicago, Illinois, August the 6th, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and the family is originally from Mississippi?  You say his parents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah from Mississippi, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You know where in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I'm not sure.  My brothers and sisters, my brother especially who lives in Mississippi, knows exactly where they, where they, where they grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know that's very typical in Chicago.  Mississippi is about 60 percent of the black population there, you know.
Speaker 2: I guess most of the black population went straight north.  And I always talk about the ones that got tired stayed in St. Louis [Missouri] (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what they say in Chicago, yes, right, exactly.  So well what do you know about the ancestors on your, your father's side?  Are there any stories out of Mississippi or, or a story about how they moved to Chicago or why they moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: There is not a lot of stories because I didn't know my grandparents in Chicago.  When you, when you have seven brothers and sisters, eight children in the family, and you, you--my father worked all the time.  It was very rarely that we had an opportunity to go to Chicago as a family.  So what we used to do is that every three, four years, we used to go up to Chicago for a, a week and one--so they'd take the girls one time, four, four girls one time and the next time they'd just take the four boys.  And so maybe I went to Chicago two or three times and my grandparents came down once or twice during that period of time, or we talked to 'em on the phone at Christmastime or I would--or on special occasions and so forth.  But I didn't know them.  And so there was really not the kind of connection that--or stories that I would hear from my grandparents [Martha Massingale and Fred Massingale] on my mother's [Dorothy Massingale Steward] side because we were basically living right there with them [in Clinton, Missouri].  My grandparents on my mother's side lived next door to us.  So I got an opportunity to know their personalities, got an opportunity to--for them to come to our games, you know for them to get to know us as well.  For them to take us places and, and do things with us.  And so I know a lot more about their personalities and about the ancestry than I do on the other side.
Story_ID: 466452
Speaker 1: Integration during that period of time was what? Just kind of nonexistent, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't very much. Yeah the two pockets. We're talking about the layout of--we're rolling now.  We were talking about the layout of Chicago [Illinois] in terms of the black population living on the South Side and the West Side.  But so did your father [Harold Steward] talk about, you know, growing up in Chicago, what it was like for him?
Speaker 1: I, I know it was, it was--he has, or had altogether I think nine, no, eight brothers and sisters.  I think there were nine of them altogether.  And he was the second to the oldest.  And so he had a lot of responsibilities.  I mean they, you know I think they kind of required that once you got old enough that you, you know, you go to work and you help support the, the rest of the family.  It was kind of the, the mindset.  And I know that--
Speaker 2: Now he was growing up during the Depression [Great Depression] too.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was, he was born in '25 [1925].  By the time he was five, we were in, in--deep into the Depression.
Speaker 1: Right, and so by the time he was about, I would say I remember him talking about working on the--part time on the railroad, or doing something for the railroad at fourteen or fifteen years old.  He was big enough, but he was--but they finally found out he was old, he was not as old as he told 'em.
Speaker 2: Is your father tall like you?
Speaker 1: Yes, he's--he was 6', 6'3.
Speaker 2: What are you, about six--
Speaker 1: 6'4.
Speaker 2: Four, okay.
Speaker 1: And so one of the things that I, I, I found out about, about him and, and the rest of the family is that they were industrious.  They worked hard.  And they weren't afraid of, of, of making the sacrifices necessary for, for their family and, and be prepared to do some pretty tough kinds of things.
Story_ID: 466453
Speaker 1: Now I remember him talking about he--now my father [Harold Steward] left high school at sixteen or seventeen years old.  And I think at the time he, he also I think joined the [U.S.] military as well, was away for about a, about a year or so.
Speaker 2: Now was he--
Speaker 1: He was in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that would be World War II [WWII] I guess.
Speaker 1: World War II.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did he have stories about the Navy?
Speaker 1: Yeah he did, he did.  In fact before he passed away, we, we sat down and visited and he was telling me some of the, the challenges of being in the Navy.  And how, how cruel and that people were and how racist they were about, about--I remember he was promoted to, to go into one of the ships.  And the, the captain wouldn't allow him to come on the ship, even though he was assigned to the ship.  And he said--the captain told him to his face, "We're not gonna have niggers on our ship."  And this went on several ships he was assigned to, that happened.  Until he finally I think got on--was assigned to a ship where they accepted him.  Most of the tough work went to most of the, the black sailors.  And I, I think he resented that because he never saw, he never saw I think African--persons of color that were, were in leadership roles or, or had jobs or responsibilities that were you know, nothing but beyond, you know the, the kind of the physical labor kind of opportunities that were, were there and they were very limited on where they could go and what they, what they could do as well.
Speaker 2: Now was he involved in any actions over there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in the, he was in the--a couple of islands.  He said he got shot at a couple of times.  But he was in, you know the Southeast Asia.
Speaker 2: Okay, Wake Island or one of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, somewhere.
Speaker 2: It's a lot, there's Guam, it's so many Marshall Islands, so many (unclear), I mean different battles in the South Pacific in those days.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now that's kind of unusual because you would think that a person of color would probably have ended up in the [U.S.] Army.  I don't know how he ended up in the Navy.  But he was a, he was a sailor.  He was a great swimmer.  I knew he, he swam a lot when he was younger, from what I understand.  And I remember when he got older with the grandchildren, he used to, to want to go out swimming with them, spend time with them doing that.  Especially when he went traveling, went to hotels.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he was probably enlisting, you know Great Lakes Naval Training Station [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] was there in--just north of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's probably where the connection is.
Speaker 2: It's a big naval training center, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, and so I, I, I don't, I don't necessarily know if he, he enjoyed that experience because he was always accustomed to being around persons of color in that concentrated area in the South Side of Chicago.  And there was a, there was a, a--and there was a, a matter of respect for one another and support for one another and I think I don't know if, I don't know if his parents [Beatrice Steward and Wiley Steward] ever told him that, or really explained to him the racism.  And he was never exposed to the kind of racism that he was exposed to when he went to the Navy.  And so I think it was an eye opener for him.  My mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] was talking about that, how much of an eye opener it was for him.  The fact that that was the case.  And so I don't think his experience--I think the experience was healthy for him to, to know that existed.  And I think it helped him grow because eventually he ended up moving from Chicago to Clinton, Missouri.  All of a sudden, that's all he was gonna be exposed to.  You're talking about a town of six thousand people.  You're talking about a black population that's about a hundred fifty maybe.  And so he had to build bridges and relationships that he had never had to build before.
Story_ID: 466454
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met in high school.  I know they met in high school.
Speaker 1: Was this before he went to the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, before he went to the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Met in high school and they married after he, after he got out, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: So that's unu- I mean that's, you know you hear about people waiting for people to come back from the service.  But that--she actually waited for him and he--you know, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And they got married.
Speaker 2: And they got married, and, and so--in fact my father [Harold Steward] was married--my father and mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] were married for fifty-four years before he, he passed on.  Which is about, what, I guess a few short years ago, six years ago.  Six, seven years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they met in high school and now--and well so I guess they lived in Chicago [Illinois] about ten years I guess before you were--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what the number is.
Speaker 1: --you were born.
Speaker 2: But you know my brother [James Steward] was born there and so, you know, and my, my three sisters and I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was born in 1951.  And so they left only a few months after I was born.  My, my mother--there was a real difficult time in finding apartments and housing and places to live and so forth in Chicago, families who had children.
Speaker 1: So the war [World War II, WWII] say was over in '45 [1945].  That's about six years I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: They were married in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Before they left.
Speaker 2: That's right.  My brother was born, born in 1946.
Story_ID: 466455
Speaker 1: Well now you have eight brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: I have, I have seven brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Seven, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight of us altogether.
Speaker 1: Eight of all, okay.  And where do you fall in the, in the order--
Speaker 2: I'm number five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have an older brother Philip Steward, James Philip Steward [James Steward].  I have a, a sister right behind him, who is four years older than I am, Regina Ann Steward Brame [Regina Steward Brame].  I have a sister Joan Marie Steward Newbill, who is two years older than I am.  I have a, a sister Yvonne Steward Williams who is one year older than I am, and then there's me.  And then there's a brother who is two years younger than I am.  His name is Michael Leonard Steward [Michael Steward].  And then a sister who is five years younger than I am, and Martha Ann Steward Hurtt [Martha Steward Hurtt].  And then my youngest brother, who is eleven years younger than I am, that's Robert Eric Steward [Robert Steward] that is the very youngest.
Story_ID: 466456
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory is probably one--I remember being upset, and this--probably a very positive thing.  Upset because I couldn't go to school (laughter).  All my other brothers and sisters were going to school except for me and my obviously younger sibling, my, my younger brother [Michael Steward] too.  And I was looking so forward and excited about going to school.  I must have been about four years old.
Story_ID: 466457
Speaker 1: I remember having these potbelly stoves with coal that we fed with, with coal from the mining areas and so forth that we kept heated.  There was only two of 'em.  It was a four room house that we lived in.  I remember the, the--everybody talks about the Saturday night bath tub, or having a--well we had a big tin tub and we had water that we heated up on the stove and that we mixed cold, hot water together.  And we--all eight kids got bathed.  That's just the way it was, you know.  And we didn't think of anything other than, than that.  And I remember not having indoor, door facilities to go to.  So we had an outhouse.  We had, we had wells, you know, for, for drinking water.  However we did have piped in, the water coming into the house.  And I thought I had no idea that we were as, as poor as we were because no one told me.  All I knew is that, you know--and we had, we had farm animals and I talked about earlier.  Talked about my [maternal] grandfather [Fred Massingale] and we had a little land in the back of the house, about six acres of so, that my grandfather, my, my father [Harold Steward] you know, kind of worked with the cattle that they had and, and hogs that they had.  And, and they had--and it was our responsibility to help take care of, of those animals.  And because there were resources of money that were tied to them.  And so it was--I think it was the first signs of, of seeing enter--people being enterprising and doing what it took to, to, to feed and provide for their families.  And it was about service and commitment to, to, to others outside of ourselves as, as well.  Because I remember when, when you always got a harvest from the gar- garden, you always shared that with people.  I remember vivid thoughts about, about or seeing--I remember first signs of giving.  We used to live only three houses down from the railroad tracks [in Clinton, Missouri].  We lived on the other side of the railroad tracks and, and they, you know, most people would say that that necessarily--wasn't necessarily the good side.  But far as we were concerned, it was pretty good for folks who were, who were considered vagrants that were riding the railroads and they were called hobos at the time.  We used to have hobos come to our house all the time.  I remember never, ever turning one away.  Here we were providing--
Speaker 2: These are black and white or just blacks?
Speaker 1: Black and white, mostly white that were riding the, the rail lines.  They used--my mom [Dorothy Massingale Steward] says our house was marked in some way, shape, form or fashion through some sort of code the hobos had.  And so they knew exactly--it was the third house you go to, to get food.  And we fed them and we gave them, you know, what they needed and they sat on the back porch and they ate.  You know and so when, when I think about giving, when I think about sharing, when I think about, you know, what I'm involved in today and, and support of various charities that are, are in this community and around the country, I think about those people who are in need.  I remember that our parents and our grandparents always shared with others.
Story_ID: 466458
Speaker 1: I remember also going to the church that we belonged to as well.  I remember my, my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] telling me that you--we need some money.  And so she gave me the responsibility, and gave me her last dollar.  She gave me her last dollar.  And I guess, I guess I just could easily have put the money in my pocket, and the last dollar was to go to church.  So I was going to Sunday school and she then she would end up going to, to, to church.  But she gave me the responsibility of taking that dollar to church to put in the church.  Now you, you know as well as I do how you--it's easy to say that you did and you didn't do it.  But she trusted me so much that with that dollar because we believed and she believed, and she told me she believed that if she puts this dollar in, there would be a return on that investment.
Speaker 2: Now what was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: St. James Methodist Church [Clinton United Methodist Church, Clinton, Missouri].  That was the church that we belonged to, it was all black church.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it was United Methodist?  I mean now.
Speaker 1: United Methodist.
Speaker 2: What they would call it now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, United Methodist.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that bell today is at Clinton United Methodist.  The bell that I used to ring occasionally every Sunday morning.  There was an elderly gentleman there that gave me the (unclear) fuel--
Story_ID: 466459
Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back and ask you why your parents [Dorothy Massingale Steward and Harold Steward] decided to move.  I know your [maternal] grandfather [Fred Massingale]--I guess his--the war time job ran out and he moved back to Missouri (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  War time job ran out and he still had property in Clinton, Missouri and he wanted to get back to that property and, and he thought that the opportunities there in, in Clinton would--at least some of the things he was doing before would kind of re-engage in some of those.  And that was hauling coal and then he worked for the, the Peabody Coal Company [Peabody Energy Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri] for a while as well.  And he was--worked as a bartender.  He did a, a number of things.
Speaker 1: I think I read you said he was like a Jamaican in the, the 'Living Color' show ['In Living Color'].  He had so many jobs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  He was a, he was enterprising.  He had a lot of skill sets and had a lot of abilities and he used those to his advantage.
Speaker 1: But how did he convince your father, a man, a Chicago [Illinois] man, growing up in Chicago, whose family had come up from Mississippi to go back down south sort of in Missouri?
Speaker 2: I don't think it was about him convincing my, my father.  I think it was my mother, you know.  Any time that, that the mother is from someplace else and she feels at home someplace else, usually the man kind of goes, goes with her.  But I, I think she was so convinced and she was so adamant about her children growing up in a, in an environment that was, was clean, that was healthy, that was--that was--they wanted to be cared for and the same kind of upbringing she got, she wanted to provide that for her children.  And she thought the best option was to, to, to--instead of city for them to learn some things beyond just being in a crowded community.
Story_ID: 466460
Speaker 1: I look and reflect back on the experience I had in Clinton, Missouri.  It was an opportunity to be able to learn about a wide range of people.  It was to learn a wide range of things about how to, to raise, raise cattle, to how to, to--how you feed 'em, and how you care for them and how do you, how do you raise, raise a, a garden.  And how do you, how do you, how do you hunt.  And really got to the core of, of existence.  Most children today or who grew up in the city, they don't have a connection to, to nature.  They don't have a connection to where milk comes from and, and how do you, how do you process it in a way that you can get butter and you can get buttermilk and you can, you can separate it and you--and how do you--and how do you take care of that as well, you know.  And how do you take care of your diet.  I can go out to, to, to this day and do green hunting in the wild.  We used to do that as, as children, go out and gather green and poke and, and dandelion leaves and, and quartz and, and, and mix it together and have greens, you know.  I don't think a child in the city could, could ever do that.  And so you know if you all--if you had to go back.  If I had to go back to Clinton, Missouri and learn how to live, or I had to live out of a tent for that matter, I, I, I--and all things went wrong or we, we went back one hundred years and, and I had to, to find a way to exist and provide for my family.  I think I would be in a better position to do that than, than most people coming from the city.  So I think it was that connection and time that my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] wanted for her children to have that I wish I was able to provide for my children [Kimberly Steward and David Steward, II].  I think it's so important to have that kind of connection.  And my, my, my father [Harold Steward] was so in love and my, my brother talks about--you ought to see some of the love letters and so forth that my father sent to my, my mother when they were separated for a while.  When he first got down there, he kept his job until he could find a job in Clinton.  Every weekend he was running and, and traveling from Chicago [Illinois] to Clinton, Missouri to spend the weekend, and then driving back.  Can you imagine that?  I mean that's a, that's at least a, a, a ten hour drive.  At least a ten hour drive.  Probably eleven or twelve, especially back in, back in those days.  Then get up in the morning in Chicago and go to work for five, five days, and then go back.  And he did that for months until he was able to secure a job in Clinton, Missouri and, and he went to work for a garage in Clinton, Missouri.  And I remember even to this day that he made very, very little money on that job and he was very much as enterprising as my grandfather [Fred Massingale].  Seeing my grandfather in the way and how he was, he was working around town and doing things.  He became very much like him in that, that regard.  But he also learned I think to, to work with other people and how to work with other people and get past all the other issues and challenge he saw when he was in the [U.S.] military.  I think there were hard lessons to learn while he was in the military, not knowing that there was that kind of racism and prejudice and so forth that were, were going on.  Because I think it prepared him to what he was to face later on in trying to make a connection and control and manage his temperament around tolerating and cha- being challenged to deal with, with the environment that he was going to have to, to, to live in, in order to, to raise his family.
Story_ID: 466461
Speaker 1: Now this is a question we always ask.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up for you?
Speaker 2: And you know something?  I forget about that living in the city now, in, in a community as large as St. Louis [Missouri].  I forget them little sounds and some of those, some of those to, to hear the birds or owls, or hear, you know, or to, to smell the fresh air.  Or to see the, the stars in the sky when it's a clear night, you know.  I mean even when it's a clear night here in the city, you--because of the lights, you can't see the stars, you know and see the Big [Big Dipper] and Little Dipper and, and how we used to, to look at the, the, the North Star.  And, and how we used to identify certain aspects of the, the--because that's what my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] did.  She, she showed us all those things.  The, the, the, the, the quiet, the peace that, that comes with that in the, the small town as well.  The--being in an environment where, where everybody in the small town speaks to everyone.  I remember coming to the city initially and I was speaking to everybody and I was smiling at 'em and, and hope they'd look at me--like, you know, something must be wrong with you, you know.  That's what we did.  We always said howdy to everybody.  We always smiled at everybody.  And everybody kind of knew one another because we were kind of all in this together.  I had--didn't have any preconceived notions about people as well.  People were trying to accomplish the same kind of thing, and that is to, to provide for their families, and to, to do the best they possibly can to be a, a, a value to the community.  That's kind of the way I, kind of the way I grew up.  And so you know the, you know there are black and white issues growing up in Clinton, Missouri.  Now doubt about that growing in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] because me being the first person of color to, to have gone from the first grade to the twelfth grade, is, is--makes--tells you that there were issues.
Story_ID: 466462
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that.  'Cause you were--the school system was segregated when--
Speaker 2: Up until 1957 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when you, when you came there as a baby and '54 [1954], the Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] case came through with--and I think the order was to do--to integrate with all deliberate speed, which means real slow in most places.  And Clinton, Missouri tried it in '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: How did it come about?  I mean was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] involved in that in Clinton or what happened?
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure.  I think that the town was ready to do it right away.  I think that there--I think there was some sort of I guess connection or tie or, or the need to, to, to do that.  I don't know exactly what it was, and I don't know exactly how my, my parents [Dorothy Massingale Steward and Harold Steward] or my grandparents [Martha Massingale and Fred Massingale] were involved in that.  But I remember my mother and my--even my brothers and sisters talking about the hand-me-down books from the, the, the other schools.  When they got finished with--
Speaker 1: So the Lincoln School [Clinton, Missouri] would get the, get the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the Lincoln School when they--Lincoln School would get the hand-me-down books from the--of the, of the public schools, you know.  And as they were throwing them away, they, they, they would get that.  And so--and it was a one room kind of place with--that had all grades.  And I think there were only--there was only one teacher, Miss Wilson [ph.].  Miss Wilson taught my brothers and sisters and she had taught my, my, my mother as well.  And so when I started in 1957, my--the day was (unclear) and there were huge threats from the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].
Speaker 1: Now were you the only black student that was getting ready to integrate the--I mean was, was there a group of you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no actually, actually there were--in my class and going to Franklin School [Clinton, Missouri], which the school, the grade school I was gonna go to and start in the first grade, there was--if I'm not mistaken, there was one other.  There was one other, Janet Brame [Janet Brame Sands] I think was the other student starting in the first grade with me.  And then there was Park School [Jefferson Park School, Clinton, Missouri], and there were maybe two others over there.  But at the school that I was located in, Franklin School, I think there were two.  And then of course my brothers and sisters were beginning transferred over.  My sister Yvonne [Yvonne Steward Williams] who would--and then would have been in the second grade.  My sister Joan [Joan Marie Steward Newbill] who would be in the third grade.  My, my, my, my oldest brother [James Steward], who would be in the fifth or sixth grade, in fifth grade--I guess the sixth grade actually.  And my, my, my sister Regina [Regina Steward Brame] who would have been in the fifth grade.  But, but anyway I remember my mother and father--my mother told me this later--my, my mother told me that my father and other men stayed up all night to ensure that the Ku Klux Klan wasn't gonna follow through on trying to stop the integration.  They were--they said they were scared to death that there was gone be violence, there was gonna be problems, there were gonna be issues.
Speaker 1: They, they had to stand guard at your house?
Speaker 2: Stand guard and they, they patrolled the town, and the outskirts of town because there were only a couple of places that they could enter into the community.  To ensure that, that there wasn't gonna be violence and there wasn't gonna be outsiders coming in interfering with the integrate- integration of the school.  And so I heard that I just--wow, he did that just for his children to have this opportunity.
Story_ID: 466463
Speaker 1: Yeah I was asking off camera if the group of men were integrated or just black men?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I think that the--I think they may have been integrated, and I hope that they were because I, I--the whole community had to come together in order for that to happen.  And there were no incidences that happened.  My mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] was so relieved. She was so frightened about, you know, what may happen to other children.  How, you know they were going to be affected by it.  I had no idea that that was even going on up until about two years ago, my wife [Thelma Steward] was asking about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so, so the integration itself worked smoothly in the school [Franklin School, Clinton, Missouri] itself.
Speaker 2: Very, very smoothly.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well we, we knew there were--even though we could not afford to go, but we knew there were a couple restaurants in town that we could not go to.  We also knew that there were a swimming pool that we could not go to, a public swimming pool which we eventually when I was sixteen years old, boldly with some other friends, jumped in and integrated it.  And then in what year, and then there was a movie theater.  Lee's Theater [Lee Theater, Clinton, Missouri] that we went to pay our money and we had to sit in the balcony of the movie theater and go to the movie theater.  So, you know that eventually went away and you know--but the swimming pool thing didn't go away until I was like fifteen, sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: So it took, it took a while.  It took almost to 1970 then to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Which is, you know terrible to say.  I mean there is a, there's a lot of first, there's a lot of things that I had an opportunity to see the first of, that, that are pretty, pretty interesting that we have broken through some challenges and some issues in my lifetime that hopefully people will, will honor by broadening it that much further coming, combing behind us.  There are people that have had opportunity in the African American community and beyond that, that I've admired that, that give, give me continued hope and excitement about the, the future.  I'm hopeful that as these kids look at, look at my life and look at others like me, that they, they get excited about what the future holds for them and will honor the sacrifice that many of us have made for us to be in the positions that we are today.  Had some sixth graders come by here [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] last week, just last week and--week before last, actually.  And had an opportunity to talk with them.  Talked to them about respect and honor and core values that are so important for them to, to get a handle on today and right today so they will have the kind of relationships and trusting relationships with others, but the relationships that they're establishing with one another.  And that was very, very exciting to do.  They had an opportunity to walk around, be able to touch and feel and see some of the, the systems that we use.  Be able to pound on a few of the systems and some of the--go in some of the labs and see the labs and so forth.  Look at our technology center as well that we spent an inordinate amount of money.  One of the state of the art technology centers in the, in the country.  And so they can see firsthand that, that all things are possible.  I had some high schoolers in here just last week.  Same thing.  I'm very passionate about getting, getting young people exposed to, to, to technology and, and thinking about computer science and sciences.  Take a look at and think about mathematics.  Be thinking about, you know, areas that we've been avoiding, in engineering for, for years.
Story_ID: 466464
Speaker 1: Were you drawn to scientific subject matter when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  I was kind of across the board.  I didn't know exactly what I wanted to do.  I think the socialization piece was, was important to me because I, you know, getting to know people and relationship with people and my--developing an ability to read people and to have interaction with people, relationship of trust and I think was something was my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] kind of instilled that we ought to, we ought, we ought to have and that we ought to be kind and considerate and, and caring about other people and, and piece of service and commitment to other, I think, was demonstrated by, by the, the hobo piece that I talked about earlier where, where hobos coming by our house and we didn't turn anyone away.  I think those are strong messages about--and then we have seven brothers and sisters.  You gotta learn how to get along with one another.  And, and, and it's important to care for one another, or it just wasn't gonna happen.  And so there's a lot of little pieces and parts and so forth I think growing up in that small town [Clinton, Missouri] that I think were incorporated that, that helped me to this day get us to where we are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna ask you some more about the, the philosophy later.  But tell me did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Probably history.  I liked history for some strange reason.  I don't know, know why but I enjoyed learning about people who did tremendous things.  It gave me a sense of, of hope, it gave me a sense of courage that, that, that it's possible.  I didn't get an opportunity to, to touch or feel or, any of these people that you, that you hear about even who were actors and actresses that you kind of look to and think wow, you know.  What they do on the screen.  Then I began to think even beyond that.  Well what about the guys who are producing and those guys who are actually funding those films?  Who are these people?  And that's one of the reasons I was talking earlier about Harry Findley [sic.] and the innovation and things that he was doing with the athletics.
Speaker 1: Charlie Finley [Charles O. Finley], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Charlie Finley, Charlie Finley.
Speaker 1: Yeah the A's [Kansas City Athletics; Oakland Athletics], yeah.
Speaker 2: Who are these guys?  I mean these are guys are paying millions of dollars to, at the time, hundreds of thousands of dollars to baseball players to play baseball, to have fun, you know.  And, and to, to--and I was with a--some, some kids and one kid was saying you know, how excited he was about one day becoming a professional basketball player.  And my question to him was well, "Why don't you own the basketball team?"
Story_ID: 466465
Speaker 1: Now these questions that were occurring to you.  And I, I, I mean I'm seeing a pattern that, that you, you would--I mean you, you value the experience on the farm because it, it kind of showed where things come from and where the essential roots of survival are.  And now you go to sporting events and wonder who owns the team (laughter).  I mean you're putting all the--you're going to the root of what's going on, you know, in a lot of ways, right?
Speaker 2: Well you really do and the source for me.  I mean now I've, I've--as I've grown up and I've become, especially in my forties still those questions linger with me.  And, and there's a, there's a--and I, I discovered a passage in Ephesians, and it's Ephesians 3:20.  And it says, it says, "Glory be, be to God that works within us that can do exceedingly above all that we can think, dream or pray for."  And that resonated with me because it--that--the discovery finally I began to find out that that discovery that the power is within me.
Speaker 1: Now, now--
Speaker 2: It's within you.  The power of the Holy Spirit that works within us that can do exceedingly above all that we can't even think, dream or pray for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I wondered if, now did you have black history in class, or is it just--you know since you're going to a majority school [Franklin School, Clinton, Missouri] and it's only two of you all--
Speaker 2: No exposure to that at all. The only exposure that we got to persons of color were, were you know the, the notables.  But, but, but also the negative piece that we were slaves and that, and that we came from that.  And that's--in fact, I didn't know that was something to be proud of, but it is.  That, that you can, you can struggle through that and become--and, and become something tremendous beyond those circumstances.  And I learned during that period of time because I had to struggle through this for, for years, not letting somebody's opinion be your reality.  Because people will impose certain thought processes, certain behavior, certain limitations on your ability to be able to, to grow and to, to, to get beyond that.  And, and so I think that we're always--we always are growing and trying to break new ground.  So what is the possibility of a person of color living in--moving to St. Louis, Missouri, not being from, from St. Louis, owning an information technology company and, and then having the nerve to call it World Wide Technology [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri].
Story_ID: 466466
Speaker 1: Well we're gonna get to that as we, you know, go along.  But so did you have a favorite teacher in school [Franklin School, Clinton, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: My second grade teacher, I thought she was just great.  I remember her today, Miss Bennett [ph.].  Miss Bennett was one that was loving and caring and one that just kind of allowed you to be who you were.  I remember in the--and she was compassionate, especially with those people who didn't have much.  'Cause I remember there were kids that even came to school with, with no shoes.  Well so I was very proud, I could have some shoes, you know.  We had two pair of shoes, go to church school shoes.  Go to church school shoes and, and school, school shoes.
Speaker 1: So these, these are white kids, right?
Speaker 2: These are white kids.  These are white kids.  And so we were very, very blessed to, to, to not be in that kind of economic position.  But share compassion for those kids you know, all the kids were kind of surprised.  And to, to, to make sure that they had shoes, you know.  And not be in a position where, you know, they weren't like the other kids.  And so you know, I, I kind of respected and admired her for that.  There were coaches that, that I, I admired when I was in, in high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Now you're like (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Especially the ones who were really, really hard on me.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you--
Story_ID: 466467
Speaker 1: I imagine you were involved in sports 'cause you look like an athletic person, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was.  But I was real thin.  And so football, I played until I was about--I was, I was, I was like--when I was a sophomore [at Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri], I was probably 6'1 and weighed probably 100, 130, 35 pounds, maybe.  I was real thin.  And I tried to play football when I was younger, when I was in the eighth and ninth grade.  Ninth grade and you know my mom [Dorothy Massingale Steward] always said you start something, you're gonna finish it.  So, so don't start anything that you don't finish, you know.  And so I have that thing today as in you know, never give up, never quit, drive and the perseverance, stick to it, and do whatever it takes to make it happen.  And it's kind of the attitude that, that I have about, about life and she kind of instilled that about you know, if you start a sport, you're gonna go every day and no matter how, how hard you get hit playing football, you're gonna fight through it to, to end the season.  And so--
Speaker 1: Did you play basketball?
Speaker 2: I played basketball.  Played basketball and started when I was in the eighth grade, got cut from the eighth grade team, got cut from the ninth grade team.  Got cut from tenth grade team.  In tenth--while playing in the tenth grade.  And so I used to still go to the games and so forth.  And I grew a little bit.  And then I got a little better because I also--that's all I used to do during the summer was play basketball and, and even, even I will play with the scrubs of course on the basketball team as well.  And they used to beat us up.  But then when I became a, a, a junior, my, my sophomore year I started my very first game.  And then when I was a junior, I started, started most of the games, all the games in fact and was a senior I, I started all--every game and I was--I was the all-conference as well.  And then ended up going to Central Missouri State [Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri] and playing basketball there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now, now--
Story_ID: 466468
Speaker 1: Give me the name of your high school, first of all.
Speaker 2: Clinton Senior High [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri].  The Clinton Cardinals.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now were, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well I'm surprised because--what happened (simultaneous?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I wasn't a very good student.  When you, when you get responsibilities beyond just, you know I think the academic piece and--wasn't that I wasn't smart.  I think it was that the, the people imposing on who you ought to be.  And subconsciously even teachers in that environment imposed that as well.  You're a person of color, you're a person who is darker complected, so you know this is how you fit into the world because this is all we've seen and so the expectation isn't the same as you know, the other students there.  And so why would we waste as much time and focus and energy on the, that student, kind of student.  And why would we give as much encouragement to, to that kind of student?  So it was a psychological kind of warfare that they were dealing with, and then I was dealing with relative to how I fit into the picture and what hope do I have for the future.  Battling through that to you know, because there's some teaching that's going on at home as well.  Words of encouragement.  Words of that, that, that, that you're great.  That, that you're gonna do great things.  That--and then coming to school and you're getting, you know this caste system, the caste system (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kind of an indifference I guess.
Speaker 2: You got the white students, you got the black students, you got the teaching of slavery and so forth.  And the very limited things that black people did because you had no real examples and all these great persons who weren't of color who were doing all these great things to build this country and, and see very few black people who were doing anything at all, they teach about.  And then when they talk about the, the, the slavery, everybody always look, looked at, turned around and looked at me.  Those kind of psychological things to deal with.  And then of course you have children who are cruel to one another as well.  You have the, the, the people who are, are even poorer than you are, that have to find a way to, to, to, to, to have a station in life as well.  So they try to do everything they possibly can by calling names and that kind of stuff to, you know, put you down or, or that kind of thing.  Getting into a few skirmishes and fights and so forth, you know.  Nothing big, but the psychological warfare associated with that I think had a lot to do with it.  And so I was an average student.  You know and I, and I hear that mostly average students are the ones who are running things anyway.  School was, was, was hard and complicated because I think that I learn differently than most people.  And then there was a cookie cutter kind of school environment.  And so in the cookie cutter school environment, if you just worked a little bit outside the box, you had to learn how to work inside that box in order to be successful.  So I was average student.  I was--I, I don't know if that's good or bad.  I--my, my, my, my son [David Steward, II] and my daughter [Kimberly Steward]--they were outstanding students.  And so that tells you that--and these were in private schools.  And, and then going on to college and both of 'em graduated with honors and my, my son graduated summa cum laude.  And he--in international bus- in international business.  And my daughter graduated communications.  But all I'm saying to you is that I--so obviously they got something from me.  My wife [Thelma Steward] as well.  But from, me in all that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's opportunity and expectation have a lot to do with whether you, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, our expectation was you know, for them to do--this is what your--minimum requirement, you know, for you to be in this environment.
Story_ID: 466469
Speaker 1: It wasn't whether you were going to school.  I had an option whether I was going to, to college or not, you know.  I mean it would have been just as fine if I graduated from high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri] and I went on and go to work.
Speaker 2: Well who encouraged you to go to college?
Speaker 1: My mom [Dorothy Massingale Steward].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Mom encourage, encouraged me to go into college, but there was another encouragement during that period of time as well.  I wanted to play college basketball.  Coaches told me I couldn't play 'cause I was too small.
Speaker 2: Too small?
Speaker 1: I was, I was only about time from public--6'2 maybe, 6'2, 6'2.  Only weighed about maybe 140, 145 pounds, maybe 150 at best.  I grew a couple of inches while I was in college, 6'4, 6'5 area.  And didn't get much bigger, but, but--because I weighed 155, 160 pounds and so forth.  But I was--proved to myself that I could do that, which I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you get a scholarship offer from Central Michigan [sic. Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not initially.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't recruited initially.  It wasn't until--I was a walk-on.  But there was another incident about there as well.  And that was the, the Vietnam War.  They were--if you didn't have a 2-S deferment, immediately you went to the [U.S.] military.  Sixty days you were in the, in, in Southeast Asia in the--in Vietnam fighting a war.  And so what a motivator when you see others who, who dropped out of school or, or didn't, didn't do very well in school, that, you know all of a sudden ended up going to Vietnam whether they were injured or they got--were killed.  You saw much of that going on around you and so what a motivator to, to, to not only get motivated about school, but doing whatever is necessary to ensure that at least you delayed that process.
Story_ID: 466470
Speaker 1: Let's take you back to high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri] for a minute.  Now, now you were--you came out in '69 [1969], right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].  Now when you were in high school, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, right?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], yeah.  So do you remember that and did that have a big im- impact on your family at the time?
Speaker 2: Yes it did from the standpoint of he was a--when you took a look at it, is that he was a great leader and, and because of that--him being the leader that he was, he was assassinated.  And so what hope--you begin to question what hope do I have to become, become someone like him?  If, if, if you're that, that hated, you know, began to--however, there was, there was, there was some-there was an element of fear at the time in our, in our, even in Clinton, Missouri because there were a lot of riots and so forth that were going on.  Other people knew that wasn't right, you know, in our community.  So there was some level of compassion, but some level of fear as well as to what, what other blacks were thinking or what blacks in the town were gonna do, if anything at all, you know.  And so, so there--it wasn't something that was talked a whole lot about, but my mom [Dorothy Massingale Steward] and dad [Harold Steward] understood the importance, especially my mom, understood the importance of reinforcing daily how important we were.  Reinforcing daily the significance of our lives, the significance and the responsibility we had to, to, to, to provide a better quality of life for the next generation.  And, and so hard work wasn't a problem for any of us.  Perseverance because they taught us don't start anything you don't finish, you know.  You never give up on anything.  And I think it reflects in obviously the fact that we've been in business, I've been in business for twenty-two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is in fact the only business I've been in. But, but I remember to this day--
Story_ID: 466471
Speaker 1: And the other thing I remember very vividly is not disappointing her [Steward's mother, Dorothy Massingale Steward].  Not disappointing her because I remember her and my father [Harold Steward] struggling so much to get their kids through school so they can have a, a better quality of life and a way of life than, than they did, you know.  That you wouldn't have to do--have the same kind of struggles that we had.  You wouldn't have the same kind of racism that they had endured.  My father being a, a master mechanic but only having to work in this environment because, because he was a person of color.  He couldn't work for Kansas City Power and Light [Kansas City Power and Light Company, Kansas City, Missouri] as a, as a mechanic.  And instead of making fifty dollars a week, made one hundred seventy-five dollars a week, you know.  Those kinds of things.  And it was not only the, the company, but it was the, it was the union and so forth as well.  Those were really challenging days for, for them to, to grit their teeth, fight through it and provide for their family and do whatever it took for us to, to have the next opportunity.  And for them to have seen my father, my, my, my, my son [David Steward, II] graduate from college, which was the first grandchild to graduate from college, was a thrill.  He, he bawled like a baby.  My son went to the American University in Washington, D.C.  So we all gathered together and we, we went to Washington, D.C. to see my son graduate from the American University and graduated with, with honors, which was even more of a thrill.  Sat in the front row and my, my father passed, I mean he bawled like a baby.  And then my daughter [Kimberly Steward] graduated from a private school here called Whitfield School [St. Louis, Missouri].  Did the same thing.  And that, that, that, that fall he passed away.
Story_ID: 466472
Speaker 1: How was Central Michigan for you?
Speaker 2: Central Missouri [Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: Central Missouri, I'm sorry.  How did I get Central--Central Missouri.  So, so you go to Central Missouri and initially so I mean how did you get--now you're an average student.  Did you, did you have to--did you get a student loan, or how did you manage to get--
Speaker 2: Student loans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was no way that my parents could afford for, for me to go to school, and so with student loans, National Defense Loans [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program].
Speaker 1: Yeah National Defense and being a veteran right.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  That's exactly what we used.  And there was some grants that went along with it, but I mean my father [Harold Steward] was probably making only maybe five thousand dollars a year.  So he and my mother [Dorothy Massingale Steward] were staying at home, stay at home mom and you know I had an older sister was going to school there.  I had my, my, my, my--and my sister Joan Marie [Joan Marie Steward Newbill] who was two years older than I, had just left school because she wanted to start work.  So she left in her sophomore year so.
Speaker 1: So you had other family members who, who went to Central Missouri.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I had--in fact, three others went to Central Missouri State prior to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did, how--what was your experience on campus there?
Speaker 2: My experience was the first exposure, real exposure I had to persons of color from the city.  I had never experienced that before.  It was always maybe a real minority being the only African American male to graduate out of my high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri] class, was only one other female graduated out of my high school class, and that was Anita Braim [sic. Janet Brame Sands].  And she was, you know, we're talking about you know, a student body of one hundred thirty-five people in my high school class.  And so my exposure to persons of color were so limited.
Speaker 1: Was Central Missouri predominantly black or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not exposed.  No, no, no.  But, but exposed me to persons of color.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You're talking about a, a student body there that was probably about seven, eight thousand people.  You know and they had campus in Kansas City [Missouri] at the time and they had, had one in Warrensburg [Missouri], the campus there.  But there are probably only two hundred black folks in, in--as students there at, at Central Missouri.  But it was exposing me to cities--people from the city, St. Louis [Missouri] and Kansas City.  And so that was a different kind of upbringing that they had versus the upbringing I had in Clinton, Missouri.
Story_ID: 466473
Speaker 1: Just kind of compare and contrast the city life that you were exposed to versus what you already knew.
Speaker 2: Well I was considered an outsider and a country boy.  And coming from a small town.  So the, the sense of who I was, was, was during that period in time was an Uncle Tom.  Because--
Speaker 1: Why would they characterize it like that in a sense?
Speaker 2: Because my exposure to persons--my broader exposure to persons who were not of color.  Even to the extent of speaking to my, my friends that were from Clinton, Missouri and coming in this environment, little small comments were: "You're an Uncle Tom aren't you?"  You know.  It was that kind of thing going.  It was--right after obviously Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] passed, had--was assassinated, but the, the black power stuff was going on.  The pride around black folk was going on as well.  And we were considered kind of outcasts.  And we weren't a part of the, the, the, the caste system structure that was set up in the cities for, for most persons of color as well.  You had, you had doctors and lawyers and very few businesspeople and professional people who were, who were teachers here in St. Louis [Missouri], for example.  And then you had everybody cascading under that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're talking about the black caste system (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the black caste system, you know.  And I didn't realize there was a black caste system.  I didn't realize there were, you know--that, that there were certain neighborhoods where people were doing well and people weren't doing well.  I didn't realize that there weren't a significant number of black businesspeople running big business in St. Louis or in Kansas City [Missouri] or in major cities.  I didn't realize how few and far between they were.  That was a shock to me.  I, I was shocked that there weren't more resources, that we weren't more organized and we, there was--the economic opportunities weren't, weren't--we, we hadn't broken through into.  And, and their--people from the cities perceptions of, of what was possible was very limited from what I could see, you know.  And so my exposure to, to--in college [Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri] was an eye opener.  I was excited about getting exposed to, to--and being involved in the social aspect of, of that so I could learn as much as I possibly could about the differences, and, and obviously the common ground and so forth as well.  Because all of a sudden I get the opportunity to see for the first time a wide range of people of color from the city that I'd never been exposed to before.  So I learned how to dance.  In fact I learned how to dance back in Clinton, Missouri.  And so I could do dances from St. Louis or Kansas City, they didn't know if I was from Kansas City or St. Louis.  You know, when I first got, got to St. Louis, to, to, to school.  But that was, that was a good experience for me.  It was fun.  It wasn't whether you were going to school.  I met some relationships in college that are relationships I have to this day.  They always viewed me as a person of, of--that was trying to do the right thing, you know, even though people were trying to maneuver and, and be slick about the way and how they, they interacted with me.  My, my sister [Joan Marie Steward Newbill] was a great protector as well because she knew a lot of them as well before I got there, she forewarned them that, "My brother's coming up here.  I don't want any of that foolishness, you know, when he gets here."  And so she kind of forewarned them, kind of paved the way.  So my brother and sister kind of paved the way for, for me to come in and, and not have to, to deal with some of the shenanigans and, and junk that maybe they had to be exposed to when they initially got there, being from the country.
Speaker 1: And did you mostly socialize with the black students, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because one of the things that I wanted to learn as much about is--because they would--because most black students would have--would ostracize you if you didn't, you know.  I mean it's just the way it was.  So there was--their own prejudice that was going on during that period of time as well.  However, I wanted to be exposed as much as I could to the persons of color because I wanted to learn as much as I--and, and be connected to the, the relationships and so forth they had in the cities, which I thought were gonna be important to me later on.
Story_ID: 466474
Speaker 1: What did you major in in college [Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Business administration.
Speaker 1: And how did you manage to choose that one?
Speaker 2: Well you know I, I--when I first got there, I was exposed to just a wide range of things.  I wanted to learn as--have general education courses and, and be exposed.  So I had an opportunity to explore during that period of time.  But just thinking about my, my background, growing up in a small town, seeing how enterprising my, my father [Harold Steward] was, my [maternal] grandfather [Fred Massingale] was and my, my brother [James Steward] at the time was, was a--working for the railroad as a, a telegrapher and was doing some things there.  And then I began to see other business people start to--at the school of business doing things.  Some persons of color and, and pe- persons not of color.  They were doing some very interesting things in business.  And so as a result of that, I decided that I, I'd--the exposure I had to business courses were something that I enjoyed doing and, and the, the, the thought of being in business at, at some point was really exciting and intriguing to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now we know you graduated in '73 [1973].  Were there any--what were the--I guess were, were there any I guess benchmark experiences in college that, that really set you on a path to really fully appreciate what you could do with a degree in business?
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that college did for me has, has got me to really begin to appreciate a college education for what it was.  But also to as even in the small town of Clinton, Missouri, kind of being, being--this is what you will be when you grow up and when you're in business school, this kind of what you will be.  But also think outside that box.  Me having grown up in a small town and thinking about, thinking about you know, growing up on a farm or growing up and raising animals and, and seeing my father and my grandfather work outside the box to provide.  How was I gonna use this business degree and because all that most people in the school would talk about is what employers were expecting.  And how were we going to integrate ourselves into, to providing what the employer needed from us with our skill sets and our abilities and so forth.  It was never about entrepreneurship.  Never about outside of that.  So I had two schools of thought, you know I can use these skills, you know in business and, but I can use, use that whole thought process also incorporating myself into, into the, the standard business environment and work for twenty-five, thirty, forty years, get my gold watch and, and, and call it a day.  I wanted something much more than that.  So I saw the--even at the time, I saw the, saw it for what it was.  And, and it helped me also once I graduated from college, to see something interesting because after I got out of college, I couldn't find a job for several months.
Story_ID: 466475
Speaker 1: Now let me go back a minute.  But I know the early '70s [1970s] was a time the--Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was president--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and the Nixon administration had--was promoting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Small business.
Speaker 1: --a program called black, black capitalism they were calling it.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And, and [U.S.] Small Business Administration--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --had quite a number of loans for black entrepreneurs.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of all that when you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wasn't exposed to it at all, and they didn't talk about it in college.  I mean they was no exposure to any of that at all.  I mean there were so few of us in the business school.  I was probably one of a handful of people in the business school at Central Missouri [Central Missouri State University; University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri] at the time.
Speaker 1: Was there a black--oftentimes in black studies departments, or the black student organizations may have--I know The Black Collegian magazine, Black Enterprise you know would have stories about some of these things.  Were you, you reading any of this material?
Speaker 2: No, and I wasn't exposed to it.
Speaker 1: No exposure at all.
Speaker 2: No exposure to it.  Except there was, you know there was a--what do they call--Black Collegiates, ABC [Association of Black Collegians].  I can't remember the name of the, the organization.  But there was an organization on campus where we talked about black issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But those--black issues usually were comprised to the college and the challenges and so forth that black students were having just on the college campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, so some sort of African American student organization, a black student organization.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And then, and then in the business school, there were--I, I, I remember only having one black professor.  All the time I was going to high school--from, from grade school [Franklin School, Clinton, Missouri] to high school [Clinton High School, Clinton, Missouri] to college, had one black professor.
Speaker 1: What did he teach?
Speaker 2: In fact he wasn't even African, African American, he was Haitian.  And he was teaching accounting.  And, and then I remember it was another gentleman whose name was Joe Paige [ph.] that was, I think his name was Joe Paige, that also taught some other courses and so forth as well.  But there were two black teachers in the business school, okay.  And one was a--one--Joe Paige I think was a student teacher, the other one was a full time professor.  And so you know, our exposure, my exposure to them encouraging me to read that kind of material was almost nonexistent.  And even teachers who had exposure to business were nonexistent.  There was one guy who said--I don't know what course it was he was teaching, but he had owned a, a shoe store, in retail, you know.  But no professor in the business school that I remember, had ever owned a business or ran a business, but they were teaching us how to work for someone in business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's theoretical and--
Speaker 2: Theoretical only because they really had no practical experience themselves in, in business so.
Story_ID: 466476
Speaker 1: You wanted to be an entrepreneur, but when you get out, you, you knew you had to start somewhere, right?  So you--it was hard to find a job you were saying.
Speaker 2: It was very hard to find a job.  Very hard to--well the thing about it I was not that great a student, I was an average student.  So when you're average, you know, they want exceptional students to work for them.  And so it gave me the, the, the--I said I never wanna be in a position where, where I ever have to look for a job for someone--I have to fit in somebody's box, you know.  And that's okay to do that.  There's nothing wrong with that at all, but I wanted to do something exceptional.  And I think it comes from that reinforcement.  From, from my upbringing.  That, that all things are possible; that you are great; that you're gonna do great things was something that kind of resonated with me from, from childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then of course I, I think that marrying well does, does, does help as well.  That someone who continues that then encouragement, continues to support you in spite of all the challenges that, that you're faced with has a lot to do with it as well.  I was giving a speech several, several years ago and I was talking about how important it is to, to, to marry well.  What I mean by marrying well, not necessarily wealth.  Marrying well from someone who is gonna stand beside you and with you and support you in spite of the circumstances.  That doesn't give up either.  With you when things get tough and there are challenged with.  And so--and but there are obviously those others that are out there that, that are encouraged by the same forces that, that, that, that your spouse is hearing as well.  And you, you've heard this as many times as I have in the, in our, our community, which probably one of the very few communities, communities that hear this.  But it says--these women will tell one another you can do bad by yourself, you know.  And so thank God that, that my spouse [Thelma Steward] doesn't listen to that.  She looks at the possibilities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you, you got married in, in late '70s [1970s].  I guess about, what, '77 [1977], '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], okay.  I knew it was around there.
Story_ID: 466477
Speaker 1: What was your first job now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My very first job was working for Boy Scouts of America.  I was working in a--you know as a--I guess associate scout executive or I think was the title.  And because I had been a Boy Scout growing up.  I went all the way up to Life Scout, went to Boy Scout camps and, and learned about--got various badges and so forth about nature to, to swimming, to, to hiking to, to you name it, I was about that.  Religion was a part of it as well.  Learned about core values and, and, and honoring and respecting your parent to, to honoring and respecting God, you know.  It was all a part of, of my, my upbringing.  A good experience for me because it just reinforced what, what my parents [Dorothy Massingale Steward and Harold Steward] and, and were exposing me to as well.  And the church was an important part of my life too, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you were with the Boy Scouts as an associate scout executive.
Speaker 2: Yeah, only a very short period of time, but I, I think it, I had an opportunity to, to use that as a platform to, to--until I was able to find a job in what I felt real business (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now what was that--what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I went to--during the time I was looking for a job there, I found a job working for the railroad.
Speaker 1: Okay, which--
Speaker 2: My brother had already worked, was working for the Frisco Railroad [St. Louis-San Francisco Railway] and he encouraged me to take a look at the, the Frisco and the, and the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company.  So what I did is I went and applied at Missouri Pacific Railroad Company and at Frisco and I got a job working for the Missouri Pacific Railroad as a, as a sales guy.  So I went through an extensive training program with them and went into sales.  I was--lived briefly in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], Houston [Texas], New Orleans [Louisiana] and Houston and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in sales and marketing.
Speaker 1: New Orleans, Houston, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the first African American railroad sales people in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And selling freight services is not the--it's probably one of the most challenging things that you can do, especially being a person of color, when there are very few persons of color that the, that people have been exposed to before.
Story_ID: 466478
Speaker 1: Very few persons of color are trying to haul, you know, have freight to be hauled, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I, I remember being in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had to deal with pretty much all white people.
Speaker 2: --New Orleans [Louisiana] and the people after going down and visiting with a, a couple of customers in, in New Orleans, one guy called back and said, "Don't ever send him back here again."  Called my manager [at the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company] and told him that.  So it was interesting because I was one also that didn't accept that.  That--and I probably was putting myself in, in harm's way, but I always believed in, in--that doesn't bother me not one bit.  That didn't discourage me at all.
Speaker 1: Did you go back to that person?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.  In fact we got a clear understanding of how we were going to do business because we didn't have to do business at all for that matter as far as I was concerned because I had the, I had the wherewithal and the ability to be able to, to, to prioritize, whether he got his rail cars in there to, to load or not, you know.  And I think we got a clear understanding who was, who was--if he wanted to be in business, what he needed to--I mean that, that we could re-prioritize only through me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you understood the clout that you had in the job that you had.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and the responsibility that I had, I mean so but--and so it, it was fun to also to, to communicate that in a way that wasn't about anger, it was about this is just good business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, we don't need your business.  Move it by a truck, I mean you know what I'm saying (laughter)?  Which would have been much more expensive for him to, to, to get to market.  So we were in a, we were in a, a--I, I knew I think how to use that and, and not respond in a, in a, in a way that, that cut off our ability to be able to communicate.
Speaker 1: Now did your bosses stand behind you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  They, they supported me 100 percent.
Story_ID: 466479
Speaker 1: I had a sponsor back in St. Louis [Missouri] as well who was, who was looking at how was this gonna work out.  They were kind of, kind of experimenting at the same time to see how the market would react to them being so innovative to, to put a person of color in that position.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that gave me exposure to, to not only a wide range of, of, of businesses, you know.  Chemicals to, to oil and gas, to, to, to lumber, to steel, to, to import/export stuff that we were, we were dealing with, to food stuff, to, to, to industries that would not have had an opportunity to be exposed to.  And also it gave me exposure to, to the VP, at the VP level.  The executive level.  From the senior management level to the executive level, which gave me a comfort about how you build relationships.  And that they put on their pants the same way I do.  Because there's a misconception about that because people had never been exposed to them.  And so there's nothing like getting practical experience.  And this was across the country because not only was I in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I was in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I was in Houston [Texas], I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And so it gave me a, a, purview for a comfort level in dealing with executives in wide range of, wide range of areas and across the country.  And so that was an excellent experience for me to, to get some experience, but also I think build some relationships that I think would, would pay off for me, me later on.  It taught me about how important core values are.  Important, how important it was that to be viewed as a person of integrity, a person that, that could be trusted.  A person who's gonna do what he said he was gonna do, and do it every time, and build good, solid relationships.  So the background I had in Clinton, Missouri being exposed to a broader community, and the comfort level I had with that and understanding and knowing that they are after the same things that I was after and that was a better quality of life.  If I could bring value regardless of what color I was, guess what?  There is a common ground there and goals that we both have that, that could be met and achieved if we worked together.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, now what, what were the years that you worked for Missouri Pacific Railroad [Missouri Pacific Railroad Company]?
Speaker 1: From like seventy-what, '75 [1975], '76 [1976], '77 [1977] or something like that.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you were at the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] first, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that, that starts in '73 [1973] I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, no, no.  It's actually '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], okay.  So you went for a while before you found a decent job.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So Boy Scouts '74 [1974], and you were, you were with them how many years, what do you think?
Speaker 1: About three years.
Speaker 2: About three.  Okay, so about '77 [1977] then Missouri Pacific Railroad, okay.  And--
Speaker 1: No, I was, I was with Missouri Pacific Railroad for, for three years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Boy Scouts '74 [1974] to--
Speaker 1: About a year, about a year, year and a half, something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so '75 [1975] then for Missouri Pacific.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then '78 [1978] went to work for Federal Express [FedEx].
Speaker 2: Okay, Federal Express.
Story_ID: 466480
Speaker 1: Now well tell us about meeting your wife?  That's a, you know--we, we, touched on it, but you didn't, you didn't tell us how you met--
Speaker 2: I, I met my wife in 1974 I think, '74 [1974] or '75 [1975], '75 [1975] because we, we went together for about a year and a few months before we got married in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.
Speaker 1: Her name is Thelma [Thelma Steward], right?
Speaker 2: Thelma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thelma.  And we actually met through a mutual friend.  This mutual friend knew me, but and she knew Thelma.  And she, she--in fact we spent some time with her just about three, four weeks ago, just reminiscing about it.  And she--Thelma was at her apartment and she was not going out that night.  She said she was not going.  She's not going, she's not--and I used to run around with guys from Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri].  We used to play basketball together and pickup games and that kind of thing when I came to St. Louis [Missouri].  And they used to have a--some parties at the various clubhouses in the St. Louis area.  And this particular clubhouse was on the north side of St. Louis.  And we were gonna have a party and a gathering and the friends invited other people and so forth as well.  And probably only maybe, maybe one hundred of us at, at, at--and I used to go to these events.  And so our mutual friend, Shirley Agner [ph.] is her name, she was gonna introduce us.  And so she dragged my wife out of her apartment, kicking and screaming, to go to this event.  She said she wasn't gonna leave her apartment until, until she went to this event with her.  So as a result of that, we met at this, this private, private party.  And I very first saw her from across the room, and I haven't looked back.  And we, we enjoyed ourselves together.  I, I asked her to dance and, and we danced together and, and I was talking with her at the same time.  She said, "Can you wait and talk to me after--." I said, "You can't dance and talk at the same time?"  And she remembers that to this day.  And so we, we finished dancing, I stopped talking and we finished dancing.  We sat down and talked the rest of the evening.  And so she wouldn't give me her number, but she gave me the number of her mother.  No, no, I had to give her my number and she would call me.  And so she called and she gave me her mother's number then, she didn't give me her actual number.  And we began to--we had our very first date probably a week or so later.  And we have been together now for, for thirty-one years.  Actually our thirtieth wedding anniversary was this past May.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's a good story.  And you've talked about your two children sort of, you know before we, you know--
Speaker 2: Our children are David [David Steward, II] and Kimberly [Kimberly Steward].  And my son is twenty-nine years old and my, my, my daughter is twenty-five years old and my, my daughter just recently got married as you can see up there.  She was newly married in February of, of this year.  And so here 2006 and so she's doing well.  Her and her new husband, he's a, he's a, a, a professional sales executive for Enterprise Leasing [Enterprise Leasing Company, LLC].  And my, my son is a, is in Los Angeles [California], producer for--has a partnership with, or has a, a contract with Good News Holdings out in Los Angeles to produce five films.
Story_ID: 466481
Speaker 1: Now tell us about Federal Express [FedEx].  Now how, how did you manage, or what happened to move you from Missouri Pacific [Missouri Pacific Railroad Company] to Federal Express?
Speaker 2: Federal Express was probably one of the--Federal Express was an interesting experience because Fred Smith [Frederick W. Smith] was an innovator.  He was one that had--using this aircraft to move to the hub and spoke concept that he had that he had written about at, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and got a C on.  It goes to show you how much, how much they knew about, about this concept that he had to now be a, what $30, $35 billion corporation.  But I went there at a very good time that the company was entrepreneurial, was innovative.  It was a company that--it was open to new ideas.  I was a sales guy and so I could then have an opportunity to meet a wide range of, of, of people in transportation again, to be exposed and do some, do some innovative things with clients.  Be of expose, be exposed at the executive level and across, across the spectrum and industries as well.  So I got exposed to a lot in that regard.  And so it gave me a comfort level and confidence level and using creative ideas to, to promote the, the package service that we were providing.  And so it was a good experience for me.  I think it paved the way for me to be an entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 466482
Speaker 1: Federal Express [FedEx], now this, this was a good experience for you.
Speaker 2: It was a great experience for me because it exposed me to, to people who were innovative, people who were creative, people who were entrepreneurial, still entrepreneurial.  Still finding, finding a way and finding new ways.  They promoted new ideas being incorporated.  In fact one client--I came up with a very interesting distribution kind of concept to, to work with the, the mail service.  And from what I hear, that was adopted and is being used to this day in their package service for, for various clients.  So I'm proud to feel like I had been a part of putting my thumb print into, into the company.  I was--I entered into the--was entered into the sales hall of fame back in 1981.  And considered one of the best sales guy that they had in the, in the country, for, for those kind of innovative ideas and approaches.  And in fact I was awarded this in front of all the, the sales guy I remember.  And I was, I was--Pete Wellmont [ph.] who was president at the time and Fred Smith [Frederick W. Smith] who was the founder and, and chairman and CEO at the time, presented me with this award in front of the sales event.  And I was excited to be there and to be a part of it and the whole bit.  And they presented me with the, the ice bucket with a--with my initials on it.  And I, I remember getting my pictures taken with the guys and, and, and looking up at them as well.  And I looked in the bottom of the, the ice bucket and there was nothing inside there.  That was significant for me 'cause that meant I, you know I got this award and we did well.  And we were successful in providing innovation and, and getting more revenue for the company than ever before.  But it meant no more than just this, this, this ice bucket, which was, was very nice, very nice.  I mean it was exciting to, to receive that.  But I wanted more than that.  And I looked on the inside, the emptiness said there was nothing more than that.  And I always have looked beyond the circumstances.  And looked at taking that experience and using that experience as a, as a stepping stone for, for running and having my own business at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were, you were there from, from what years to--
Speaker 2: To '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, from '78 [1978] to '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 466483
Speaker 1: Well what happened in '84 [1984] to--
Speaker 2: I decided that in 1983 actually I decided I was gonna look for a company that I could, I could buy.  I didn't know how I was gonna do that.  So I had--at some point I had--I knew a guy in Kansas City [Missouri] that owned a unique company.  I had worked with him before and, and, and done a couple of things for him and acted as a consultant for him and so forth as well.  And he was looking at sixty-four years old he was looking to get out of that business.  And had no one to turn it over to or to sell it to.  There was some people he had that he didn't have a whole lot of confidence that, that to sell directly to them.  But I convinced him to sell me that business.  I didn't have any money.  I had two children [Kimberly Steward and David Steward, II], a mortgage and a wife [Thelma Steward] and I didn't have any money to, to, to buy a business.  But I always believed that there's a will, there's a way.  And if you have faith, you can--all things are possible.  And so as a result of that, I arranged it in such a way I gave, I gave him a promise that I would pay him.  So he again--convinced him to sell me the business, he sold me the business for nothing down.  He sold me the business.  I leveraged his assets, gave him a down payment, and, and paid him over the course of one year to pay him for that business.  So I created a cash flow as well, and continued that cash flow and kept the same staff in place.  Gave a piece of that, that business also to the guy who was leading that group as well.  He was living in St. Joseph, Missouri and the business was in St. Joseph, Missouri.  And so, and so in 1984 I now had a company [Transportation Business Specialists, St. Joseph, Missouri], I had left Federal Express [FedEx].  And that was in the audit business.  We were analyzing and auditing freight invoices for overcharges.  So various carriers I had worked for, we were now filing overcharge claims against them to get monies back for our clientele base.  So I was able to get Pfizer chemical company [Pfizer Inc.], Campbell Soup [Campbell Soup Company], Abbott Laboratories, Cargill [Cargill, Inc.], ADM [Archer Daniels Midland Company], some of the biggest coroporate- General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC], Ford [Ford Motor Company], we did this with especially General Motors was a big client of ours.  Because one of the things I could do was build relationships and sell value, sell a service.  And I really believed in what we were doing and so forth, and so from 1984--during that period, a three year, three year stretch, we then had put in a, a, a full brokerage operation as well.  We were moving--
Story_ID: 466484
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of the business?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Transportation Business Specialists.
Speaker 1: Transportation Business--
Speaker 2: Transportation Business Specialists out of St. Joseph, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so what we were doing actually, we were--began to see that there were certain movements of product from certain markets to other markets, and we saw there was a number of private and commercial fleets out in the marketplace on tank truck movement, boat product movements that we could take a look at, analyzing and finding ways to get those tank trucks back home with full loads and revenue opposed to going back home empty.  These private and commercial fleets.  So we set up a full brokerage operation so moving tank trucks and we were ICC [Interstate Commerce Commission] licensed property broker that was surety bonded, which had never been done before.  We, we were moving linseed oil, cottonseed oil, liquid animal feed from markets in Chicago [Illinois], for example, into, to Arkansas to feed chickens.  We moved orange juice and a wide range of liquid bulk products with these tank truck carriers which had--which we were one of, one of only two in the country doing that.  In 1987 with my railroad experience [at Missouri Pacific Railroad Company], I thought I'd sit down and visit with the railroads because as much as we were finding overcharge, we were finding a ton of undercharges.  But there was nothing we could do to represent our clients, but we eventually wanted to represent the, the railroad.  So as a result of that, in 1987 I sat down and visited with the railroads about doing an undercharge audit.  Goes to show you the relationships you build, the reputation that you build where you've been employed or where you had--or have your own business, is vitally important to your ability to be able to, to reconnect with those, those relationships with integrity.  As a result of that, I talked to the executive management team at the Union Pacific Railroad Company, one of the largest Class I railroads in the country, and they said okay.  I was pretty good--that sounds like a good idea.  Why don't we do that?  Never been done here before, never exposed ourselves to that before.  And so as a result of that, I started this company to do undercharge audits on behalf of the railroads.  So here I have a major Class I railroad that's gonna give me $15 billion of information over a three year period so I could do a, an audit.  So how am I gonna do an audit of that much information?  It'd have to come over in truckloads in order to manage that in an office environment.  So in 1987 we built one of the largest LAN [local area network] systems here in the mid, Midwest.  We hung 8088 machines.  I don't know if you remember the 8088 machines.  Okay the 8088 machines, 286, 386, 486, 586 in the Pentium series [Intel Pentium].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: We, we had a--our file server was 660 megabytes.  We had a gateway tied to the railroads themselves to pull the information over to us.  We had a, a converter-box to take the ASCII [American Standard Code for Information Interchange] file and dump it down to our, our LAN system.  We took Clipper C++ and a software application that allowed us to be able to, to, to put an application in place that could allow us to be able to do the, the, the audit thirty-five to forty times faster than railroads could do it themselves and feed the information back to them so they can balance due to their clients.  So we were using internet, intranet and extranet applications when we didn't know what it was in 1987.
Story_ID: 466485
Speaker 1: Now what's the difference in these, the intranet--I mean internet, intranet and extranet?
Speaker 2: Internet is, is an interaction between us and our, and our customers, okay.  Intranet is internal applications that we're using and sharing information with one another.
Speaker 1: And extranet, you mentioned that.
Speaker 2: Is, is a specific design specific for, for, for clientele that you're interacting with.  Only for that clientele.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: So internet, internet is, is any clientele.  Extranet is a specific application for a relationship--how you're interacting with, with that particular clientele or individual.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was the largest LAN system in the Midwest?
Speaker 2: Here in the Midwest at the time.  Yeah we had almost fifty nodes.
Speaker 1: And LAN is spelled L-A-N, right?  LAN system, okay.
Speaker 2: Local area network.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so this was 1987.  This wouldn't have been possible just a year prior to that.  So as God would have it, you know, this happened at a perfect time.  So gosh, we've been in technology--are we in the audit business [at Transportation Business Specialists, St. Joseph, Missouri]?  We're using technology to change the way in how people are doing their business.
Story_ID: 466486
Speaker 1: I wanted to be a part of the revolution and the change and be able to use technology to help change the way in how people were doing their business.  And evolved out of that is this company 1990 called World Wide Technology [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri].  So in 1990 with about $250,000 we opened up an office, 12,000 square feet, and four people, five people.  And we called this company World Wide Technology.  To provide technology to the commercial marketplace.  Our very first client was the--it's now AT&T [AT&T Inc.].  Then it was called the Southwestern Bell [Southwestern Bell Telephone Company; SBC Communications Inc.].  And they gave us our first opportunity to provide technology to their organization.
Speaker 2: Okay, now did you have to do something special to get this account, or did you--
Speaker 1: It was all about relationships.  I mean you know I had established some relationships with South, Southwestern Bell and they were interested in doing business with, with, with persons of color.  But persons that they have done bus- you know have a, have a track record with.  And so with, with very little resource, I was able to convince them that we had the, the wherewithal and the ability to be able provide them some low cost technology that they needed.  In fact the first things that we were providing them were, were--I remember to this day, Hayes modems [Hayes Microcomputer Products] is what they needed then.  We were also providing HP printers [Hewlett-Packard Company] to them as well, which were the first kind of technology that we were providing in the marketplace.  So to this day we're doing business with SBC, now AT&T and we're proud to have that relationship.  I relate that story a lot, that they were interested enough and that--to, to take a chance on a newly formed company called World Wide.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I mean just from--I forgot our timeline here of the company, I mean the growth is just unbelievable, you know.  I mean the next year you were doing like $3, over $3.5 million in sales, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.  But you know when you think about the kind of relationships you already established and you, you, you go back and, and reconnect with those relationships.  And if you were successful with them in the past, it's easy to go back to, to someone that you've been successful with, and them promote you or them have the confidence that you're gonna do what you say you're gonna do with--even in another area for that matter.  It's all about doing what you say you're gonna do, but also people do business with people they like and they trust.
Speaker 2: Okay, now you founded the business with Jim Kavanaugh, right?  Who, who is Jim Kavanaugh?
Speaker 1: Jim was a, a--we were introduced by a mutual friend in 1980--in 1989.  And, and it was, it was him and, and the other person who is still with us here today, is Julene Tojo as well.  So yeah, he started the business with me and he, he's still with us to this day.  And he is now the, the CEO of World Wide.
Story_ID: 466487
Speaker 1: Now in 1993 you hit a crisis from my understanding.  You had a, a financial crisis going on.  What happened?  I mean things seemed to have gotten out of--
Speaker 2: Well I think, I think first of all I don't think we had good financial--we didn't have good financial systems in place.  We had people in the organization [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] who started with us as well early on, that let's say directed some money in some areas that they shouldn't have.  And to their benefit.  And which spoke to a whole lot of core issues that, that we had in the--and challenges we had in the business because we didn't track that and didn't find that there was a problem until--'til later on.  Those persons were, were, were eliminated out of the business, or at least are no longer--were no longer with us.  And as a result of that, we learned from the experience.
Speaker 1: Now it got pretty bad.  I heard that they came and repossessed your car right out of the lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they repossessed my car because ultimately I was responsible.  I was, you know I owned the majority of the shares of the stock and, and ultimately I'm responsible to ensure that you know the, the banks are secure and the creditors that we have get what they need, and our customers, suppliers are, are, are supported just telling--doing what I said I was gonna do.  And so you get, you get your priorities.  Your priorities is to assure that everybody gets paid, and you do what you say you're gonna in payments to them.  But also payroll is met on a regular basis.  The benefits they, they need as well for their families.  And the last thing that I needed was to, to have a, have a car.  And so when you don't pay, I found out later that they'll come and pick it up.  But, yeah I was looking out, one day out of my window and, and there a tow truck man is picking up my car.  And--but that wasn't as important as our ability to be able to make our payroll, our ability to be able to, to, to--the future opportunities that we had as well.  We had (unclear).  We were doing millions of dollars in business, but there all of a sudden was, was--it's a $5 million, I mean $500,000 is taken out of the business, you know, and your, your accounting systems are in shambles.  And the lack of, of confidence and trust of the bank is diminished.  And they're trying to, to shut you down as well, as well as suppliers.  Well it puts you in a very, very difficult position to kind of reestablish the fact that you're a credible, trustworthy person that is prepared to, to protect his integrity and his reputation with everything.  And I think we proved that over time.  Had tough times doing it.  Gritted our teeth.  Obviously many times that I did not have an opportunity to get paid, or at least to receive a payroll.  But at the same time I think it showed internally the people who stayed with our organization, and those outside our organization, that I was committed to, to what's in the best interest of this business first.  And their welfare and their families' welfare and, and making sure that we, we followed through on what we said that we were gonna do.
Story_ID: 466488
Speaker 1: I don't know if I'm asking this question properly, but when--the contracts you were getting, were they--did they require a lot of expense?  I mean was the profit, the profit margin was very small, or--
Speaker 2: Profit margins were--at the time they were, they were pretty doggone good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: However, we didn't have a--we didn't have enough of 'em.  We were trying to grow a business [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] at the same time you know, putting new technology in place.  We were putting the facilities in place.  We were, you know, making sure that our people were well paid 'cause we had to compete to get some of the best talent in here as well, you know, that had knowledge in the space.  From engineers to, to sales engineers to, to people knowledgeable in the technological space.  People knowledgeable in, in developing knowledge in the, the spaces that we're in, telecommunications being one of them,  space that we're involved in also was federal government, and also the general commercial space.  And around technologies that most people weren't that familiar with.  And as you well know and you may or may not know in the government space is a whole, unique nuance all by itself.  I mean understanding the contracting process, understanding the, the--how the pro- various programs work and how to utilize those in ways (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you explain 8(a) certification [8(a) Business Development Program]?  I think that's necessary for government--
Speaker 2: 8(a) was a, was a government set aside program for small disadvantaged businesses that allowed you to be able to, to put in the contracting mechanism that allowed you to be able to do business with the federal government.  It was kind of an entry point and a, and a learning process that they put in place to--so you could get--set aside opportunities up to $3 million to do business with our federal government.  And it worked well if you used it in a way that segued you in or bridged you to, to getting the larger government-wide contracts.  Or putting GSA Schedules [Federal Supply Schedule] in place, or, or other options once you learned how, how to do that.  And build relationships at the same time.  'Cause it's a whole different and unique culture that, that, that's there in our federal government that's very, very difficult to break into and understand.
Story_ID: 466489
Speaker 1: I've read also that customer satisfaction was something that you started to focus on at this--after this crisis [at World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  Putting gov- putting the customer first has always been a part of our culture and part of who we are and, and because we, we always believe that the best salesmen out there is the customer saying good things about us in the marketplace.  And giving us more business.  If you're doing a good job, that means that you know, and, and doing better, the above and beyond job that means that customer is always gonna come back to you and have confidence that they could--you're gonna do what you say you're gonna do.  But you're gonna go above and beyond that to invest in their, their, their business and their business proposition and what's in their best interest long term.  So as a result of that, they--we used them as reference points as well for other clients.  And so they become your best salesmen out in the marketplace as a result.  So it also says on every payroll check here it says, "A satisfied customer made this check possible."  We truly believe that, that the customer is the boss.  He's the one who, who, who knows what he wants and knows what brings value to his business and we try to be very attentive to, to his needs and, and listen to what his needs are to, to bring solutions and applications and opportunities that, that make good sense to improve his, his, his business proposition to his clients and the relationships he has.
Story_ID: 466490
Speaker 1: What were some of the legal issues attended to growth as a business?
Speaker 2: Well one of the biggest issues I think that a lot of our--a lot of businessmen ignore is the whole estate planning piece.  I mean if, if you don't properly shape that and put that in place and, and or, or business continuation, insurances and so forth, or, or, or session planning is a, is a part of that as well.  That, that regardless of whether you are alive or not, that this business has, a process of how it transitions the business to, business to other and still--because people have been trusted, customers are being trusted, suppliers are being trusted, customer--the, the employees are being trusted.  You know their, their lives and their families into, to the viability of this business long term.  You know so we've taken a lot of time and continue to, to evolve the estate planning piece, the session planning piece, and insurances to ensure the long term viability of this business [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri].
Story_ID: 466491
Speaker 1: How does being global affect your business [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri]?  I mean how does the global marketplace now affect what you do?
Speaker 2: Well I mean it, it's that much more opportunity because companies are looking to be supported globally.  They want the like practices and like processes and the like technology globally opposed to, to in the, in the local marketplace or nationally.  And there are many open--new opportunities for those companies and we wanna make sure that we're there supporting their business model of wherever in the world it is.  And so--and this technology allows us to be able to do that in, in favorable ways that still brings the same kind of supply chain efficiencies and visibility and, and cost savings that they realize here in the U.S.
Story_ID: 466492
Speaker 1: Is there a benchmark?  When the company [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] just turned the corner and you knew it was--you were--I know you had confidence all along, but is there, like a certain benchmark?  I know '93 [1993] was a down period, but what was the--was there a period of time when you say well we've got it made now (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean you--I always wanna be a little bit paranoid all the time.  I think that that's healthy, and that--and the other thing too is that I don't want any of this company to be ever complacent or standing still.  Because if you're standing still, you're moving backwards 'cause everybody else is moving forward.  We always are looking to finding ways of being creative and innovative and improving the, the, the business proposition between us and our, our, our business partners, but also improving the value proposition for our customers.  Because we're always, always trying to go above and beyond our customers' expectations to bring even more value for the long term relationship.  And so we've been with--the companies that we do business with, we do business with--we're hoping for a lifetime.  We have, we have lost very few clients ever over the last sixteen years that we've been in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you've expanded to--you have other offices other than St.--the one in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have some twenty-seven, twenty-eight offices across the country.  From, from, from Alaska to--we're in San Diego [California], to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], to, to San Francisco [California] and Livermore [California].  I mean to Los Angeles, I mean not in Los Angeles, but Phoenix, Arizona, to Nashville [Tennessee], to Austin [Texas], to, to San Antonio [Texas], to Dallas [Texas].  I can name 'em all, but I will have a tough time.  But we're, we're from the East Coast to the West Coast, we're from Washington, D.C. area down to Florida.  And we also have off--some sales people in Europe, and we also have some sales people in the Far East as well.
Story_ID: 466493
Speaker 1: I'll just say this that I guess 2003, 2003 you cracked the billion dollars in sales figure, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was 2003 was the year that we broke through.  This year, 2006, we, we'll break through $2 billion, or 2., we're probably around $2.2 billion probably will be the--near the number that we will do in 2006.  And so it's an exciting time here.  I mean we, we have forged some unique relationships business-wise for the--some of the largest technology companies in the world.  And are bringing a value to, to, to those partnership relationships which allow us to be able to put in some of the most sophisticated systems in the world for some of the biggest corporations in the world and our federal government and telecommunications companies.  So the companies like Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.] and HP [Hewlett-Packard Company] and companies like Dell [Dell Inc.] and, and those companies are significant players in the, in the marketplace.  When you, when you take a look at the stuff we've done with Hitachi [Hitachi, Ltd.] to EMC [EMC Corporation; Dell EMC], to--in the storage area, we, we're becoming--and Sun Microsystems [Sun Microsystems, Inc.] has been a huge player of ours in the marketplace for, for a number of years.  Look at telecommunications, and you take a look at the stuff that we're doing with, with Fujitsu [Fujitsu Ltd.] and Tellabs [Tellabs Inc.] and (unclear) with, with Lucid [Lucid Inc.] now.  And how we have integrated ourselves into their platform and able to deliver those products and services to the incumbent local exchange carriers in the, in the marketplace.  And the things what we're doing in the wireless area with, with companies like Cingular [Cingular Wireless; AT&T Mobility LLC] are, are pretty significant.  So--and they continue to grow with us as well.  Take one particular area that we have concentrated a lot of time on, that's on the networking side of our business.  The things that we've done to augment--to our services side with engineers and sales engineers to, to CCIE's [Cisco Certified Internetwork Expert] to the five hundred certifications that we have with Cisco which is the, the Cadillac network platform in the industry.  We're the number one Cisco partner in the federal space.  We're number two in the country.  That says a lot about the relationship that we have, but also a lot about the investment that we've made into one another to make us better together versus us being apart in the spaces that World Wide [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] is in.
Story_ID: 466494
Speaker 1: We're considered a, you know a, a--the premier systems integrator in the country, from, from voice over IP [Voice over Internet Protocol], to telepresence that we're doing, the stuff we're doing with Wi-Fi, the stuff that we're doing within security.  The stuff we're doing in optical are unique and different than anybody in the space.  It has allowed us to be able to bring those technologies to the spaces that we're in, to take their technology and their backbone to, to a whole other level, which is exciting to see.  In addition to that, our--how we've integrated ourselves and those partners I think are unique as well.  How we do our transactions electronically.  How we are managing the supply chain in delivering those products and, and services and integration services to our clientele.  The way we're implementing those applications and so forth.  We can manage the whole supply chain, which brings down costs, which brings visibility and efficiency.  I think has allowed them to be even more excited about the ease and the way that we do business with, not only our partner, but also with the clients that we're doing business with.  And so we put--invested over $30 million just in back office systems this past year with our inter- Oracle Enterprise [Oracle Enterprise Manager] resource planning system, a whole business system that cuts across all--every aspect of our business.  We--ten year ago we were, we were smart enough to, to have implemented that system and had cuts across every aspect of our business now with a (unclear).  And then now to upgrade that and having taken two hundred people out of our organization [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] to implement that system this year and we cut over July the, the, July the 4th, which will take us to the next level, is exciting to see happen.  It allows us to be able to scale our business and grow our business efficiently where our expense level won't be the same as it would be if we had then.  So we haven't fully used the, the breadth of the applications that we have, have implemented, but very few companies can say that they have implemented Oracle 11i in their environment to bring the kind of efficiencies for the future of their business that we have.  And so we're looking forward to the future.  We think we, we talk like and we act like and we walk like and we like a company that's much, much bigger than, than we are.  And I think people see that, that advantage and that innovation and still that entrepreneurial spirit that I think is incorporated in the culture of this organization, that is exciting for them to want to partner and work with us in the future as well.
Story_ID: 466495
Speaker 1: If I understand what you were saying here, that the pattern of growth I guess for your business is to cut back sometimes on employees develop as, as technology is, is upgraded.  And then, then there are more opportunities for more I guess people to work and then it's kind of a cyclical pattern (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.  We, we (unclear) some technology that's allowed us to be able to, to lower our costs, increase efficiency for--not only for ourselves, for, for our clientele as well.  And do good business electronically.  There's a lot of room for human error.  But if you right--put the right technology and the business processes in place, you put yourself in a position now to, to be much more exclusive with, with, with suppliers and, and with customers than you ever have.  If you can, if you can continue to, to innovate and with your business processes and technology, to, to bring that much more efficiency and evolve that, that relationship, it makes it very difficult for anybody else to compete with you as well.  We have spent an awful lot of, of money and time, and we can do that because we have the flexibility to do that.  We're a privately held company, which is opposed to public.  So we are not as scrutinized on the quarterly, quarterly reports and analysts or, or SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] and all the other things that are out there that would have us distracted.  We can do what's in the best--long term best interest of this business and our clientele and invest accordingly, which I think is--brings a lot more flexibility and our ability to be competitive, toe-to-toe with those companies who aren't in a much better position I think for the long term future of the business.  So I see this company as a $10, $15, $20 billion company down the road.  We have nothing standing in our way to do that.  We're gonna continue to not only invest in the technology, but we feel that our most important asset actually is our people.  Our people coming with the skill set, having the skill sets and the ability and be trained and, and be entrepreneurial and innovative in their approaches in solving business problems.  And if clients are satisfied and we have gone above and beyond, there's no doubt that he's gonna continue to do business with us for the long term.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who--give me a profile of who you were--who you'd be looking for typically in terms of an employee.  I think young people are in school now.  They may think like what, you know, what would I have to--what are they looking for at World Wide Technology [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri]?  What do they want me to be when I come, you know, knocking on the door?
Speaker 2: One of the things I think is important is that, that you understand the, the importance of communications.  Being able to interact with one another.  The importance of working together as a team.  The importance of our core values.  If you walk through World Wide Technology, we talk about core values all the, all the time, about attitude, about, about integrity, about trust, about loyalty, about commitment, about teamwork, about, you know, all those things and about diverse ideas being incorporated into our organizations and important for the fabric of our company to be able to, to come up with the kind of ideas and kind of interaction amongst our team to make our team strong and viable to compete in, in the, in the global marketplace.  So, so, so basic core values I talk about, and, and are an essential piece of even our evaluation of employees here.  And coming with that kind of reputation is an essential platform and foundation.  Education, college degree; science and engineering are important, but business is as well.  I mean we have--and sales and marketing backgrounds and so forth are important.  But we have a lot of people who have computer science backgrounds, but, but also people who maybe not have that kind of background, but, but are very analytical and have the ability to be able to think outside the box and come up with new and better ideas and are, are, are important too.  There's a, a huge youth movement here, but we also like the, the value of experience coming from, from other, other environments that where you're doing business with our, our, our federal government is, is important to us.  And so having sometimes that experience in that space is important.  So there are a wide range of experiences I think that we're open to.  But one of the undergirding things I think is important and essential I think as we look at employees, are employees that, that can, can adhere to and believe in these core values that we have set in place we think sets as the undergirding of our business.
Story_ID: 466496
Speaker 1: Now you got started in the early '90s [1990s].  This was during--this was like the tail end of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration, beginning of the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration I guess, right.  Did, did, did--from what you said I don't know if it does or not, but did it have anything to do with the business environment, you know, when you started [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I think it does have a lot to do with the business environment.  I think the, the business environment of the, of Bush when he won was one that was really promoting business and it was really one that promoted minority business at the time as well.  You know the 8(a) program [8(a) Business Development Program] was viable and well and many were, were using that as a way to be able to learn about federal business and how you do business with federal business.  And that was the time that I was certified and, and became a part of the, the, the 8(a) program as well.  And he was--him and his administration were, were very supportive of, of our here being in the Midwest using the 8(a) vehicle, and in the technology arena, providing those kinds of services for, for our federal government.  And we primarily were started on the, on the DOD [U.S. Department of Defense] side.  And so yeah, political climates.  But you know if you are interested in being in business, you're interested in being business, it doesn't make, make any difference what political environment that you're in.  You're gonna find a way to get it done.  Over, around or under or whatever it takes for you to, to, to work within that environment, be adaptable to that environment that you can reach your goals with the companies that you're trying to do business within the federal space or other spaces that you're trying to, to focus on.  If, if it had of been for that, well maybe I would have focused more on, on state and local.  Maybe I would focused on maybe, maybe the commercial market space, or the telecom [telecommunications] market space more if that hadn't of been a part of my portfolio initially.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I think like 50 percent of, of your business at--I read, I don't know if it's still there, but 50 percent was from, was government.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was federal.
Speaker 2: Well it was at one point, yeah.  It was at one point.  Today it's about 25 percent of our business.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We'll probably do this year--we'll do probably $2.2 billion and about maybe $500 million is, is federal government.  And then we have some state and local business that we do as well from Arizona, Missouri, to Alaska, to, you know some other states that we have some state contracts as well.
Speaker 1: So I take it you're, you're happier with more diversity.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  I think it's healthy for us.  As, as you well know our, our way.  But we have expanded.  (Laughter) Funny as this may sound, we have expanded our clientele because we were primarily concentrated heavily on DOD.  Now we're heavily also have a diverse--broader, more diverse portfolio in the civilian agencies as well.  From, from IRS [Internal Revenue Service], Treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury] to U.S., USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture], to, to USAID [United States Agency for International Development] to, to you name it.  The Center for Disease Control [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], you, you name it.  We've been expanding in the much broader than just DOD.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's more government business now than it was, but there's more of everything.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: So it makes--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  So you know in our segments, for example, whether it's commercial, whether it's the federal government or just state and local, whether it's stuff that we're doing in the telecom area, if you take a look at it, we are, we are--if one sector is, is, is not having a good year, you know, the other sectors usually are, are doing better which has allowed us to be able to continue to grow in every sector of our business for, for the last number of years.  And so when you look at our numbers, they're a compilation of a lot of things going on, lot of cylinders running pretty well at this particular point and I think you're going to continue to see that in the future.
Story_ID: 466497
Speaker 1: The history of your company [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] is filled with partnership awards from Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company] and Cisco Systems [Cisco Systems, Inc.] and lots.  But in, in 2004, you wrote a book ['Doing Business by the Good Book: 52 Lessons on Success Straight from the Bible,' David L. Steward with Robert L. Shook] and that's a--can you tell us about your book and the publication of your book and what it's about and--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah I'll be happy to do that because I'm excited about talking about that.  But I, I do have to take a step back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very quickly and talk a little bit about, about when you talk about the partnership awards.  That, those partnership awards I think significantly speak to our, our investment in our partnership relationships.  That we invest into the technology that we talk about.  We put that--even incorporate it into our environment that we have here.  When you talk about the relationship with Cisco.  Well we have the Cisco environment here.  When you talk about HP, we have HP servers and, and systems and so forth here.  When you talk about Dell [Dell Inc.], we're using Dell systems and so forth in our environment as well.  And Sun [Sun Microsystems, Inc.], Sun, some of the Sun stuff we have in our environment, EMC [EMC Corporation; Dell EMC], some of the others.  We have incorporated that technology in our environment here and so we're walking the talk, and we're using the technology we talk about in our environment.  But also we have invested in the engineering talent, the expertise, and the, the knowledge base and in training and developing our talent here around those product sets that allow us to be the best at, at, at knowing that technology and how to incorporate that into the, the working environment in America.  To, to bring more value to them, us going in with them versus them going in without us.  And I think that put us in a position to be as I talked about earlier, one of the leading systems integrators in the country.  And when you take a look at particularly relationships that we have with Cisco Systems, and the positioning I was telling you that we've evolved to, I think it speaks to that.  So there is a return on investment.  And we continue to invest in the relationship with Cisco for example, as being one of the core technologies that we, want to invest in for the future viability of this business, and for the future of their business as well.  So we're--as the (unclear) talks about at 30, 60, 100 fold, you do reap what you sow, and that you would know them by their fruit.  Well I think you're beginning to see an evolution of you knowing us by our fruit of the success that we're having with partners like a Cisco.
Story_ID: 466498
Speaker 1: As I look at--for the future and I'm thinking about, you know we were talking about core values earlier and we were talking about the new book that I have out, have out for the last couple of years, 'Doing Business by the Good Book' ['Doing Business by the Good Book: 52 Lessons on Success Straight from the Bible,' David L. Steward with Robert L. Shook].  It talks about principles.  And the reference point that I only know and I've only known from a boy has been reference points I, I've known from the word of God itself.  When you take a look at--and it's really all about, it's really all about serving, serving others and as I've hoped--as I've talked a lot about.  It hasn't been about not, not Dave Steward [HistoryMaker David Steward, Sr.], not about World Wide [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri], it's about, it's about how do we serve people better.  And Jesus was a perfect example in my mind of, of how to serve.  And when you talk about examples for my life or, or someone to, to look to as an example, or, or, or, or what does Jesus say or, or what does the word of God say about, about these principles, that's always been a reference point.  So I wanted to say, I wanted to share a number of passages from the Bible and how, how that related to the way I live my life, the business practices that we have, how the personal experiences I've had as well, and how they, they played out and have played in my life because I think they're essential to pass on to the next generation.  I spent two years with my wife [Thelma Steward] and Bob Shook [Robert L. Shook] to, to incorporate all those into a, a, a, a book that we can share with other business people and not frighten, and not, not concerned about, you know, what people might say because I think business has lost some of these, these basic principles that have been the undergirding of our, our, our, our economy and our relationships in business, and relationships with other, other--regardless of whether it's business or not.
Story_ID: 466499
Speaker 1: Something very significant happened to me several, several years ago.  I was, (unclear), I was going and this company was going from the NASDAQ to the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York].  And so I sat on the board and so here we are on the perch of the New York Stock Exchange.  We're gonna push the button and ring the bell for the--to open the New York Stock Exchange.  This company all of a sudden, so the CEO--everybody's up there and our wives and us and we're up there and in eager anticipation of what was gonna happen, you know and, and the people were looking up at us and they were excited and ready to get the, get started for the day.  And the CEO pushed the button, the bell goes off and people start doing transactions with one another.  They started gesturing to one another.  They started yelling back and forth with one another, and they started, you know, interacting with one another.  I found out something very significant that day, that, that people do business with people they like and they trust.  They trust and they, and they did what they said they were gonna do.  They gave their word.  And that was how the basis of how they did their business.  And I found out something else significant that day from the, the executives who were there from the New York Stock Exchange.  They do $13 trillion a year that way.  Those are basic biblical principles about trust, you know, and, and so our principles of serving, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and all of its righteousness and everything will be added unto you.  Seek first to serve" [Matthew 6:33].  Put someone else interest ahead of your own.  Faith is important.  "Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, the belief in the unseen, belief beyond your circumstances," you know.  And not allowing somebody's opinion to be your reality.  So do I think of World Wide Technology [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] as a $2 billion company or do I think of it as a $20 billion company?  Well if I thought of it as a $2 billion company, there was no need for us to invest $30 million into a system that takes us to $20 billion, right?  It goes with the principles of reaping and sowing.  You get the 30, 60, 100 fold.  So I'm expect--my expectation is that we're gonna get 30, 60, 100 fold from the investment that we've made.  And that's whether it's an investment of dollars or investment of time and energy and resource, you know, so we believe beyond our circumstances.  So we act, walk, talk and walk like a $20 billion company opposed to the company that we are today.  'Cause we're looking forward to it in eager anticipation.  It says it's impossible to please God without faith, and so that's what we have, a tremendous amount of faith in the, in God that he is gonna provide us the promise and his will that he promised in, in the word of God itself.  So that is his will to us.  The Bible is his will.  And so I want to talk about all those things, all my experiences, and some of my experiences, so I could share that with businesspeople.  Because if you really take a look at what's happened to the fabric of some of these businesses over the years, you have Enron [Enron Corporation], you have Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP], you have WorldCom [MCI Inc.], you have Adelphia [Adelphia Communications Corporation].  You have all these companies you know, having difficulty with, with some basic principles and core values that are--that, that they lost their way.  And people make mistakes.  That was also just kind of a way of life within the culture of the organization as well, just gun slinging.  What can I get?  It's not how, how can I serve?  And then you get twisted at what's right and wrong.  And then you make wrong decisions as opposed to right decisions, you know.  And so we, we wanna make sure we're making right decisions that they are solid for the long term future of this, this business, but the long term future of the companies that, that we work with, we're in partner with as well.  Because only, only that way will we have the ability to be able to, to get to the $20 billion company that we want to be in the future.
Story_ID: 466500
Speaker 1: 'Doing Business by the Good Book' ['Doing Business by the Good Book: 52 Lessons on Success Straight from the Bible,' David L. Steward with Robert L. Shook].  It was a two year labor of love as I talked about before.  Our publisher is Hyperion [Hyperion Books], a division of Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California].  Al Zuckerman was the literary agent on it as well.  The co-author is, is Bob Shook [Robert L. Shook], and I, I think that I'm honoring God by having, having published the book and to share with other businesspeople so it will also bring the kind of prosperity.  The word of God will bring the kind of prosperity it's brought to me.  I think that it is a segue hopefully for people can read the book, that's fine.  But if it segues them to reading the word of God for themselves and seeing His will for their own lives and as they read through it, it's, it's a--I've accomplished a great deal if that's the case.  That's what I'm hopeful for--we've gotten some--a lot of very, very positive responses from people having, having read it and being encouraged by it and being excited about it and, and also people, people being reconnected back to those principles and reconnected to God as a, as a result of it as well.  And so I'm looking forward to continuing to, to, to--and all the proceeds are going to the, the church and to various charities that, that I'm involved in.
Speaker 2: Okay, now I've heard that people from--a couple of the governors in Missouri have come to the lectures about the book and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, people from all walks of life.
Speaker 1: Well many, many, many universities have adopted it as, as a, as a core book for their ethics courses and teaching about ethics and teaching about values and so forth.  And so I'm excited about that and I know that I've had a number of endorsers and a number of governors that you talked about as well, talk about it.  In fact, George Bush 41 [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was the, the--wrote the foreword for the book.  And then we have many politicians as well as businesspeople who were, were endorsed it, some thirty endorsers of, of the book as well.  So it's been a good experience for me to have the opportunity to share values.  As it says the word of God, "To much given, much required."  And so we have been blessed with much and this is the opportunity to share and witness to, to others my, my faith and, and share the word of God with them, and I'm, I'm hopeful that it will work in their lives that it's worked in mine.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now you mentioned church.  What church do you belong to now?
Speaker 1: I belong to--my old church was Union Memorial United Methodist Church [St. Louis, Missouri].  It's kind of where I had been for some twenty-five years.  And the last five years I've been at Salem United Methodist Church [St. Louis, Missouri] in Salem (unclear) United Methodist Church in, in (unclear).
Speaker 2: It's Salem United Methodist?
Speaker 1: It's here in St. Louis, Salem United Methodist Church (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 466501
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your charitable activities and, and what--you know, you serve on a number of boards and just tell us a little bit about what you do.
Speaker 2: Well I think it's important that we--I call give forward.  Because it's hard to give back those people who helped you, but you can give forward to the, the generation to come, to your peers and to, to others moving forward.  And so that's what we've tried to do.  First of all, we tried to give and support and be encouraging to, to my family, my, my children [Kimberly Steward and David Steward, II].  Encouraging, supporting to the family here at World Wide [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] as well.  To, to doing the kinds of things to help the employees have a better quality of life versus us being here versus us not being here, you know.  And for them and their families and, and the future families that they would have--the generations beyond just our generation here.  But also it extends beyond that to our communities that, that we are in, and one of the, the best ways I found to do that is, is the United Way [United Way of Greater St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].  I started in the United Way back in the late '90s [1990s] actually, and getting involved.  There was a lady here, her name was--they came here from Minneapolis [Minnesota], who was running United Way.  First African American female to run the United Way here in St. Louis [Missouri].  Her name was Charmaine Chapman.  And Charmaine Chapman and a number of other African American leaders in this community, Donald Suggs [Donald M. Suggs] who run the, the American [St. Louis American] and a few others, [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith and a few others decided that it was important that the African American can be recognized as givers as well.  And so they started something called the African American Leadership Giving Initiative in 1995 with about $84,000 and maybe only a handful of members.  But they started the--Charmaine--and so they started that society and a few years later they asked me and my wife [Thelma Steward] to run the, the African American Leadership Giving Initiative in 2000 and 2001.  And we've--Charmaine Chapman was adamant about us doing that.  And so I didn't know her very well and she came out to my office and she stayed in my office, and she stayed in my office and she stayed in my office until I agreed to run the Charmaine Chapman Society [Charmaine Chapman Leadership Society] with my wife.  And my wife is very shy and so she didn't wanna get up in front of a microphone and talk to people and that whole bit and encourage people to, to, to give.  Sure she does it in her own way, and so she had me call my wife and get her, and convince her while she was there to do this.  And as a result of that, we did probably one of the most gratifying experiences that we had 2000, 2001, running the Charmaine Chapman Society.  The, the African American Leadership Giving Initiative at the time.  The second year, in 2001, Charmaine Chapman passed on from cancer.  And so we began to name it--(unclear) African American Leadership Giving Initiative is called the Charmaine Chapman Society.  So I remember her to this day and her being the one who really got me engaged in the United Way.  The following year I was involved on the cabinet, but they wanted me to run the, the United Way campaign.  And, and so in 19--they wanted me to do it in 2005--so I still continue to be involved in Charmaine Chapman Society to the other aspects of the United Way.  But in 2005 I, I ran the United Way campaign for the whole community.  And it's a pretty large campaign.  It's--we, we raised $65.5 million to support some two hundred agencies, one million people in this community.  They're being affected by United Way in some way, shape, form or fashion.  So it was a sign to have that kind of responsibility, but at the same time the time and effort and energy to, to visit with the agencies, United Way agencies, to visit with the, the, the, the various CEOs in our community to get them engaged, get them involved.  And put together a cabinet was, was a challenge to say the least.  But we were able to do that in light of Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and Rita [Hurricane Rita] and the mud slides and also the, the tsunami that happened in that year.  And right around the campaign time as well.  And I was the first African American to do that.  Very, very, very excited to have experienced that.  So this year, the following year, 2006, I've been the United Way--chairman of the United Way.  I will be that for 2007, and also 2008.  And so it's been a good experience to, to visibly show African Americans giving forward and investing in the community.  And it all started with conversation we had in my office around the African American Giving Initiative.  In fact, it's the largest African American Giving Initiative in the country now.  The campaign and United Way is the fifth largest in the country.  Bigger than New York City [New York, New York].  And so we're very excited about what people do in this community and I found a very giving, caring community.  And understanding the significance and the responsibility of stewardship for what God has, has so richly blessed us, each and every one of us with.
Story_ID: 466502
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns for the future is our, our youth.  The biggest concentration for me is, is making sure that our youth understand the responsibility they have to, to not only themselves, but, but the responsibility to honor and respect and--those who sacrificed so much for them to have the opportunity and the privilege to be in the position to be educated and privilege to, to have the opportunities (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 466503
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So one of the things that I think was important that we get involved in and continue to get involved in our community.  And it goes much broader than just United Way [United Way of Greater St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].  I think (unclear) and Science Center [Saint Louis Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri] to, to the BJC Hospital, Barnes-Jewish Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri] here which is the largest regional hospital in the area.  Our commitment to, to various causes around even the arts for that matter, it's an education around that for, for our youth is important, important to us.  Our school systems are challenged and we need to do everything we possibly can to undergird that and to make sure that we got the right leadership in place.  And at every level there as well.  We gotta get parents refocused I think on, on parenting again.  African American men engaged, involved in their children's lives.  Not being absentee fathers, not, not investing in their lives with their, with their resource and with their, with their labor and their time and with every, everything possible they can do to make sure that these kids have, have a foundation for their lives moving forward.  And I think the responsibility for raising children are not in the right place.  I think that it takes two parents to raise a child.  And then it takes much more than the two biological parents to raise those children.  It needs fathers and mothers from other parts of the community helping do that.  And so if we don't do it, who, who will?  And so I'm passionate about that.  I think that the, the church needs to be much more incorporated into to their lives, into the school system.  I think prayer not being the school and inviting God out of the schools have left us with the moral deterioration that we have today in the school system will extend, plays out into the, the business community and our community just in general.  And the way that you've seen evolve with the shootings in the schools to the situations that we've had with, with the, the various situations you've had with the various businesses that have failed us and, and, and incorporating and insuring those things aren't reinforced in the business environment as well.  And that's one of the reasons that you've had the failures of some mega corporations as a result of that.  So our children are our responsibilities.  I wanna pass on the biblical principles that worked some two thousand years ago I think would work today and I don't doubt works today as it did some two thousand years ago.  That, that's the reason for writing the book ['Doing Business by the Good Book: 52 Lessons on Success Straight from the Bible,' David L. Steward with Robert L. Shook].  Maybe it will encourage people to read it for themselves and will encourage others to also start not only publishing books, but also through the media, communicating our, our faith and how important it is to encourage people to, to make a different kind of decision.  And children making different kind, kinds of decisions that they're making today.  If you don't make decisions that are in line with the word of God, you're not gonna receive the blessings that you expect, you're gonna receive a curse.  And not only you're gonna receive a curse for yourself, but you're gonna show other children that, that, that kinds of decision making process as well, which passes it on to the, a generation.  So if we don't get back to the core of those principles, we'll continue to have the kind of destruction, the kind of death, the kind of, kind of lifestyle that we have today.  And so I think it's a big job for, for all of us to, to, to get involved and get engaged and, and do everything we possibly can to, to cure the future of our, of the African American community.
Story_ID: 466504
Speaker 1: Is there anything--when you look back at what you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently?  A major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think every aspect, good or bad that's happened to me in business has, has--especially the bad, probably has--the bad has probably been the best learning experience for me because it, it's shown me a number of things.  It has shown the kind of people that you're around.  It exposes, exposes good and bad.  It exposes those people that you know you can get in a fox hole with when things get tough.  They're not gonna run away.  They're gonna be in there with you because, because they believe in what you believe in and are prepared to, to risk everything that they have and their lives for, for what they believe in, no matter what anybody says.  And that's, that's, and that cuts across racial lines, it cuts across all that stuff.  You find out about that, that about people.  You find out who your, your, your, your suppliers are and partners are and customers are and all those people that you, you work with.  What they're prepared to do during difficult and challenging times.  You find out who your family is.  You find out who you're, you're married to and so forth as well, you know.  And you, and you learn from the mistakes that you make.  It means that you won't make the same mistake again, you will do something different, you know.  Because every time you do something, you would--you--it cost you money.  And so I would say every experience I've had has, has been good because I've learned something from the experience, good and bad.  So if I was to point to one item, I, I would, I would say that when, when things went bad, what--I think it helped me determine what I really believed as well.  That I believed truly in the promise that I truly believe and have faith in the future of this business [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri], or I didn't.  You know, it tests your faith.  What you really believe.  But at the same time I think that we, we learn some things early on in life when you talk about never quit.  Perseverance, drive, determination, stick-to-itiveness in spite of the circumstances.  And I think that we've had an opportunity to, to challenge yourself over a period of time more than anything else.  I've, you know I've--there's an analogy out there.  When you talk about nature's way of, of, of, of strengthening you.  And weeding out the, the weak stuff that you really don't need in your life anyway.  When I take a look at--they were talking about butterfly.  Butterfly starts in a cocoon under the larvae.  And as it begins to grow, it begins to struggle.  And it's through the struggle that it breaks through the cocoon to become a beautiful butterfly.  However, if you take out that butterfly prematurely out of that cocoon, it will never fully develop as a, as a butterfly.  And so that's life's way of--through that struggle, that we've had in, in business and in life for that matter, that allows us I think to be a much better person today versus having not gone through that.
Story_ID: 466505
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I, I hope that, that--hope it's about, about bringing people to, to, to God, to being that ambassador that God would have me be.  To be that, that, that, that bridge that allows people to, to get back to the source and for them to know that that is the source that--for every as--whatever they would try to do.  And it's around serving and commitment to others.  We're blessed to be a blessing.  And that giving and serving is a part of, of who I am and, and who I should be and, and hopefully to pass on that blessing to the next generation to understand the significance and responsibility they have to, to that as well.  And I, I hope that the people's lives are, are better off as a result of me having been here versus me not having been here.  That the jobs and the opportunities and, and their, their, their ability to be able to build wealth for themselves and the generations to come and, and the people who are less fortunate have been, been served and helped as a result of, of our existence.  And they have a better quality of life as a result of our existence.  It says, it also says in (unclear), it talks about, about did I, did I serve the, the, the needy and the, and the hungry and those who were in prison and those who needed help?  If you did that for, for them, you did that for me.  And so as, as I, I see people on, on, on the street, that just as easily could have been me.  And so having a compassionate, loving, caring heart for, for them is something I always want to, to, to, to--people to know about me that, that I do care about others and it's important to me that their, their lives are, are changed as a result of, of me caring a little bit more and me investing in their lives.
Story_ID: 466506
Speaker 1: I know you've already given us some information about your family and been able to discuss them on some level.  But do you have any grandchildren now, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not, not at this point.  So we--you probably have a con- conversation with my, my son-in-law and my, my daughter [Kimberly Steward] about that.  But hopefully one of these days they will--I will be blessed with a, a grandchild.  My son [David Steward, II], twenty-nine, is not married yet and so we, we do things in order.  We get married first, then we have children.  But I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your mother's [Dorothy Massingale Steward] still alive right?  She's still--
Speaker 2: My mother's still alive.  In fact I saw her this, just this past weekend and we were celebrating a graduation of my niece who received a, a degree from University of Missouri-St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], and her degree was in biology with a, a minor in Spanish and, and chemistry.  And so that tells you a lot about I guess the legacy my mother's leaving in regard to her, her grandchildren.  So she's the third grandchild to--my two children have graduated from college and this is the third grandchild to have gotten a, a degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there, is there anything I haven't mentioned that we, we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I think that you have talked a lot about--but it's important that people know about my faith and how important that has been as a, as a foundation of, of my life and it's beginning and the ending as far as I'm concerned.  And I've incorporated that into the way I live my life, the way I build relationships and the way that, that I conduct my business with others as well.  And if there's anything that I want people to remember about me, is that those--that I want to share with others, and what to make sure that everybody understands and knows about me and knows that, that that too will make all the significant difference in their lives that it has for, has for me.  This wouldn't be possible without, without my faith in God.
Story_ID: 466507
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: A person that--I would want to be remembered as a person who, who cared, who loved, who was prepared to sacrifice for his fellow man.  We have--and, and also the person who honored the sacrifice that was made on his behalf as well, and with his life, and the decisions that I make each and every day.  And hopefully that I've done that to this particular point.  I, I've fallen short on certain days and other days I'm very proud of myself on, on what we've done.  And I also give credit where credit is due.  As I indicated earlier, this, this would not be possible without, without, without I think the, the God in my life, and without, without the, the--His will they left for, for each and every one of us.  And so I guess I need to give credit where credit is due.  You know you can highlight that He used me as an instrument, but as an instrument only for His, for His will for others.  And so I'm, I'm, I'm looking forward to I guess many more years of, of, of not only this business [World Wide Technology, Inc., Maryland Heights, Missouri] showing that, but many more years of service much beyond this business and the, and the real business, and that's the business of, of, of, of serving others in our community and beyond.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much sir.
Speaker 2: All right, all right.
