Story_ID: 71570
Speaker 1: --Interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Edward N. Smith.  Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, N, as in Neil, N-E-I-L, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you please give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 19th, 1930, Detroit, Michigan, Herman Kiefer Hospital.
Speaker 1: That's pretty specific (laughter).  And can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July the 31st, 2002.  And where are we?
Speaker 1: We're at the WOUB Center at the University of Indiana, Purdue, Fort Wayne [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm an attorney and a publisher.
Story_ID: 71571
Speaker 1: Okay, before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions that I am compelled to ask you, the first one being, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Maroon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it's changed though, but Las Vegas [Nevada].  I like to vacation in Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  Not that I can detect.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was gonna ask you if it was "not that I know of" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 71572
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your parents' names and spell them for us, and the dates of their birth and where they were born?
Speaker 2: That's a pretty tough question in that I'm a single parent--offspring.  And that information wasn't really available to me.  My mother's name was Alberta Smith.  My father's name was Neil Edward Soober (ph.).  I don't have the slightest idea of when they were born.  I know my mother's birthday.  But I don't know when she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, do you know where they were born?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I believe my mother was born in Indianapolis.  And I don't know where my dad was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, did either one of them talk about their childhood and upbringing or their ancestors and where their ancestors came from?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yes, well, can you share some of that with us?  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My mother was, was a young adult during the Depression.  And she would talk about how she used to make a living, some of the things she experienced.  Her and her sister were exceptionally good-looking young women, the kind of young women that the Elks and the Masons would give beauty contest awards to, type of thing.  They were very attractive.  I guess that's about all I know about the early part.  My mother was young enough where she didn't need any children.  My great aunt took care of me for a while.  As a matter of fact, my great aunt tried to get, gain custody of me when I was a little bitty thing.  However, I did end up with my mother.
Speaker 1: Did you mother talk about where she went to school or did she talk about any of her other kind of--or do you know about any hobbies or activities she had or talents or skills or anything that she, you know, could share with you?
Speaker 2: No.  Even though I was raised with my mother, we never engaged in that kind of conversation.  The only way I would know what the family history was, is I'd overhear them talking with someone else, the sister, this kind of thing.  I know there's a couple of relatives out there that I don't even know about that they talked about.  One's been in the hospital all their life.  I don't know who that is.  But they never really sat down and shared that with me.  Okay.
Story_ID: 71573
Speaker 1: Okay, let's pick it back up, and now, I was asking you if there was anything that she would--now, you were, you said your mother [Alberta Smith] got custody of you when you were about three years old 'cause you were with an aunt prior to that?
Speaker 2: She was, according to what my aunt told me, neglecting me to the point where my aunt thought that she wasn't being a mother.  And they went to court or a social agency, wherever they went, but my mother ended with custody of me by the time I was probably four years old, so.  And in my entire lifetime (laughter), I don't think I was a factor as far as the child is concerned.  And that sort of impacted decisions I made later.
Speaker 1: Now, did you miss your aunt, or were you aware enough at the age of four to really miss your aunt at that point?
Speaker 2: No, although that's my favorite aunt.  To this day, she's my favorite aunt.  That was my, who I call my Aunt Mattie.  And she was the kindest person, and there was a time I stayed with my aunt she was a domestic.  And she worked for the Duffield's in the rich part of Detroit [Michigan], what they call it--one of the suburbs, and we lived on the place.  She cooked for 'em and all that kinda of stuff.  Yeah, I remember that.  That was a nice time, that was a nice time.  How much you wanna know?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm just asking, you know.  I mean just, and find out, you know, what actually--
Speaker 2: I had several aunts, okay.  My Aunt Mattie was my favorite aunt.  My others aunts in Detroit ran a sporting house, okay.  And sometimes I might have to stay there as I grew up, high schoolish type, okay.  I don't know what to tell you that that's gonna enlighten history any, but I think one time, I was probably around nine years old, eight or nine, was accused of trying to shoplift a comic book in some drugstore, and they locked me up for it.  And my mother came down and just pitched a dog about it.  That was the first time I been to jail, wasn't there long at eight or nine (unclear).  They'd lock you up for little of anything.  I'm not quite sure--I'm trying to think of something on a historical point that may--
Speaker 1: Well, just tell me the story.  I think that's probably the best thing.
Story_ID: 71574
Speaker 1: If you can like think back at some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that, your neighborhood--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Of course--
Speaker 1: --in Detroit.
Speaker 2: --of course.
Speaker 1: Like what kind of things did you do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother [Alberta Smith] was young when she married in Detroit [Michigan].  She married a gentleman who was much older than she was, maybe like twenty, twenty-five years older than she was.  But she was the toast of town, her and (laughter), her and her sister, who is still alive, used to have pictures--I mean they'd make Dorothy Dandridge look puny.  I mean they were some good-looking young women.  And they were much in demand.  I was sort of left on my own.  My stepfather, which is first marriage she had.  She had a twenty-one room house in Detroit, five-car garage.  He had a couple of confectionary stores of which at that young age, I--see, I think I had my seventh birthday when she was married in Detroit.  Sometimes I'd work in the store, just little pitley stuff, ice cream stores, cigarettes, stuff like that.  And he was a pretty good guy, all except he just worked the heck out of you and make you get on your hands and knees and pull weeds out of grass.  And I think I was probably forty years old before I could walk across somebody's grass because he (laughter), he just threw--he just, if you wanna get hit, you walk on somebody's grass, see because everybody in our neighborhood took care of their grass, took all the weeds out by hand.  It wasn't no spray (laughter).  He'd get some--like you had tweezers (laughter).  You'd go through there and pick 'em all on your knees.  So grass was pretty important.  My mother ran away with the taxicab driver, left me there.  When they ran out of money, she came and got me and moved to Indianapolis [Indiana], and, of course, divorce followed and all that other kind of stuff.  To give you some idea how my mother and I got along--and we get along, and I guess--say we get along.  The impact she had on me as far as my life's concerned was mostly a counter impact.  It wasn't 'cause she would encourage me to do something.  Because she did something, I would react and go a different way.
Story_ID: 71575
Speaker 1: I remember when my good aunt [Aunt Mattie], for my birthday, brought me my first long pants, okay, my suit, my first long pants.
Speaker 2: Because in those days, those--
Speaker 1: In those days, wearing--you either wore knickers or short pants.  You were becoming a young man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my mother [Alberta Smith] did not like the color or whatever it was, and so she took 'em back to the store, got the money and bought herself something.  Well, that was about typical (laughter), the way mother was.  And I got--even to this date I remember, you know, that was done because she sort of put herself and her, her men ahead of me anyway.  That was one instance.  After we moved to Indianapolis [Indiana], we moved into a one--how was that?  It seems first we stayed with my grandparents, all in one house, which was pretty nice.  My uncles all stayed there.  We're all about the same age and what not, that group.  That was pretty nice.  That's when we started going to school, at Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].  Then my mother moved into an apartment.  I guess I'm fourteen.  And--
Speaker 2: So you were about fourteen?
Speaker 1: Then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, she moved to her own apartment, took me with her.  And this is a one-bedroom place with a kitchenette, okay.  And when I went with her, it was a boarding house that had several boarding houses, apartments upstairs and several downstairs, one bathroom at the end of the hall, okay.  And she put an army cot outside the door, and that's where I slept at fourteen, army cot next to the door.  Of course, there're people coming in late, coming in going to the bathroom.  They all--
Speaker 2: So you're in the hallway?
Speaker 1: I'm in the hallway, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that went on for a while, and that's, I mean that's the way that was.   But we had a big confrontation because I was playing football at the high school.  And we'd had a heck of a day exercising, and I was hungry as I could be.  And I came in, 'cause I had a key to the apartment.  And I walked in, and I could smell that pot roast cooking, man.  I could smell (laughter), and I'm starving, okay.  So I went in the kitchen, and cut me some of that pot roast off.  And I did all right okay.  We had a big fight when--she wasn't there.  She came in.  She said, so and so bought that roast and you ain't supposed to eat it till he eats it.  And we had a big--remember she slapped the hell out of me.  When she slapped the hell out of me, my ear rang.  I'm fourteen.  That's pretty rough. So she put me out; went down to the "Y", YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], got me a room, and from then till the time I got married, I stayed at the YMCA.  I still saw my mother from time to time, but since I'm so grown.
Story_ID: 71576
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's pretty rough stuff.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can--
Speaker 2: Rougher than you can believe, rougher than you can believe--
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet your father [Neil Edward Soober]?  I mean did you ever--
Speaker 2: Well, my father is my alleged father, although, although on his graduation picture, you couldn't tell us apart.  Not that that's propounding, but there was, during these days, when I tell you during the Depression when she [mother, Alberta Smith] was--he was a lawyer.  And I remember he was Archie Moore's lawyer, okay.  And the consensus was, as I was coming up, she'd take me to court sometimes when I was real small and say, point out, that's who it is, that's who it is.  Well, for one thing, he never acknowledged me as having any--until 1959 (laughter).  I'm in law school, because--I mean who ever knows.  You never know, you know, people say.  But he said, you know, you might be kin to me.  And I sort of gave him an expletive (laughter).  I'm not looking for a daddy now.  I'm in law school.  I wanna learn some law.  And there was bad blood between his family and my mother [Alberta Smith].  And that derived, when I was at Attucks High School [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], there was another young lady in my homeroom, very attractive young lady.  I always wanted to say something to her in high school.  And as, being an athlete star, athlete, whatnot, I wanted to, you know, but I just got never nerve to really talk up and say something to her.  And my timing was horrendous.  I walked over to her, and I said--her name was Barbara Soober (ph.).  And I'm just being light.  I say, I understand that me and you supposed to be some kind of kin.  And she started screaming.  She cussed me out.  She started crying, and she ran out of the room.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I said, wait a minute, wait a minute.  Well, I found out later that my mother had done something just a day or two before.  Apparently, Soober had had a son, two years younger than I am, okay.  (Unclear) a couple days ago.  And my mother had called him and according to what they say--she never admitted that, she says, now, you'll take care of your first son.  And you understand how that would go over (laughter), how that would go over.  Even I understand that.  And Barbara hated me 'cause she--we're okay now.  But, man, she thought that was the awfulest (ph.) thing.  I didn't know any better.  I didn't even know that had happened.  I didn't know the kid (unclear) really, didn't even (unclear) know he had a son, really.  That wasn't my business.  I didn't even know that.  And strange as it was, her other sister, who was named Sharon, just took me in like I just come from the hospital or something and knows that I was her brother from then on.  And Sharon became, and Sharon and I became very close.  Barbara finally broke down and came on (unclear).  But that was a hellified (ph.) relationship because of the by play.  So, of course, Barbara and Sharon's mother hated my mother for that.  I mean it's a horrible thing to do to somebody.  At any rate, I'm just trying to give you the idea of the relationship.
Story_ID: 71577
Speaker 1: So when she sent me to the "Y" [YMCA], she said, you'll never amount to anything.  She says, so go on down there and find you a job.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have to pay your room yourself or how--
Speaker 1: No, my aunt [Aunt Mamie]--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--[pause].  I don't believe I was paying, although I had a paper route at the time.  It's been a long, been sixty years ago, man.  It's a long time ago.  I don't know.  I had a paper route, and I made money to do whatever I needed there, but I think she was paying it.  And it think it was something like $15.00 a week or $15.00 a month, something like that.  That was about the cheapest place you could find.  And believe it or not, at the "Y" [YMCA], I got to be good a checkers, chess and ping pong and basketball and swimming, just by being there, you know, and billiards, which nobody plays anymore.  Everybody plays pool.  Back there, we played billiards.  And I met some people that were, I wonder if you say "role model", but people that you look up to like Mr. DeFrance (ph.) was his name in Indianapolis [Indiana], probably one of the most distinguished gentlemen I've ever seen in my life and respect and ethics in that he was sort--excuse me, what else can I tell you about that?
Story_ID: 71578
Speaker 1: Well, so I decided that--I told her, we had a big argument.  I said, I'll go for myself.  I--well, when I came from Detroit [Michigan], I'd had one year in high school.  And I'd run track, and track was the only thing.  I didn't play football.  And when I came to Indianapolis [Indiana], Indianapolis was segregated whereas Detroit was sort of integrated.  Detroit was big enough where all the schools played each other within the city 'cause it was that many schools.  And in Indianapolis, everything was segregated, and everybody wouldn't play a black school.  And Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] was all black.  So they had to go down to Kentucky and play, and they had to go all over the place.  And I liked that, hey, that's traveling.  So when I came in, I told 'em I was a freshman.  I already got a year in high school, told 'em I was a freshman.  So I started all over again.  When I finally--well, I married when I was a sophomore in high school.  So when I finally got serious about college 'cause we just walked the halls.  We didn't care what the grades--we didn't even pick report cards up 'cause it doesn't make any difference what they gonna do?  Report card didn't mean anything.  When I finally decided I was going to college, then I sort of start getting some books.
Speaker 2: Now, what made you decide that you were going to college and what--
Speaker 1: That argument I had with my mother [Alberta Smith].
Speaker 2: Pardon--
Speaker 1: The argument I had with my mother.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: She said I'd never amount to anything anyway.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, reverse psychology.
Speaker 1: Right, I don't know if it was no reverse psychology.  On her part, she meant it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it worked, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was really steamed that because her man didn't get some before (unclear), still had a roast that big, roast ain't going nowhere.  He had, no, I understand you're buying.  I understand that.  I'm still, I'm still her child (laughter).  And it's 6:30 in the evening, you know (laughter).  Want me to wait till 10:00 o'clock till he show up?  At any rate, any rate, I end up in high school, a math major and history.  And I went an extra year before I went to college.  So that's how six years in high school came about.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you end up going an extra year, I mean after--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: After I, but see I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: After you got to Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Well, like I said, I went a year in--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and because I enjoyed traveling on the bus and eating out and all this kind of stuff, I just told 'em I was a freshman again.  And I was so well received there that I really liked it.  It was treatment I had never received before.
Story_ID: 71579
Speaker 1: I immediately was in the area gang which was run by my uncle who's a year older than I am (laughter).  See, it's funny calling him uncle 'cause we're all virtually the same age, but, and we were standing in, just before--this is when I first went to Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].  We were standing out there on the fence and the track team was coming out for its first Spring practice, the first day in the Spring, coming out to practice.  And they were wearing these, these what we call long johns, but they were gray, warm-up suits and carrying (unclear).  And we were laughing at 'em and really, really disrupting the whole place.  I mean it's, we weren't a gang, in the sense, drive-by shootings you talk about now.  But we were a gang and we controlled that area and what not.  We did pretty much what we wanted to do, to the extent we wanted to do it.  And we were disrupting the practice.  So the coach come over there, and he was smart, because all he had done was got cussed out if he'd been belligerent.  That's, you know, just, just wouldn't have worked.  He said, "Fellas", he said, I" mean we're trying to have a practice here, said, why don't you guys, look, you know, let us get through with practice and, you know, go somewhere else, have your fun."  And one of the guys--I don't know what said it, said, heck, you haven't got any team, said Smitty can beat anybody you got there (laughter).  He said, oh, yeah.  He said, who's Smitty.  He pointed at me, and everybody laughing and carrying on.  He said--and then the coach got smart.  He said, you mean--I tell you what, if Smitty beats so and so, you guys can stay all you want to.  But if Smitty doesn't beat so and so, will, you guys leave?  Said, yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter), a big joke.  This coach was smart.  So, and the coach had a gentleman by the name of Eulice Jackson, and anchored the relay team, and very quick.  And I'm in our railroad stuff--we wore railroad.  That was our uniform, our railroad cap and stuff, gym shoes.  I had gym shoes on then.  I have knob-tail shoes on then.  And they marked off a hundred yard dash for me to run against Eulice.  And it was really comical 'cause Eulice was down in his three-point and what not, ready to go.  (Laughter) I was standing up.  Well, of course, I beat Eulice (laughter).  And the coach walked over to me, and said, "What you say your name was?"  (Laughter)  They had given (unclear)--wait, wait, what you gonna do (unclear)?  The next thing I know I was on the track team.  And that's the only time I ever beat Eulice (laughter).  That's the only time I ever beat Eulice.  Eulice was quick.  Eulice was quick.  Oh, wow.  I laugh about that 'cause that's a fact.  When Eulice was running 9-8, 9-9, I was doing 10-flat, 9-9.  I never could catch up with him.  He was, he was fast.  He--at any rate, that's how I got started at Attucks as a celebrity, so to speak.
Story_ID: 71580
Speaker 1: Another little incident, I have a nickname, you see on there called "69".  And as a kid, it didn't make any difference.  Why they call you sixty-nine?  Well, I told 'em why.  But as a adult, people put all kind of connotations on why you're called "69", and the ladies smile, you know.  There was a "Buddy Young"--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Buddy Young played with Illinois.  And he was quick, like I was supposed to have been quick.  And he was sort one of the guys I looked up to, him and Glenn Davis of Army.  I sort of looked up at those guys as speedsters.  And Buddy Young's number was 99, okay.  So when I started as a freshman at Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], you had to buy your own uniform, had to buy your own jersey.  And they gave you pants that were too long for you.  You looked like a, looked like a--they used us for tacking dummies, really.  So I bought my own gold shirt, and I bought six--not '69', I bought '99' like Buddy Young.  I said, I don't want this particular--so I flipped them to '69'.  I didn't care.  I mean that was just so I had my own number.  What had happened, they wouldn't let me play.  We were just tacking dummies even though were I a coach, I'd a seen my talent long time ago.  I'm just, this is the first year there, and three or four games had passed of playing a game at home.  And in those days, you have a long bench on the, at the fifty-yard line or wherever it is.  And you got your water bucket at the end of the bench.  In that day, you had water buckets.  And the star of the team was a kid named Nick Jones.  Nick Jones was the star of the team.  Well, we were getting our butt beat in that game.  And I don't remember what the score was.  It was close, but we were losing.  And Nick came out--in those days, we played both ways, defense and offense, you know.  It wasn't no platoon stuff.  Nick came out and was talking--he's sitting between me and the coach, okay.  And the coach was telling him to do this, telling him to do that and told him to do all kind of stuff.  Okay, I'm sort of a wise guy 'cause Nick got up to get him a bucket of water on my left side, and the coach reached over there, looking--'cause we're on about the twelve-yard line.  He said, "get in there".  (Laughter) And he pulled on me (laughter), and I started running out on the field.  I don't know the plays, the pants are hitting me up here.  I got my own jersey I bought with number sixty-nine on it.  And when he threw me out there, and he saw Nick, the coach started running out on the field with me, cussing me out, "Hey--and he was saying all--he out there in a high school game.  He's cussing me, blah, blah, blah.  I act like I didn't hear him 'cause the play is way down the field.  The official stopped and put him on the side.  I run all the way down there.  They guy--of course, I was a blocking dummy--yeah--
Speaker 2: We're about, we're having to change tapes.  (Laughter) This is right in the middle of the good part, but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 61927
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, you're in the, so you're in the game?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Nick Jones was sitting between me and Coach Waffer (ph.), Wachfer (ph.), and Nick got up to get him some, a cup of water at the end of the bench.  The coach was focused down at the end of the field where our team was on offense, and he reached and grabbed, but he grabbed me.  He said, "Get in there".  Well, I already know the plays, okay.  I wasn't sure I knew quarterback from left guard 'cause that's how I knew I was a football.  And I ran down there in the huddle, and everybody looking and say, who, the team says, who are you, 'cause I'm this tackling dummy.  I told them, I told the guy who was quarterback, I said, the coach said give it to me around right end (laughter).  And they did it.  Eighty-eight yards later, I'm crossing the goal line.  Everybody's going crazy.  I'm looking for a lot of cheer.  They had to hold the coach back.  He wanted to kick my butt.  He was still upset.  I done run a touchdown, eighty-eight yards, don't know what I'm doing, just speed, just pure speed.
Speaker 1: Only a coach would be upset.
Speaker 2: And the coach was upset.  I mean he was serious.  I mean he would fight his players, I mean make a man out of 'em or whatever it was.  He'd kick you and run--that was just his style.  And the coach, they had to hold Coach from getting me, and he told me, "Get over, get over there".  I done run a touchdown, and the next day in school, everybody wanted to know who sixty-nine was.  And they said, that's sixty-nine.  And I (unclear) wearing the jersey in school.  That's sixty-nine, and from that day on, I was known as "69".  Everybody said, how you get the name "69"?  That's how I got it.  Which is strange (laughter).  And, any rate, that's how me and the coach met for football.  So, that's a story in and of itself.  Now, where you wanna go from here?
Story_ID: 61928
Speaker 1: So, did you ever, I mean did you get any--did you ever become a starter?
Speaker 2: I, I--okay, since you asked the question, short answer, for high school, no.  One year we were--the next year, matter of fact--I only played two years 'cause I got married.  The next year, we're playing a team called Cathedral, which was one of the two white teams we played.  And the coach was having us run the Cathedral plays, okay.  So they got the blocking dummies, which we still were, and they run the play.  Well, three times in a row, I ran the ball beyond the defense.  He jumped in my face again.  He says, you--well, (unclear), the way it was, he had his first team there practicing against the offense of Cathedral.  Well, the first one I 'posed to go through the side, going in the--go off the guard and run through, okay?  Well, I ran through, get a couple of jogs, and I'm gone, okay.  No problem.  Let's run that again.  And he told Bloatie (ph.) which is a big guy.  At that time, that's big.  He's 230, 240, something like that.  He said, he's coming through this middle here, and you gotta do this, you gotta do that.  He said, run it again.  So he ran, ran the play again.  I go to the line, did (unclear) around the side.  I'm gone again.  Now, he's all over me now.  "I told you to run"--I ain't run through so the people can tackle me.  If they wanna tackle me, tackle me, you know, I'm arrogant a little bit there.  And he said, try it one more time.  I actually ran through those guys three times, and the assistant coach said, I think you ought to dress Smith.  Nah, he was telling me, can't get dressed that game.  And the kicker was, believe it or not, again truth is stranger than fiction.  We were gonna play Fort Wayne Central, right here in this town.  And they had a hall of famer named Johnny Bright.
Speaker 1: I've heard of him.  He--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, hall of famer.  He played with Central.  Before that game, I had just run it from--I mean nobody could do anything with me.  And the kid that was the starting halfback was named Donald O'Hamm (ph.) who eventually went to Michigan.  He had been hurt, his leg, and he's wearing a big cast and what not.  Before that game, we drove all--he said, Smith, he said, my name--he didn't say Smith.  My name was on the list, so I got to carry my uniform, my real uniform, a real Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School] uniform.  And in those days, it's a big badge.  You walk up and down the avenue with your stuff on your arm.  Everybody know you're playing the next game.  I mean it's, it's like the Heisman Trophy.  You walk around, "Hey, you playing?"  Yeah, you know it.  That's big, big stuff.  So the next day, we drove out here to Fort Wayne [Indiana] in the bus.  We had a nice dinner and everything and nice stadium here, and (unclear).  I'm looking forward to playing, and Donald O'Hamm started crying.  Donald O'Hamm's in his civvies (ph.) with his leg still bandaged up.  He said, "Coach, I wanna play, I wanna play."  He said, Smith.  I said, yeah.  Give O'Hamm your stuff.  Oh, that hurt.  That hurt worse than my mother [Alberta Smith] (unclear) (laughter).  That hurt, boy, that hurt.  And I gave, I gave my stuff to O'Hamm to wear.
Story_ID: 61929
Speaker 1: And with, with--I'll say something like 12 seconds remained in the half.  The score is zero, zero.  And Fort Wayne Central has the ball on their own five-yard line, and Donald O'Hamm is playing left halfback, defensive back.  It's like, like it was yesterday, okay.  [pause] That's how my mind go sometimes.  Johnny Bright got the ball 'cause he played, he passed.  He was quarterback, he was halfback.  He was full-back, he was punter.  He was everything on the team.  He got behind the center.  It was fourth down and 20-something, okay, 12 second left to go in the half.  The score is zero, zero.  Johnny Bright got the ball, turned his butt to his own center, and very obviously, paced off, five, 10, whatever it was so that you kick, okay.  They gave him the ball, and he came straight up the middle, straight up the middle.  And the last thing I saw (laughter) was Donald O'Hamm limping after him, (laughter) trying to catch him (laughter).  And he went all that way for a touchdown.  We ended the half six, nothing, behind.  And that's, that's the image I have of that game.  They took my uniform.  Johnny Bright also was a track star, and we'd run track against him.  So I knew he was quick, but I wouldn't let him get that--I'd a got the angle on him, and with speed, you can do the angle thing.  And I see Donald O'Hamm now running.  If he ever sees this, he ever hears--he was running, limping after Johnny Bright 'cause Johnny Bright just kept dissing him away.  And that's, that was just about the end of my football career 'cause like I say, I got married.  And when I got married, I did get cussed out by my track coach.  Why you marrying so early?  What, what.  And he was upset because we had a half-mile relay team that was really good.  You had to run twenty-three or better just to be on the team, for 220.  So, we had a good team.
Story_ID: 61930
Speaker 1: So that was--
Speaker 2: Now, how did you meet your wife, I mean was she going to school at Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] too?
Speaker 1: I met my wife--I was in Detroit [Michigan].  My mother [Alberta Smith] took me to Indianapolis, a little short trip.  I met her there.  And--or I should say, she met me because I was walking down the street to the house, didn't know where I was going on Indian Avenue in Indianapolis.  And my wife-to-be was on the other side of the street.  And, of course, this is what she told me.  She said she saw me, and the minute she saw me, she wanted to meet me.  That's what she said.  And she actually crossed the street and asked my uncle, who she knew, who was named Seth, said, "Who's that?"  And that's how that started.  We got along pretty good, still married, so I guess (laughter) we got along pretty good.  That's how I met my wife, and we went--we were in high school together.  We were in classes together, sort of the thing of the time, I wouldn't want a kid to go through what I went through.  So I got married early.  So, if I have any children, (unclear) or you understand what I'm saying.  And that was that.  So that takes me through high school.  Now, where you wanna go from there?
Story_ID: 61931
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about graduation from high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] and what were you thinking about when you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Graduation from high school, I still want a book.  I never--my mother wouldn't buy me one, and I couldn't afford to buy one.  So I never got a graduation book.  Matter of fact, I've offered a couple hundred dollars for one, just for that class, 1949 class, and just the people I knew, just to have it as something to keep.  I'm gonna still try to get one around, get a chance.  Other than that, let's see, I--
Speaker 1: Did you--what were you thinking about in terms of a career?  Did you think that you would go to law school--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, most definitely.  Matter of fact, that's when I made up my mind.  I went to the "Y" [YMCA].  At that point, I start training to be a lawyer, okay.  I knew I was gonna be that no matter what.
Story_ID: 61932
Speaker 1: Now, let me say this.  I know in my hometown which is about the same size as--well, a little smaller than Indianapolis [Indiana], but the "Y" [YMCA] seemed to be a gathering place for a lot of black professional men who would go there.  They played basketball and do other things.  And they were on different boards and stuff.  Did you have that kind of traffic at the "Y" over there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  As a matter of fact, we had the gym to ourselves, and one day, Mr. Abe Saperstein came in and made a personal request that he'd like to warm the Globetrotters up there, and we'd say, yeah, you can have the gym 'cause it was our time on the gym, but we gave it up to him.  And I moved back a little bit.  I'm too far away?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, I think your tie covered the mic.
Speaker 2: And at that time, Wilt Chamberlain was playing with the Globetrotters, Marques Haynes, Goose Tatum [Reece "Goose" Tatum] and I mean what I call the "real Globetrotters" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: They could have beaten anybody (laughter), and to see those guys play was a big thrill, yeah.  I learned to play chess there.  The gentleman I told you, Mr. DeFrance (ph.), played billiards with us, two white balls and one red ball, no holes in the thing.  And it's a game of honor, like golf is supposed to be where you are on your own honor not to fowl and some--and it was just a tremendous game.  Pool, you can knock a ball in with your sleeve as you shoot, you know, aye, hey wasn't watching, was he, you know.  A nice, quiet game.  You didn't bang the balls, you know.  Everything was so gentlemanly, you had to wear a suit and tie and generally, a bowtie to play the game.  You know, a pool player come in and play any (unclear).  That's where I got that inspiration from.  Like I said, to this day, he's one of the finest, most refined gentleman I've ever met.  So that's where I got in the "Y". Ping pong.  I thought I could play ping pong till I ran up against some Asians, found out I wasn't as good as I thought I was (laughter) (unclear).  I don't know how they play that way, but I couldn't, couldn't overcome that.  There was a centered YMCA in Indianapolis, which is torn down now.  Fall Creek's there now.
Story_ID: 61933
Speaker 1: I got drafted in 1953 to the service.  I had, my wife and I had a run-in, and we'd split up.  And I'd gone back to Detroit [Michigan].  And at the time, I had four children.  So, but I got drafted, and went into the Army, anti-aircraft unit.  In the service, I played basketball there, played against the Globetrotters, which has more than one team.  It wasn't the Wilt Chamberlain team I played against.  They had two different teams in different locations to cut the traveling down, you know, and played against the All American Red Heads which was an all-white team, women played.
Speaker 2: They all had red hair?
Speaker 1: They all had--that's what they called themselves (laughter).  You didn't chance to check it out (laughter), just have to take their word for it.
Speaker 2: I was in the service two years, didn't go overseas 'cause my mother-in-law died, which left my wife alone with four kids.  So that caused me to come back to Indianapolis.  All the time I was in the service, I was taking classes at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], and then I went to Wayne State [University] in Detroit [Michigan], and then I went to Indiana Central [Indiana Central College, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Story_ID: 61934
Speaker 1: I worked full time at American Foundry.  When it came time to go to college, I switched to the night shift, 12:00 to 7:00, as a janitor, clean up at night.  That way, wasn't any conflict.  And I tried up--well, actually, I made the football team.  But I didn't get a letter.
Speaker 2: This is at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 2: This is at Wayne State--no--
Speaker 1: No, no, Indiana Central [Indiana Central College], Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, I'm, (laughter).  Wayne State was at--I went out for basketball there, and the first practice, I didn't, I knew I was not a basketball player.  That killed you.  He did three-on-three.  He did three weave for hours (laughter), (unclear) for just weaving, just--that was more than I was used to.  Anyway, I went to Indiana Central, and I was pretty good there.  But what happened was, I left--we had a game with Manchester or one of those schools, way out.  And we had to be on the bus at 8:00 o'clock that morning in order to get there for game time.  And I didn't make it.  I left work around, a little after 7:00 o'clock in my 1941 Chrysler.  And the oil thing that's connected to the accelerator broke.  And I'm five, seven miles from school through the boondocks.  And at that early in the morning, nothing was open.  And I didn't make the bus.  The bus left without me, and the coach said, "You ain't getting a letter".  And that was that because I'd missed that game.  That was the last game of the season.
Story_ID: 61935
Speaker 1: In college, I was on the debate team for three years, again, training for a lawyer.  At that time, you could go to college three years and then go to law school three years.  Your first year of law school, you get your degree for college, and after three years, you get your law degree.  Well, I went to college four years because I already knew that law school was tough, especially for certain people.  And I wanted to have my degree before I went.  And then I went to law school.  I went an extra year of law school 'cause I wanted to get international law and patent law and some other things, just to have a general knowledge of the whole thing.  So that's eight years, plus two years in the Army.  That's 10 years gone.  When I graduated from law school--
Speaker 2: Now, this is what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty one [1961], 1962, 1962.  I have to think about that a minute.
Story_ID: 61936
Speaker 1: I was immediately picked up by the Attorney General, State of Indiana.  I was pretty solid in politics, and I had me a job with like forty people under me with the Attorney General's office.  And as I was walking through the complex a month or two later, there were some black gentlemen that were really depressed.  And I asked 'em what the problem was.  And they were from Fort Wayne [Indiana].  And they had a problem with liquor license and they thought they wasn't treated right and, etc., etc.  So I intervened, and when I intervened, the other deputy--we were both the same rank.  I mean it wasn't, I didn't make him do--we just discussed it.  And he said, okay, we'll do this.  And got the license and (unclear), and they liked that.  They said, why don't you come to Fort Wayne?   Well, I got three doctors, the biggest businessman in town and one dentist.  Plus, it was two more doctors in town I hadn't met that were gonna, they were gonna put me over, they said, because blacks were being mistreated in Fort Wayne, they're taking 'em all to jail.  And they needed a good trial lawyer who (unclear)--which I was.  So with no further ado, I said, yeah, I'll come to Fort Wayne.  At that time, I cut my roots in Indianapolis [Indiana] which is bad; gets me to talk about a mentor that tells you what to do and what not to do.  Sometimes we don't know how important our roots are.  For instance, the story that I related to you earlier, the guys I know that I could really (unclear) that story to, we get a good laugh on it.  They're somewhere else.  And those are the stories that go on, those stories--that story will never grow old until, you know, as people grow old, they'll talk about those things, me beating Eulice (ph.) Jackson that first time, and I got civilian clothes on and he got track stuff on.  That kind, those kind of stories go on and on.  And I missed that, especially now.  And in Indianapolis, I had a cadre of lawyers and judges that we met at the watering hole all the time, discuss cases, Supreme Court cases, and it was, it was really nice--well, when I got here to Fort Wayne, first of all they found out I was Republican, not that they didn't know it when I was with the Attorney General's office, and all of them were Democrats.  But they don't say (unclear).  So I'm their lawyers.  That's the way--I was here now, so I had to stay.  But I do miss Indianapolis.  If I ever have to talk to anybody that's, that's--ask me the right questions.  They're going to professions, I don't have the answer because it's very important.  I talked to everybody.  "Should I go to Fort Wayne?"  Yeah, you'll be the only black lawyer there, yeah, go ahead, which I was for fifteen years.
Story_ID: 61937
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Really, there was no other black lawyers?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.  But what I found was, it didn't change anybody's way of doing business (laughter).  They still took all the money.  The good cases went somewhere else, and if yours was free or cheap or they could give you a used television set to barter, you got it.  Now, it's a lesson to be learned there about our culture, which I learned and, which again, I hope to write about one day.  It's the, what you call the Judas complex, you could call it.
Speaker 2: I know that book was the "Judas Factor".
Speaker 1: Yeah, the "Judas Factor".
Speaker 2: --Carl Evans.
Speaker 1: Well, it's stronger, it's really there unless, unless something is acknowledged or confirmed by the master, it just doesn't amount to anything.  Everything is tipped towards the master, and you don't believe it until you see it, until you live it.  And in a small town, it's intensified.  In a town like Indianapolis [Indiana], a million, it's still, it's everywhere.  But in a town of a million people, it's like diluted.  You don't see--you can work around it.  But in a small town, it's very concentrated, and it's a monster.  It's a monster to deal with.
Speaker 2: In smaller cities, it's only so many channels you can take.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you got, I mean you're segregated, whether you know it or not, don't care where you live at, as long as your skin's dark, you're put in a category, the minute somebody sees you.  The minute they see you, you're automatically in a category, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  (Off-Camera Discussion)
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  I'm sorry.  And some folks don't understand, don't care how liberal or conservative you, that's the badge, that's gonna be the first impression the minute they lay eyes on you.  Now, you might work from that and go here, but the minute they see you that way, you're sort of put in a certain category.  You either gotta work your way out of that category or stay in that category.  And I don't know how you get away from that.
Story_ID: 61938
Speaker 1: Now, you remained a Republican in an era when a lot of blacks were converting to the Democratic Party.  How come?  I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question because when I was in Indianapolis [Indiana], I was Republican, and a gentleman by the name of Lawrence Rogues (ph.) was my precinct committeeman, that needed help doing his precinct, and he just happened to be a Republican.  And me and him got along fine, and he was showing me the ropes and what not, and I liked it.  When I got to law school, there were seven of us that went to law school there, seven blacks.  And all of 'em but one, were Democrat.  And the two other Republican black lawyers were judges, okay.  And then then there was one more black lawyer that was a Republican, Brocum Burr (ph.) of Indianapolis.  And I went to see him while I was in law school.  I said, I would like to come to your firm.  I mean it was three of 'em, three blacks.  The youngest lawyer in his firm was sixty-eight years old at that time.  It was three of 'em.  Brocum Burr was seventy-something then, said, "Nah, I don't need anybody."  (Laughter) Of course, in three years, they're all dead (laughter), and all that business went caput.  But I thought it was would have been a move for me to stay where I was and some of the philosophy I liked.  I liked independence.  You just can't do a lot for me without me having to say, hey, let me help you, help me.  I mean I don't need you to take care of me.  I need--that kind of thing, whereas, it seemed like on the other side, they was always giving you something, giving you something.  And they were exchanging 'em like socks.  I mean if they don't like you, boom, they get another one, just like replaceable parts.  There wasn't any personality to it, and within the black community, they fought like dogs to get that spot.  I didn't want that, I didn't want that.  But I found that the politics in Indianapolis was entirely different than the politics in Fort Wayne.  The politics in Indianapolis, you didn't know who was gonna win, Democrat or Republican.  It was always close.  In Fort Wayne, Republicans always won, okay.  Now what does that mean?  Complete power.  They didn't give a damn.  They didn't need you in other words.  So they went a different way, two different--I don't know why they call themselves Republicans really 'cause they're not really the same as the ones I knew about.  So to try to answer your question.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: You okay?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 61939
Speaker 1: And I'm in a learning process when I come here.  I come here just because I'm trying to help some black people, okay, 'cause they need--which I did.  But I was unsophisticated enough to know when you're being used too.  Now, the first year, I--well, 1964, [Barry] Goldwater running against--
Speaker 2: Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] then.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, the County Chairman asked me, he says, "What do you know about Johnson?  What do you know about Goldwater?"  I said, I'm not in this election.  I said, I'm out.  I said, I say, Goldwater voted against the Civil Rights Act, and I don't wanna be getting into that.  He said, we understand.  He say, but, would you do a favor for me?  We're having our treasurer meeting, our treasury board or whatever it is.  It's only four people.  Would you--let's just talk to them on lunch, have lunch with them and just talk to 'em."  So they met at the Shrine, okay.  I said, fine.  I'm new in town.  I'm trying to keep the politics connected up.  I'm not gonna be involved, but, and then I'm gonna speak some--I can do some research on Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] and how he had his deeds, and no black person could have his property.  I went through the whole thing.  Well, I came to the luncheon.  It's four people there, and we're in a room, my God, a fourth the size of this.  Let's (unclear) clean up, have a table and bring some food in.  Nobody there but us.  So I give me speech, and everybody liked my speech.  All four people liked my speech.  That's good, that's good.  The evening paper, I got a half page thing on what I said about Johnson, and what I said about this, all in the paper 'cause the County, the chairman, he owned the newspaper, okay.  Now, wasn't anybody there but five of us.  And that was all in the paper on what I said about Johnson, which I tried to stay out of it.  Well, they used me, but the thing about it.  I didn't get mad at them.  I wasn't--I didn't understand being used at that time.  No soon it hit the paper, the black community just rose up in one big thing, man, "Run this guy out of town".  And we had an ongoing, the papers sold like everything.  For months we had an ongoing fight between me and them.  I hadn't been there but a year (laughter).  You know, and I didn't realize--what I should have been mad with was the party that did that.  I didn't see it.  That was one I missed.  I still get mad about it, think about it 'cause that would have--did a lot of things.  Everybody was mad with me.  They started talking about I was responsible for the kids being blew up in Mississippi (laughter).  It was bad.  Yeah, it got bad.  But--
Speaker 2: And that's an intense time.  I mean the--
Speaker 1: Oh, that was an intense time.  But I didn't understand in politics how they can use you without you knowing it.  Well, I--
Speaker 2: It's funny.  In 1964, the Democrats, I mean black Democrats, were, a lot of them were sorely disappointed at the Democratic Convention when the Mississippi Freedom Party wasn't seated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Remember that?
Speaker 1: Right, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: They were betrayed by the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well--
Speaker 2: It's kind of a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I've been involved in politics long enough to know that there's not a hair's difference between a rabbit and a hare (laughter), okay.  When it's all said and done and behind those doors, they do pretty much what they wanna do.  And they scratch backs, okay.  And you don't--you think there's two warring parties, but not really.  It's like Venus and Serena playing tennis (laughter).  You don't know who gonna win, but when they get through, they're still sisters, okay.  But that's another story.  What else you wanna know?
Story_ID: 61940
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, were you involved in Civil Rights at all--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --on an active level in those days?
Speaker 2: Active, oh, yes.  We, we march on City Hall.
Speaker 1: You said, "we".  Now, who--
Speaker 2: Oh, we formed--I said, "we" formed.  I was the only lawyer in town.  So I was (unclear).  I formed the corporations, I formed not-for-profit stuff, all--I'd done--I was doing all that.  CCC, which was the Citizens Coalition for--I don't know, Civil Rights or something.  I didn't, it's been a long time ago.  Reverend Jesse White [Hon. Jesse White, HM] who's an icon here.  He was, he was one of the leaders or "the" leader.  And we marched on City Hall.  We marched on, for instance, like you're talking about Harvey and extortion, well, we marched on a place like Parkview Hospital because poor people couldn't get served.  And they had to pay all stuff to park.  Well, even though a lot of folks went to jail behind it--Civil Rights jail.  You know, police come and arrest the protesters, they changed the policy at the hospital.  If you had--if you're poor, you can't pay, you don' have to pay parking.  They get medical things.  But all that was '67' [1967], '66' [1966], '65' [1965], all that was then.  Now, forty years later, everybody's forgotten that.
Story_ID: 61941
Speaker 1: Okay, so you formed, you said you were able to form,--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --incorporate various entities--
Speaker 2: Yeah, during the school segregation problems, I formed "Concerned Citizens for Education"-type things.  I really didn't know you were gonna (unclear) ask me these things, but that's--
Speaker 1: Well, we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I guess, all through the '60's [1960s], all through that, we were very active.  That was the main thing I did.
Speaker 1: Now, comment on this.  I've heard this now several times here in Fort Wayne [Indiana] that the school desegregation plan basically broke up most of the black grade schools and middle schools here, and sent the black students out to the suburbs where they were like a fish out of water and they didn't control anything.
Speaker 2: Well, bussing was probably one of the worst things that happened to black people.  I don't know who came up with that idea, but all it did was pick you up and take you to a hostile environment, you're supposed to learn something.  And that doesn't work.  It's very curious about--about the black psyche.  When we were doing, we were going through the issue of desegregation, me and my group was involved in it.  And so were two or three other people that weren't representing any group, just individuals.  And to my surprise when the rule came down, the court said to integrate, that the people here had to go to Chicago to get a black firm to come down here to do that.  And when they came down here, they used my office as their local base (laughter).  I thought that was real, (laughter) didn't make sense.
Speaker 1: What firm did they get in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember now 'cause, that's in the '60's [1960s].  I don't even remember now; didn't make sense, and I had a fine office, and efficient office.  So, you know, but it didn't make sense because of the money that I could have made just doing what I do.  And it turns out, I'm not sure anybody made any money.  I'm not anybody, if segregation ever really took hold here like it was supposed to.  Now, my buddy in Indianapolis, John Moss, he was in a similar situation where they, they got their, settled for millions, okay.  And, of course, had they asked me to help 'em out here, I'd have called John.  We'd work together, and we do the same thing here we did in Indianapolis [Indiana].  It never happened.  I never understood why they--again, the Republican label had something, probably something to do with it, okay.  The experience that I've seen here as far as integration is concerned, the athletes would have no way to get home unless their parents came and picked them up.  Even though they were bussed in, they weren't really part of the group, you know, and you wouldn't say--bingo, you were gone, quick to kick you out.  I defended several young people.  They were kicked out for, for little or nothing, you know.  And then it's always a three or four day hold over before, before you get a hearing.  Well, they're missing all that school.  And like I was always told, boy, that day you miss school, you may never hear that again.  That's, whatever you missed that day, you may never see again.  So, never catch up.  We integrated the hospital.  I told you that. What else did we do?
Story_ID: 61942
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I guess when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Were there issues about public accommodations here in Fort Wayne [Indiana]?
Speaker 1: I don't recall a lot about public accommodations.  I don't recall any of the hotels giving us a problem.  Most of it was businesses, and the businesses wouldn't do business with us.  We couldn't get bids.  I started a concrete company because the black concrete finishers, (unclear) cement finishers were always the last ones out of the union hall.  And the way they did it, they would say, it's like they do with the longshoremen.  A guy would say, you go here, you go there.  Somebody would be giving the jobs away, and the eleven black cement finishers would always be last.  And if anything was left, they may get it.  So I formed a company to pick them first.  And we did very well.  We did very well.  But then the black psyche comes in there again (laughter).  For instance, we got a guy in charge, and we're gonna do the Holiday Inn, and we need eight cement finishers.  So I got all five--eight black cement finishers.  Well, it's three more in the hall.  The guy said, well, yawl come on anyway.  So we'd get up there and instead of eight, we got eleven.  Now, we've bidded for eight.  I said, why we got eleven?  Well, they didn't have any more work, and they need to get out so we told 'em, come on.  You know--(laughter).  It's not their business, you know, (laughter).  Again, I'm following for--I'm forming a company to help them, right.  So then we do Mr.--Motel 6, and we got several slabs.  And, let's say again, we got eight cement finishers doing the slabs.  And they get the slabs down, we'll say in four hours, okay.  Now, you know, cement has to set, and then you have to sort of seal it.  Well, we'll say, look here.  We'll keep two of you here, okay.  And the rest of you can go home.  We'll pay you for eight hours.  Haven't been there but four, we'll pay you for eight hours.  Nah, nah, nah, it's gonna be several hours before this cement's ready, and we need the overtime (laughter).  That's how I learned the psyche.  Now, I don't understand that at all, man, you know.  Here you create a job--the job's bid because you bid for a price, and here we finished it in four hours.  They're gonna get paid for eight, but they need the overtime [sigh].  I still have trouble dealing with (laughter), dealing with that.  But so I formed that company to make jobs.
Story_ID: 61943
Speaker 1: As far as the newspaper is concerned, I formed that for my wife in case, practicing law I drop dead, she'd be able to carry on.
Speaker 2: So you all got back together again after that one breakup?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  We broke up in '52' [1952] and '53' [1953].  And after I got out the Army, we were back together, yeah, oh, yeah.  A relationship is such--everybody thinks relationships are just like smooth, calm water.  Well, they haven't had a relationship if they think that.  Relationships (laughter) go like this.  And some of 'em last, some of 'em don't.  And that's why, because of how much you can take the heat.  And you're--I mean you--nobody's your slave.  They ain't gonna agree with everything you say.  And you're not gonna agree with everything they say.  So you gotta, you gotta know how to compromise, and give and take.  And sometimes some people can learn that, some people can't.  I learned it, I'm fine.  (Laughter)
Story_ID: 61944
Speaker 1: What was I tell you about the paper?  All right, the newspaper.
Speaker 2: When was it founded?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And what's the name of it?
Speaker 1: "Frost", F-R-O-S-T.  It was, it was named by my, one of my two partners, and I've asked him, I said, what does Frost mean?  And he couldn't tell me.  But since I--
Speaker 2: Well, what does it mean?  Does it have a meaning?
Speaker 1: Oh, nah, nah.  Well, I didn't question him for a year or so because I thought it was F-R-O-S-H.  In fact, just since we were new--well, we were Frosh, like you come into college, you just--but I didn't spell it right.  (Laughter) So I don't know why he named it that, but he was good at naming things.  He had another newspaper before that, he called "Coffee Break", which isn't a natural newspaper name.  But he was good at that.
Speaker 2: So "Frost", okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Both my partners are gone, deceased.  So my wife runs it--well, I run it now.  And my wife's trying to begin to take it easy.
Speaker 2: So what were the editorial aims and objectives of it?
Speaker 1: The editorial aim was to bring the issues out and to try and impact resolution of the issues.  It'd have been much more money to be made just to do a shopper or just for ads.  Ads are important.  But the main thing we wanted to do was try to impact the issues and create jobs for folks because during that time, black journalists just couldn't walk in and get a job.  Now, they get 'em from us if we on their resume (unclear).  They get hired real fast (laughter).  So times have changed to that extent, okay.
Story_ID: 61945
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're actually had franchises of your newspaper too?
Speaker 2: I tried, I tried to franchise it once in Dayton, Ohio to Harvey--I can't think of Harvey's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Simmons.
Speaker 2: Harvey Simmons, right.
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: Harvey Simmons.  And Harvey ran into a little trouble.  And he wasn't able to do it.  But that was--I forget what year that would have been.  That have been--
Speaker 1: Early '70's [1970s].
Speaker 2: The '70's [1970s], yes.
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], '73' [1973].
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there.  And had that, that franchise been right, we probably would have franchised several more because we had all the wherewith all.  We could produce a paper.  All you do is put your name on it.
Speaker 1: So the Dayton's paper, the "Jetstone News" or "Gemstone News" was actually printed here in Fort Wayne [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: No, he took care of all that, but we furnished him anything he needed, news-wise and what not because we belonged to an organization called The National Negro--well, National Newspaper Publishers Association, and we get news from them by being a member.
Story_ID: 61946
Speaker 1: Well, we use that--
Speaker 2: NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], that's right--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.  The paper's been good for the community.  The highlight of the paper's career was very interesting.  Several years ago, we had a heated mayoral race.  I mean it was heated.  They were throwing everything at everybody, Democrat and Republican.  And they were giving a big debate in front of hundreds of people.  And they both--to make a point, quoted "Frost" (laughter) as an authority for this particular proposition.  I thought that was, I thought that was neat.  I figured you (laughter), in a heated debate like that, they could call your publication for authority on a particular issue, I thought that was pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 2: And how many people do you all employ at Frost?  How big an operation is it?
Speaker 1: That's a good question because it goes and comes.  It depends on what the advertising demands.  We've got--ah shucks, I'm sorry.  Did I hit the--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's okay.
Speaker 1: We've got--we could have triple the employees we got if the advertising justified it.  Right now, I guess we may have from five to seven, back and forth, five to seven.  With modern computer technology, you don't need a lot of people.  But you do need reporters to go out and get the news or people to bring the news to the reporters.  We're trying to expand now.  I'm trying to create twenty more new jobs.  But that's gonna take some doing.  I'll know by this time next year.
Story_ID: 61947
Speaker 1: Okay. So you basically, at this point you've retired from law practice?
Speaker 2: I've retired from the active trial of serious, what I call felony, million-dollar suits.  I don't do that anymore 'cause I'm not set up to do it anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me what was, what is your most memorial case from your law career?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got several memorable cases.  Both, the two I'm thinking of, both got the other side fired.  I guess, the case that I like because I think the result was right.  I had a statutory rape case where a twenty-year-old man had had consensual, I think you call it consensual carnal knowledge with a fifteen-year-old, okay.
Speaker 1: A twenty-four-year-old man--
Speaker 2: Twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Twenty-one year old with a 15-year old.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  And the young woman was Caucasian and the young man was Hispanic from a suburb of Fort Wayne [Indiana] which was the rural part of Fort Wayne, which is hard (laughter), okay.  And that trial came off with a not guilty, even though both my client and the so-called victim both got on the stand and testified to the facts that they had had intercourse.  And lawyers asked me, and the prosecutor who lost his job, how did you do that?  How did you do that?  And it's very interesting 'cause every case is different.  And at that particular time, the kind of skills I figured I had, I could, first, I won any case I went after.  That's why, some cases I wouldn't take; some cases I would.  And well this case--'cause everybody asked me and I'll tell you again, very easy.  When you're dealing with a jury, a jury is a bunch of human beings just like anybody else.  Well, this little Mexican kid is twenty-one years old.  He's about five feet tall, didn't have a hair nowhere on his face, looked like a baby's butt.  (Laughter) His face was smooth.  This little fifteen-year-old girl, she was, she was--I remember she was blonde.  Her mother was blonde.  She was about 5'8, 5'9, put Marilyn Monroe to shame (laughter), okay.  She looked like she was older than he was.  He looked like he was about twelve (laughter).  He really did.  He looked like he was about twelve.  And they had had knowledge of each other at the drive-in, the back seat, frequently.  And they both were in love with each other, and they wanted to get married.  The mother, the one that was pushing the case, she was mostly blonde, but you could see the dark roots and she wore a lot, a lot, a lot of makeup (laughter), just caked on her face.  And her skirt barely covered her navel.  I mean she, that skirt (laughter), that skirt was up there over her knees.  And she'd get so mad on the stand, she'd slobber [grueling sound].  I mean she was, she wanted this guy castrated in no uncertain term, in no uncertain terms.
Story_ID: 61948
Speaker 1: And the facts came out.  My daughter, and he's twenty years old, grown man (laughter).  Well, first of all the young girl got on the stand and she got on the stand, and she told what happened.  And she looked at the jury, boy, and tears flowing down her face.  She says, but we were gonna get married.  We wanna get married.  We love each other.  She was just crying, and [humming], okay.  Then this little guy, he comes to my shoulder (laughter), I mean he was a short little dude, five foot tall, and I swear looked like he was about twelve or thirteen even then.  When we were went to trial, she was sixteen.  She was over sixteen at the trial.  And he told the story, and the tears were just natural.  And when he started crying, she started crying (laughter), okay, and the mother started, un-un (laughter).  And the mother's mascara was running down her--oh, she was a horrible-looking (laughter) lady.  Well, in Indiana, we have what we call jury nullification 'cause our constitution says that the jury is the judge of the law and the fact, the law and the facts.  They can determine themselves what the law is.  They can determine themselves what the fact is, okay.  Well, the judges here don't like that.  They say, you gotta follow what the judge says.  You gotta follow what the judge--well, I know, I know what he says.  I know what the Constitution of Indiana says too, okay.  So, to make it short for you, what I told him, I said, this is a very simple case.  All the facts are in.  Everybody's told the truth.  I say you only got two choices, you know, with the dramatic pause.  I take long look over at mother.  She's looks like a Doberman ready to come loose.  I say, you can do what she wants; another long dramatic pause, we'd look at her.  She's going (unclear) (laughter).  Or you do what these two kids in love want, you know.  And the girl's still crying, and the boy's crying (laughter).  Jury come back, not guilty.  That was it.  They got married too.  They got married too. But that's the kind of way, when you call yourself a lawyer, that's the kind of thing you get into.  It's not always what the legal say it is.  It's how you, you do it.  Obviously, I wouldn't have done a rapist that way.  Obviously, I probably wouldn't have taken the rapist that way, okay.  Matter of fact, I have taken four rape case--I've never lost a rape case, but that's another story.  But they have to be special kind of rape cases, not, not snatching somebody in the bushes and, you know, I mean one where a guy and girl is having--and somebody walks in and catch them. Ah, I didn't, you know, it's rape, rape.  Well, (unclear) kind, do that.  That's, that was probably my most memorable case.  That's the one I feel most warmly about 'cause I think the jury made the right decision to--I don't know how that came out years later.  But I knew it was just, some bias was in there, and all the ingredients were in there, you know.
Story_ID: 61949
Speaker 1: Tell me this.  A lot has been written in the last ten years about the criminal justice system and being characterized historically now by some historical writers as being traditionally biased against African American men.  And as the jails fill up and (unclear), how do you feel about that?  Do you think that there's a particular, I mean are young black men really targets of the criminal justice system in this country, do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't think they are the targets of the justice system, no.  I think they are the target of some police officers and some law enforcement people.  The system is beginning to suffer because we're not getting as many good judges as we should be getting.  There was a time when a judge made 20, $24,000 a year.  Now they make almost a hundred thousand a year.  Well, there are young lawyers that don't make that money.  They say, hey, you got to be a judge.  A judge, a judge, to me, is a very high holding, and it's not what you think personally.  It's what the law says and how the Supreme Court interprets the law to be.  Since the Supreme Court has interpreted the law, you've got to follow the law.  It's not how your coffee was this morning or how the guy is dressed.  That's a tough assignment.  We have a lot of judges today, we have more judges today that do how they feel, and not follow the law.  I've had, I've had magistrates, which aren't even judges, okay, overrule the Supreme Court of the United States.  I put a brief on it, throw it aside.  That's (laughter), I can't tell you how traumatic that is because the system is falling down because people don't have the money to go the next step and appeal, okay.  So at the lower court level, we're getting amazed--a lot of folks are going to jail because they can't afford to fight the system.  They'll plead guilty because they can't afford to fight the system.  So the system, and what you're saying about targeting black folks, by and large have been poor.  And white people are poor.  The system's gonna grind you up because you cannot afford to fight it.  And arrests is almost tantamount to having a record, being convicted.  And that's bad.
Story_ID: 61950
Speaker 1: Well, I think the justice system's been scandalized on some level.  I know in Illinois, we've had like fifteen people come off of death row in the last five or six years--
Speaker 2: With DNA?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from DNA--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, of course.
Speaker 1: Which is a scary thought when you think of those who are--
Speaker 2: They're gone.
Speaker 1: --that are picked up and charged and convicted of a crime that they--and now, we can prove they didn't do it, though somebody's doing these things.  And they're still out there apparently.
Speaker 2: Well, what my take is on that, is first of all, the media, especially electronic media, double especially the right-wing electronic media, they put everything on television.  Ninety percent of it is not admissible in court under the rules of evidence, and the rules of evidence are there so a person can have a fair, level trial.  Well, if the media totally ignores those rules and you get people watching that get, that get the, all this so-called illegal evidence, they come up with a conclusion, okay.  And by way--if you refuse or can't understand, I heard the fact the other day saying, he refused to get on the stand.  His lawyer must have known he was guilty.  I mean, come on.  There's a lot of reasons you wouldn't wanna get on the stand that might even be related to this case.  If you get on the stand, you'll be cross-examined on something entirely different, okay (laughter).  So that's--take the fifth, you're dead.  What else can I tell you on that?  When they try you in the newspapers, the notorious O.J. [Simpson], everybody has got an opinion on O.J.  There are people who think he's innocent, people who think--not innocent, but not guilty; people who think he's guilty.  But that was done on television, with the commentators giving their opinion here and (laughter).  They didn't sit there where that jury sat, okay.  And it's sort of like what our media has developed into.  It's sort of like they make news as well as print it.  They'll interview you and waiting for you to say something that they can take over here and get a response some other way.  And I don't think that's what it's supposed to have been like.  So that's another theory of mine, that the Constitution's gonna self-destruct because everybody thinks their amendment is superior to everybody else's amendment, whether it's the first amendment, free speech or whether it's right of religion.  Everybody thinks, well, this is my amendment, mine.  I can do what I want to with my amendment.  And they begin to clash with each other.  Pretty soon, you only have one religion, and then they say, what you gonna do then, call it a theocracy? Freedom of religion, but if you do not--the major, majority religions, they look at you like, you know, who are you?  But that's what it was built on.  And they've sort of forgot that.  So we got away from that.  I don't know what you can do with that.  Does that answer your question?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, yeah, in a sense, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm trying.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it's your answer to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 61951
Speaker 1: Well, as the only lawyer in town, I mean there's a lot of--well, for instance, in Chicago [Illinois], we have the City Council and very few black lawyers on the City Council, of all the City Council that we have.  So I know being a lawyer puts you in a position where people come to you and want, you know--
Speaker 2: That was in the '60's, [1960s], that was in the '60's [1960s].  We've got, we've got a fair representation of black lawyers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --here in town now.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I shouldn't--yeah, I--but so you think it's a fair representation now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  Oh, Larry, I don't know how to answer that.  Until the firms are totally integrated, you really won't, you really won't be right.  And I'm the last one to say that because I was offered to join a firm years ago, and my answer was, I don't wanna be in no lawyer factory (laughter), you know, but I've learned better, okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) there's power there, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not only power.  It's longevity.  It's, it's--if you join a firm, you've got a senior partner in there that's gonna kick your butt if you don't do something right as you come up.  You come up to be a good lawyer.  If you've got to learn everything by yourself, trial and error, you're gonna be a total idiot.  By the time you get down the line, you done made so many mistakes, learning without somebody telling you, okay, 'cause the lawyer, (unclear) my connector is not gonna tell you.  But if you're in the same firm, he's gonna sit you down and say, look, we'll do this, this--that position goes this way or that way.  And that's the way you learn.  You do it by yourself, you're gonna learn, trial and error.  And that, that's the (unclear), like hand grenades.  This one's a dud, this one's not a dud.  Nah, it's not, not gonna work.
Story_ID: 61952
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, as a--now, do you still consider yourself a Republican, basically?
Speaker 2: I still consider myself the kind of Republican that I was when I finished law school [Indiana University School of Law].  And that's a rare Republican.  That's almost what I call middle-of-the road. Everybody's not--the Republicans that I know now are so far to the right, that I can't really identify with (laughter) all--I just can't.  I know better.
Speaker 1: Are you active in Republican politics?
Speaker 2: Not--yes, I have a buddy that I've known for a little while, and I'm trying to help get him elected, yeah.
Story_ID: 61953
Speaker 1: We were talking about Republicans, right, before we--the break.  And we were talking about the value of the law firm--
Speaker 2: Yeah, law firm, the value of the law firm is that you can learn going up and a lot of the good lawyers that I know, what I call effective lawyers, lawyers that are good trial lawyers, they started in J.P. Court.  The firm would give 'em those cases--they're small cases, but the rules are virtually the same.  And they learn by doing that, and nobody's hurt.  You don't want a million-dollar case where you're just learning on, you know.  As far as law is concerned, the actual practices of law and being in court, arguing positions is where the fun is, at least for me.  That's where the fun is, especially if a jury is involved.  A judge can be arbitrary.  A judge can be arbitrary.  Nothing you can do about it, okay.  Were we ready?
Story_ID: 61954
Speaker 1: We're rolling.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What else can I tell you?  I do take misdemeanor cases now, but I don't seek any felonies anymore because my memory is not as sharp as it should be to--you can't be stuttering in court on an issue.  You gotta be on it right now.  So since I started having those memory lapses, I don't know if that's Alzheimer's or whatever is coming in, you just, you look real foolish in court when you're trying to make a point and you-- know, you can't do it that way.
Speaker 1: There's a lot at stake too
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: There's a lot at stake too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  You represent, you're representing somebody, you daggone bet yah, representing somebody.
Story_ID: 61955
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, all right.  One of the reasons my wife and I picked up again is because we did have four children, and in my opinion, it's no way you can raise four children unless it's two of you.  And I was real tough on my kids, and they all came out pretty decent.  None of 'em were arrested ever till they were grown.  None of 'em drink, no dope, no babies either way.  My baby daughter is a dentist in the Army.  She's a full Colonel, very young to be a full Colonel.  My eldest daughter (unclear) the person department at General Motors, been there a while, handle millions of dollars.  My baby son is a lawyer in Corpus Christi, Texas, and my eldest son is a deputy fire chief here in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  None of 'em have ever caused me any trouble.  And none of 'em borrow money (laughter).  (Unclear) It's amazing.  What I've done from the time I left my mom [Alberta Smith] to go live in the "Y" [YMCA"], what I've done with my kids makes me most proud 'cause all of 'em went to college.
Speaker 2: Sir, that's something to be proud of.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah (laughter), all of 'em went, obviously.
Story_ID: 61956
Speaker 1: Well, what would you consider then, your legacy then?
Speaker 2: [Pause].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you're still young.
Speaker 2: The way I look at it, being a rejected child by my mom [Alberta Smith], being rejected all, virtually all my young life, I've always sort of bent backwards trying to be accepted which made appear sort of gullible sometime, which can be a negative when you're dealing with people that are barracudas (laughter), okay.  I, I have learned through hindsight that I, that I needed a mentor or somebody that gave a damn about you, to tell you how to go--I didn't need to make all the mistakes living by trial and error.  That's why you need a father and a mother, okay.
Story_ID: 61957
Speaker 1: And so I couldn't get that from my mom [Alberta Edwards], and, of course, when my dad [Neil Edward Soober] didn't recognize me tentatively until 1959, and had he--had he lived, I probably would have been different because we were getting along pretty good.  And he was an excellent lawyer, and they called a shyster, but they called him--it was, it was good name--if you could say that's a good name because at one time he won 14 straight murder cases (laughter) okay.  That makes him pretty daggone good, and good naturedly, they called him the shyster.  Had he lived, I know I would have been in Indianapolis [Indiana] probably with him 'cause he was so, he was, he was as sharp as I was, but his was almost street smart, where I wasn't necessarily street smart.  And my dad could, he had a gift of talking.  He could bring tears to your eyes, cussing you out without using a cuss word.  And he could actually, I mean he, he was that good with words.  He was that good.  He could use words just like a razor [making swiping sound] and give it some facial expressions, but, boy, he could really cut you up.  But again, religiously, I think everything is planned anyway, so nothing I could do about that.
Speaker 2: Really?  You think everything is--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  I don't think--yeah.  It's all a pattern.  Otherwise, you wouldn't be able to explain--so many things you'd be able to explain if it weren't--had he lived one more year, it'd have been enough (unclear).  We'd have got along fine.
Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, 'cause--
Speaker 2: --tings had to come to some kind of reasonable conclusion, you know, the reasonable (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I didn't--
Speaker 2: --I mean happy ending.
Speaker 1: We'd have, we'd have talk like we're talking now.  And I'd say, what kind of lawyer are you?  I said, I know--and that's (unclear), being smart, I said, you had a client came in there and sat down.  I said the client had all this, dirty clothes on, and he sat down in your nice chair.  He said, nothing wrong with that.  He said, all I tell him, is he working?  (Laughter) (Unclear) he's working.  And another guy come in, and he'll almost cuss him out and carry on, raising all--throughout the office.  I said, why you do that to him?  He said, if you don't do it to them first, they'll do it to you.  But you're a professional.  Why you gotta, you know--we'd talk.  And it's just--forty years later, and I still miss the guy, you know, 'cause we were just getting to the point in our lives where we were getting--(unclear) 'cause in law school--how can I say this?
Story_ID: 61958
Speaker 1: In law school, I was so determined to be a lawyer and knew I was gonna be a lawyer.  In law school, we actually wrote books for the lawyers, study books for the lawyers.  And we wrote books on evidence, books on contracts, and other senior lawyers would come and ask us questions 'cause we were, we were in it.  We, at least I knew I was in it.  And evidence follows you all the way through law.  What kind of, whatever kind of law you practice, evidence is always part of it.  We wrote the book on evidence, the whole book.  We did the summer, whole book printed it up, sold it $5.00 a copy.  (Laughter) And Dean Small gave an exam on evidence, five-hour course.  And he gave me a "D" in evidence, the only "D" I got in law school.  And the way, the way they gave the exams in those days, they'd give you a case.  They'll say here are the facts of the case.  What do you think the conclusions were?  And he'd given a Pacific case of, you know the one I'm talking about, California case, which is in the Pacific book.  And it's an advanced case.  It's not even in the book yet, okay.  So I went down to--a guy had murdered his wife.  He'd gotten a rattle snake.  He put her leg in a box and put a rattle snake in there and let the rattle snake bit her on her leg.  That's how he killed his wife.  And, of course, he got caught, and that's why it's in the book (laughter), you know, but I did all the conclusions, all the evidence in class, did everything right down the line.  He gave me a "D" on it, so I said, what was wrong with my paper.  And his answer was, there wasn't enough stuff.  Well, they had a way of "D"-ing blacks out of law school.  They wouldn't get you out at once.  They'd just "D" you out.  Your grade point average would come down because I'm hot.  Well, about a month later when that, when that case comes into the book, I (unclear), I could have written the book (laughter).  I mean, well, my answer was right, I (unclear) daggone line out of the book 'cause I knew my evidence.  I went back to him, I said, what about this?  He said, well, yeah, but I mean I want you to go beyond the case.  I mean well, that's the way they talk, okay, but I knew I knew my evidence.  Still do.  But seven of us started.  I think four of us finished.  Three flunked out and went somewhere else, but it was tough getting through law school because of--(unclear) easy and then, easy getting out.  But every since I went to the "Y" [YMCA], I started thinking then about being a lawyer.  I miss it right now.  I should be practicing now, but if I was sharp enough.
Story_ID: 61959
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you had to do it over again?
Speaker 2: Stayed in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that'd be the one thing I'd do because all my roots are there.  See what I've learned is that, when I come to Fort Wayne [Indiana] forty years ago, I'm building a practice, sure.  But I've got little kids there that are going to college, and then when they come back from college, they were born and raised here (laughter).  All of a sudden, they're home (laughter).  You understand what I'm saying.  And they got all their roots, got all their roots.  They went to school with this person, went to school with that person.  I never realized the value of roots.  I'm beginning to feel sorry when people go all over the place, you know.  You got nobody to identify with.  (Unclear) There a--now, like you say you're from Dayton [Ohio].  Well, I don't know where you are now--where are you staying now?
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how long you've been in Chicago, but Chicago's a big place, you know.
Speaker 1: I feel the same way as you.  I do.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying, that's sort of something you don't think about until down the road.  My relatives have died.  I couldn't make the funeral because they're down there, and I'm somewhere else, where I'd be the first one at the funeral home were I there.  That's (unclear), nobody, nobody told me about roots.  When I said I was going to Fort Wayne, nobody objected.  Mom didn't object, nobody objected.  So I left, and now at this point in life, I'm going back down there and play golf with the guys now, you know, but these are guys I knew from--and when you're sort of in retirement, you got time to talk and discuss things and see how, who's kid is doing what and this kind of thing.  I didn't realize how valuable that was, and I really miss it.
Story_ID: 61960
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Regardless of the money I've made here, that ain't got nothing to do with, okay.  It's just--guys call me, "69", you know, it's a funny thing--oh, twenty years ago--I've been here forty, twenty years ago, my son's in, running track.  And they have a track meet in Indianapolis [Indiana], okay.  I've been gone twenty years, right.  I'm down there taking pictures of my son because it's, dad, I'm taking pictures of my son, and I got a newspaper thing here, so I can get in and all that kind of stuff.  And I hear somebody in the crowd, "Hey, 69".  Well, you know, nobody's (laughter)--I must be in Indianapolis, you know.  And I had one contract put out on me--I had two contracts, but one the guy was--they identified me as the target.  He says, nah, he said get somebody else.  That's 69.  I ain't gonna do it."  And I found this out a couple years later.  I miss Indianapolis, you know.  Indianapolis' got everything I want down there, good basketball team, football team, everything that they don't have here.  Yeah, but that's, that's why I'm a little down.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--what you just said is true.  I mean I agree with you.  I mean I--I'm not supposed to do that but I--
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: Do what you just said about roots and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, man--
Speaker 1: --and leaving a place.  It's--
Speaker 2: It has to do with family too.  Had I stayed in Fort Wayne [Indiana]--I mean in Indianapolis, my family wouldn't have scattered all over the place, okay.  Now, I got some kids in Detroit, Michigan, another one in Germany, another one in Texas, you know, and you miss your family continuity there.  Grand kids, you don't see for three or four years at a time.
Story_ID: 61961
Speaker 1: Sir, you still have a lot of vitality left.  You're still working on your paper, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  How would I like to be remembered?  That I was a good lawyer, that I was honest, considerate of people.  By and large, I was a good parent, and really a good son (unclear).  That's about all I can say from me.  I probably still have a mark to make, and I probably won't make that till I write a book or two.
Story_ID: 61962
Speaker 1: I think when you go over here, the Judas factor is very important.  You're talking about unity, it's neutralizing that Judas factor.  There's a tendency to think that if you're accepted by the folks, then you don't have to worry about anything black.  In other words, you join my club, and whatever the hell he's doing to the other black folks don't matter 'cause you're all right.  They don't see the fact that all of us are put into a category of entertainment to be successful.  Virtually ninety percent of the, of the big-money folk are all in the entertainment field.  That's not a field of leadership.  That's a field, just like it says, entertainment.  So you never really take a serious leadership part, okay.  If I get my books written, I'll probably have a mark there, and if I get time to sit down and just write, do like Haley [Alex Haley], and write these things.  I haven't been as explicit as I could have been with you.  As I said, I don't think it's required, but there are a lot of things I have in my head that I've learned the hard way that I think may help someone else come along, if they will stop and listen.  The tendency is now the young kids don't listen to older folks.  They just old folk.  What they know?  They old.  That's why they know something 'cause they're old (laughter).  But that doesn't seem to come through.  I've lived through the, I should say the first Detroit riots in 1942 (unclear), the second Detroit riots, 1967, and understanding just who we are and why we got (unclear) our lives a certain way in order to be respected and productive, not just 'cause your next-door neighbor pats you on the head and say, come on, that I'm all right.
