Story_ID: 624906
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and I'd like to have you start out by stating your name, full name, and spelling it for us?
Speaker 2: Carl O. Snowden [HistoryMaker Carl Snowden], S-N-O-W-D-E-N, C-A-R-L.
Speaker 1: Okay but you have to give your also your middle name?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Carl Orie Snowden.  And that's O-R-I-E.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 6--June 17, 1953.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: December 9, 2011.
Speaker 1: And our location, The HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Right, 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: And I wanna have your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the director for the Maryland attorney general's office, Office of Civil Rights.
Speaker 1: But how would you define your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess the way it would be defined is it's governmental, obviously.  I would say government.  I don't know any other way you would describe--
Speaker 1: Government employee or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 624907
Speaker 1: And the other, the other--I'm gonna ask People magazine-ish questions there are five of them.  We call them our favorites.  And so I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Probably Chinese.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Brazil.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No one can do everything, but everyone can do something.
Story_ID: 624908
Speaker 1: Okay and I wanna start out talking about your family 'cause your family is from the Maryland area is that true?
Speaker 2: Right, both of my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] and father are native Marylanders.
Speaker 1: So can you, let's start with your father, who was a butcher, right?
Speaker 2: Nodding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd like to have you state his name for us and talk about what you know about his, his family and his background?
Speaker 2: My father name was William Amber Snowden [William Snowden] and his father was Reverend Eugene Snowden and they lived in Anne Arundel County, Maryland, and he came from a very, very large family.  His father was a late--he, he converted to Seventh-day Adventist.  But he started off as a Methodist, became a Seventh-day Adventist.  My father was a Catholic and my mother was Baptist, which (laughter) made it an interesting mixed marriage in a lot of ways.  My father served in the armed services.  It's kind of an interesting story involving him.  My father had one eye and when we were growing up, he wore a patch over his eye for all of his--all of--for as long as I can remember, but no one ever asked why.  The assumption was, at least it was my assumption, that his loss of eyesight had come from having served in the war because I know he had been in the [U.S.] Army and it was not until after my father died, that I learned something as to how he lost his eye.  I had always assumed it was as a result of being in the service and the day that he was buried, at one of these veteran cemeteries in Crownsville, Maryland, I was coming back with his brother and his brother's name was Joseph [Joseph Snowden] and I said to him, "Joe, what year did my father lose his eye" because we had never talked about that as a family discussion.  "Was it when he went to war?"  And he said, "No, no, no, your father lost his eye before he went to war."  So I thought Joe had it backwards because I said, "Wait a minute, he couldn't have gone into the Army with one eye?"  He said, "Oh yes, he did." And he reminded me that during World War II [WWII] there was such a great shortage of people that they did take people in who had--as was the case with my father, a missing eye, he--my father lost his eye because he was part of what a program Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had put together, civilian CCW [sic. Civilian Conservation Corps] I think it was called and these were persons that were government employees who were hired by the government to do various things as it relates to the infrastructure and the job that he had whereas taking explosives and blowing up boulders to be able to make roads and bridges, et cetera and according to my uncle one of those boulders that he blew up, one of the splinters hit him in the eye and that's how he lost his eye.  But he was--he enlisted in the [U.S.] military and became a sharp shooter of all things.  I think he was in the Army maybe a couple years before being released. And he was a laborer and he would eventually go to work for the United States Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland], where he became a butcher.
Speaker 1: Now was he the, the work that he was doing where he eye, you know, was damaged, was that during the Works Projects Administration [sic. Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], was that during that time under the Roosevelt--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --administration (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 624909
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about was he [Snowden's father, William Snowden] a talkative man?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He wasn't.  Did--what--do you remember stories he told you about his growing up [in Anne Arundel County, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No, what I learned about his growing up came from his mother. His mother. His mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah who lived there long.  I mean they were in their nineties before they passed?
Speaker 1: So what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Emma [Emma Snowden].  My grandmother's name was Emma and again his father, my grandfather, name was Eugene [Eugene Snowden].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they would talk about what it was like when he was growing up.  That's how I sort of learned about some of his history.
Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me so the--your, your grandmother and grandfather on that side, how much do you know like even going back on that side of the family because it seems that you did--did you originate there or was there a southern migration of your family?
Speaker 2: No, they were here.  They, they were already here.  I'm not, I'm not able to go beyond on my father's parents in terms of where they came from.  As I said they had a very large family.
Speaker 1: How large is large?
Speaker 2: It must have been at least twelve or thirteen.
Speaker 1: And where did your father fit?
Speaker 2: He was the second oldest.
Speaker 1: Now are you saying that your grandmother and grandfather were Seventh-day Adventist or did your father come to be Seventh-day Adventist like--
Speaker 2: He came to be Seventh-day Adventist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was originally Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay so they--were they A.M.E. Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal] or?
Speaker 2: No, United Methodist.
Speaker 1: United Methodist.
Speaker 2: They were United Methodist, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you remember a doctrine or things from your grandfather of the United Methodist church?  Do you--because he was a minister, right?
Speaker 2: Actually he came under the Seventh-day Adventist as a minister.
Speaker 1: Oh your--
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: --your--he converted then to Seven--oh so the whole family converted?
Speaker 2: Right well he converted his right--his wife converted but not the whole family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mentioned to you my father was Catholic.
Speaker 1: Right that's right you said (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] was a Baptist.  No he--I can recall the conversion because I recall some of the things you could not do as a result of him becoming a Seventh-day Adventist.  But no, the whole family did not convert.
Speaker 1: Okay so he converted I mean were you, were you born and everything when your grandfather converted?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh so you did--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so we'll get into that.  Okay so how, how would you--how did people describe your father then?
Speaker 2: Hardworking.  Very much a hardworking man.  One of the things that I, I remember he was always working, always working as a laborer or he would walk to work.  It was not unusual for him to walk to work. And that's what I remember about him mostly, just being a hard worker constantly.
Speaker 1: But describe him to me you know how, his height is?
Speaker 2: Six feet two, probably before he got ill somewhere around 180, 185 pounds.  Because of the type of work he did as a laborer, well built. And someone that loved to have a good time.  Oftentimes he would break out in singing, whatever the popular songs were in that day.
Story_ID: 624910
Speaker 1: Talk about your mother.  Give her name.
Speaker 2: Her name was Ora [Ora Brown Snowden].  Her father's name was John Brown.  I knew him as well.
Speaker 1: Her mother?
Speaker 2: Her mother had--her mother died when--at her birth.  She never knew her mother.  She would later learn I believe that her name was Daisy Pendo [ph.], but she really never knew him--knew her mother.  She was raised by her father and she had one brother who by the way was a minister as well.  His name was Reverend Brown and, and he only had one daughter and his first name was Ed, Ed Brown [John E. Brown].  He was a minister.
Speaker 1: Now was he a Baptist minister since she was, right, she was Baptist?
Speaker 2: He actually was United Methodist.  He was United Methodist and he's now deceased but he was her only brother and my mother was a domestic worker and for a period of time we lived as part of an extended family with her father on a farm in Davidsonville, Maryland, which is a very large farm and he owned his own property.  He being her father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her father?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: On that side.  Okay.  And describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh she was, too, a hard worker.  She had eleven children.  I'm next to the youngest.  She is, she'll be ninety-five her birthday, she's still living.  I think the thing that I would say very determined person, very, very determined and one who even to this day continues to be the matriarch of the family.  You know she was very, very much in charge.
Story_ID: 624911
Speaker 1: And did she [Snowden's mother, Ora Brown Snowden] talk about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Can you share some stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, one of the things she would talk about in terms of her growing up, remember she was well because of her age, she was born during the Great Depression in 19--my mother was born on January, January 9, 1917 and the Great Depression would come twelve years later.  So she remembered the Great Depression.  She remembered what it was like to live during this particular era.  She has lived through eight presidents, several world wars, Vietnam War, up to the present day and her memory is very, very, very good.  She remembers when we moved from Davidsonville [Maryland] which was in the, in the country to the City of Annapolis [Maryland].  And she was married three times.  My husband--my father [William Snowden] rather, was her last husband but she had been married previous to that.  So she has shared with me what it was like growing up and essentially gave me an understanding how people in that day survived because prior to our Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] coming to power and there being a social network, a social, social safety network being created, there was none. You were sort of were on your own.  So I always wondered how it was that people were able to survive without any government programs at all.  And she was able to explain it to me.
Speaker 1: What did she explain?
Speaker 2: Well because she lived in the City of Annapolis and because her father [John Brown] was a farmer, they learned to use--to raise their own food, be able to fish and crab and use the bounties of the sea as well as raising their own crops.  That's how she was able to survive and there were also a barter system that was going on at that time where if a neighbor have something that you didn't have and you had you something they didn't have people exchanged among themselves. That was not unusual according to her would it be people coming together other than for your immediate family coming together and sort of creating a potluck situation where the community survived. And of course the church played a central role as well.  Now this is before of course social programs came to be.  So a lot of it was people acting with whatever resources they had and using mother wit.
Story_ID: 624912
Speaker 1: Did she [Snowden's mother, Ora Brown Snowden] talk at all though about any of the organizations like the, the lodges or you know the organizations that are important.  Did she talk about that--
Speaker 2: She was a member of the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World].
Speaker 1: She was a member of the Elks.
Speaker 2: She was a member of the Elks.  That was one of her, her organizations that she was involved with for, for many years.  That was one of the many outlets that she had.  The time in which she was younger and more active, of course segregation existed where, where I grew up at and where she lived.  So she remembers all of the segregated bars and taverns and places that people would go for they social outlet.
Speaker 1: So what were some of those places 'cause your history is, is deep in the, you know Anne Arundel area [Anne Arundel County, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Well there's now places that are just memories Susan Tea Bar--there used to be a place called Susie's Team Room [Annapolis, Maryland].  There was another place called Beenie's Bar [ph.], Joe's Tavern [ph.].  These were one place had an interesting place called Dew Drop Inn [Annapolis, Maryland] was one of the names that come to mind now.  They had all of these little places that people would go and gather and socialize and because the city that I grew up in was a segregated city, the lines were very clear what you could do and what you couldn't do.
Speaker 1: So where were the lines drawn?
Speaker 2: Basically at what restaurants, what theaters, what facilities.
Speaker 1: What street?  Were there any streets that were the dividing line?  Any sides of town that were the dividing lines?
Speaker 2: No, I think there were places that--and--
Speaker 1: That you could or could not go?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They were like movie theaters that you could not go into, restaurants and the like (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Skating rinks?
Speaker 2: Skating rinks. Blacks had they own beaches you know, whites had they own beaches.
Speaker 1: So what were the black beaches?
Speaker 2: Carr's Beach [Annapolis, Maryland] was one of the famous ones.  I mean Carr's Beach was a beach that was well known on the East, East Coast.  People would come as far as New York and Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to come down to this place and some of the major entertainers of that day performed at those beaches, Carr's beach.  So it was a very popular place.
Story_ID: 624913
Speaker 1: Describe your mother [Ora Brown Snowden] to me.  'Cause your father [William Snowden] you described and--
Speaker 2: Well let me--I'll tell you a story that I think sort of reflects who she is and sort of captures I think what it was like.  When I was growing up in Davidsonville, Maryland, on a farm that my father, grandfather [John Brown] owned--he was a very dark complexion man, had no formal education, but you couldn't cheat him.  I mean he had an incredible capacity for numbers and very stern as a, as a disciplinarian and we lived in this extended family situation and I had a friend of mine that I grew up with a little boy named Tommy [ph.] and Tommy's father was a sharecropper and I didn't know of course what a sharecropper was in that day but Tommy loved his father.  I mean that's the only way to describe Tommy.  He just held his father in such great esteem.  His father Mr. Marshall [ph.] was a very hard working man and very strong 'cause I used to remember seeing Mr. Marshall put a plow literally to--hook up a plow to his back and plow up the field and he would put calves on his shoulders, he would just--incredibly hardworking man and he's one that did say a lot but when he did speak, you listen.  And I must have been five or six and Tommy and I would play in these forests in the woods and in that day there were very few white people that we could come into contact with.  In fact anytime I recall coming into contact with them was when you went into the City of Annapolis [Maryland] because again you on your own farm, you sort of played with your kids of your own race and Tommy and I would play in the forest and in playing in these woods you could do all kinds of things.  Take twigs and through your imagination turn 'em into a spaceship or a twig into a gun or whatever your imagination would have with all these woods to play in and Tommy and I played together constantly.  In fact when you saw Tommy you saw me and Tommy once told that me his father was so strong that he could beat Superman and I never told Tommy that I believe he could, I would always argue with him.  Tommy would tell me his father could beat my father. And Tommy just held his father, Mr. Marshall, great, great esteem, he just loved his father and his father was the kind of man that as I told you just constantly work hard and it was not unusual to see Tommy's father without a shirt on especially during the summer.
Story_ID: 624914
Speaker 1: I remember one sweltering August summer day, we're doing what we were always doing, playing the forest, in the woods and the man that Tommy's [ph.] father worked for was a man named Rossback [ph.], Mr. Rossback. And on this occasion Mr. Rossback was leaving to come to Tommy's father's house. And neither Tommy and I knew what was going on we just sensed there was something awry.  It was the way the man was walking or just something we just--for an intuitive standpoint knew that there was going to be something going on.  And in those days kids were literally not seen or heard.  You just didn't get in adult businesses.  So Tommy and I ran down to where his father lived and we hid in some bushes that would enable us to see what was going on but not be seen, and Mr. Rossback walked to Tommy's father's house, banged, banged on the door and Tommy's mother opened the door and he went in and what seemed to be a long time but it was really a very short period time, we heard this cacophony of sound and out of the house comes Tommy's father followed by Mr. Rossback and he is--he, Mr. Rossback is telling Tommy's father, "Nigger if you can't come to work today, I want you off my property and out of, out of here."  And this leads to some altercation between the two of them and Mr. Marshall [ph.] is saying something to Mr. Rossback when suddenly Mr. Rossback pushes Tommy's father, who loses his balance and he falls and in that day was not unusual for people to chew tobacco and Mr. Rossback had been chewing tobacco in his mouth and when Tommy's father fell, he spat upon him with this tobacco and when he did that, I just for me the whole world just came to an end 'cause I knew what Tommy's father was capable of doing, saw these huge muscles he had in him. And so I just thought this guy is gonna--but Tommy's father did something altogether different and something I've never forgotten which leads me in a long way to what my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] was like.  What happened was instead of Tommy's father getting up and striking this man who just spat upon him, Tommy's father started begging this man by saying, "I's a sorry boss, don't fire me.  I, I's a sorry, I'll come to work today," and Mr. Rossback without spending a lot of time just said, "Well nigger if you wanna work, you get on up here." And he started walking back toward what was called the big house where he lived at.
Story_ID: 624915
Speaker 1: As Mr. Marshall [ph.] was getting up and rising, his eye contact came directly to where Tommy [ph.] and I were hiding so he looked at Tommy and he looked at me and Tommy was crying profusely and to this day I don't know where Tommy went, but he just started running off.  Mr. Marshall didn't say a word as he got up slowly, gathering himself.  And so I started running too (laughter).  I ran home to my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] glad to tell my mother what I had just witnessed because I wanted her to be aware of what had happened. And I think my mother was like so many black women of that day, she didn't want me to be embittered by the process of experience, wanted me to be better.  So she kind of convinced me that what I'd seen I hadn't actually seen.  And it was my really first experience with raw racism.  It was more than just watching a man getting embarrassed in front of his wife, humiliated in front of his son, literally see, saw someone's manhood get emasculated and I never forgot that experience and I think my mother was trying to protect me from the effect she thought that might have on me over the years and as I look back on that particular period of time, I've concluded that in her own way she was trying to shelter me from experiences that I would later have in life.
Story_ID: 624916
Speaker 1: Now you're saying that at that time that it happened you were around five or six, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I want to take you back to what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: It would be around that time.
Speaker 1: Around that time?
Speaker 2: Growing up on a farm [in Davidsonville, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) having, having these very pleasant experiences on the farm and I you know of course there were events that occurred that you don't forget. But we eventually moved to Annapolis [Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Okay, but let's stay there a minute.  So let's--tell me about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Sights, smells and sounds.
Speaker 2: Well farm clearly during those early years it would be farm life.
Speaker 1: Sights.
Speaker 2: Horses, cows or smell of tobacco.  I can remember the house being cold because it was heated by a wooden stove.  We--I grew up in a very extended family not just my own but my older sisters had their children with us which were around my age.  So we all sort of grew up together.  I remember one of the lessons of growing up together was the peer pressure and what that really meant because we would live, we would sleep maybe six or seven to a bed and it became real clear if someone wet the bed, everybody got affected by that.  And so it became a real need to make sure that you checked with whoever was sleeping with you at the time you know you kind of go to the bathroom, you gotta go, right, because everybody would be affected by it.  So I remember those experiences and also remember just how much, how it seemed so self-sufficient the farm was.  Everything you seem to need was there.
Speaker 1: So what about smells?  You know what smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: As I told you animals and the farms, the tobacco.  In terms of the woods, a pine smell you could smell throughout.  Those are the ones that kind of come to mind.
Speaker 1: And any more sounds?
Speaker 2: Very quiet because again we were living again in the country so it was very little sounds except for gunshot.  I do remember gunshots and I remember my sister, I had a twin sister [Carolyn Snowden Keene] and I remember my twin sister being frightened by gunshots, absolutely frightened by it.
Speaker 1: So you are--you said you were the eleventh so your sister and you are eleventh and twelfth?
Speaker 2: Yea my sister is older than I by five minutes.  My mother there are nine, there were eleven, they're now eight still living, so I'm next to the youngest.
Story_ID: 624917
Speaker 1: You know large families like that you know you and you're the youngest it's almost like you know there are maybe three or four families within the families so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so can you tell me how you found your way sort of?  So you said in your earliest memory is really around that five or six year period and you're living on the farm but how are you, you know how are you--and who's the youngest because you did--'cause can you give your before we do that?  Can you give your siblings names in order?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My oldest brother his name is William or Junior [William Snowden], I got a brother named Allen [Allen Snowden], I got a sister Carolyn [Carolyn Snowden Keene] and then Theresa [Theresa Snowden Hamilton] is the youngest and as I mentioned to you earlier, my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] had been married previously so she had Helen [Helen Blake], Charlene [ph.] and Henrietta [Henrietta Williams] and Alverta [Alverta Digg Barnes].  Alverta is recently deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay and then but that's still not all of them?
Speaker 2: Well two of them--
Speaker 1: Passed away.
Speaker 2: --passed away before I was born--
Speaker 1: Okay I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so I never knew them.
Speaker 1: Okay so how many people are living in your household when you, you know when you're born because you--I mean when you're young, I'm sorry
Speaker 2: When we lived with my [maternal] grandfather [John Brown], yeah when I lived with my grandfather there were three--
Speaker 1: But this is out in Davidson, Davidson [sic. Davidsonville, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Right before we moved to the city [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: It would be at least two distinctive families.
Story_ID: 624918
Speaker 1: So what were you like as a young person, can you describe that?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, when I eventually would move into the city--
Speaker 1: When, when did you move in the city--
Speaker 2: After my grandfa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because you were born in 1953.
Speaker 2: After my [maternal] grandfather [John Brown] died.
Speaker 1: And what year, how old were you when he died?
Speaker 2: My grandfather died in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I would have been seven, eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had a stroke and at that time, the hospital Anne Arundel General [Anne Arundel General Hospital; Anne Arundel Medical Center, Annapolis, Maryland] it was called, it didn't serve African Americans so he had to go to Freedmen [Freedmen's Hospital; Howard University Hospital] which was Washington, D.C. by automobile.  And--
Speaker 1: And that's at Howard right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  That's an hour away at least?
Speaker 2: And that's what I believe and others believe contributed to his death.  So we--when they move into the City of Annapolis [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay but I wanna ask about that.  Do you remember his death you know the discussion around this death, the funeral?  I'd like to review some of that.
Speaker 2: Yea when he died, he--my grandfather--one of my nieces who was part of this extended family were very close to my grandfather and in fact she was sitting on his lap when he had the stroke.  So that was a very traumatic experience for her.  And we as kids didn't know what had happened.  Just knew that you know something was awry.  He was taken by car to Annapolis, which was a shorter distance as you pointed out, but for whatever reason was not waited on and had to go up to Freedmen where he, I think, died en route when he got there.  And it was very traumatic for my nieces who were very close to him, very, very close and I think we didn't go to the funeral.  We were not allowed to go to the funeral.
Speaker 1: The younger kids?
Speaker 2: The younger kids.
Speaker 1: That, that was common a lot of times, right?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 624919
Speaker 1: So, you, so you are seven, now so he--now that was his [Snowden's maternal grandfather, John Brown] farm, right? Your--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're seven so do you remember discussions about the movement into the city? So that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh yeah.  When we moved into the city it was a whole different I mean it was--we had been visiting Annapolis [Maryland] as sort a regular routine for shopping purposes and that sort of thing.  When we moved into the City of Annapolis, we moved into what is now referred to as downtown Annapolis and prior to this I had went to a segregated school which was Carver Elementary School [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Lexington Park, Maryland] named after George Carver--George Washington Carver.  But when we moved to Annapolis I was put in a class that was integrated.  That's my first sort of experience going to school with whites and I think I was in the fourth grade, third or fourth grade when that happened.
Speaker 1: And so let's talk about you at that point because can you describe yourself.  I find that time period pretty informative in a lot of respects.
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that happened was when I went to--it was called Annapolis Elementary School [Annapolis, Maryland], we had a teacher whose name was Mrs. Turner [ph.] and another teacher named Mrs. Anderson [ph.] and they had a program that they had started where you would get a silver dollar for reading so many books and I had already taken an interest in comic books at a really young age and I loved, I used to love these comic books and when an opportunity come to earn a silver dollar for reading, I won a number of those contests.  So I started reading a lot more.  The silver dollar begin- was the incentive in the beginning.
Speaker 1: And to think but describe yourself that's what I wanna know.  Were you rambunctious, were you quiet, were you--I mean I'm just trying to get a sense of--
Speaker 2: I think quiet.  I think I was pretty much a introvert during that period of time and very much contented with my books.  I could be you know I was very happy.  Give me a good book and I was just delighted.  Kind of went to my world.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did you so you went to Carver until what age?  What grade?  Was it up to sixth grade?
Speaker 2: No, no, third grade.
Speaker 1: Third grade?
Speaker 2: And then I went to an integrated elementary school for the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And that would be Annapolis Elementary School.
Speaker 1: So this is, this would be--okay that makes sense so this is the early '60s [1960s] really that you're, you're doing that.
Story_ID: 624920
Speaker 1: How is family life?  What is happening you know in the family--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at this point?
Speaker 2: Well now we've got one, we not with an extended family, it's just our immediate family and we're now living in downtown Annapolis [Maryland].  There was a place called Cornhill Street, 10 Cornhill Street. And what made that particular place particularly of interest, it is said that [President] George Washington slept there.  10 Cornhill Street was three blocks from the state capitol [Maryland State House] and so it's right in the heart of downtown Annapolis.  And both parents are working my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] and father [William Snowden] at this point and I'm going to--I'm attending for the first time this integrated school [Annapolis Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland] and you could literally walk from the school to home, it's that close, it's like three or four blocks and downtown Annapolis is far different today than what it was then.  It used to be predominantly African American, although whites lived in that area as well.  It was overwhelmingly African Americans and the waterfront the city dock [Annapolis City Dock, Annapolis, Maryland] was really a working dock where watermen would be working on the dock.  So it's totally different than what it is today.
Speaker 1: Now you, so your parents--I just would like you describe first of all what is the address that you're living at?  Do you remember the address?
Speaker 2: 10, 10 Cornhill Street.
Speaker 1: Okay so it was 10 Cornhill Street?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe the street and?
Speaker 2: Very narrow street, very, very narrow street.
Speaker 1: So was it like row houses sort of, no?
Speaker 2: Yes it's like row houses along the way it's as I told you several three, four blocks away from the state capitol and a fairly short street, it's not, it's not a very long street, and you literally knew everybody on the street.
Speaker 1: Can you describe some of the neighbors and who they were?
Speaker 2: Well probably the one that I remember most clearly is a man named Roger Williams [ph.].  Mr. Williams was a barber as well as a landlord.  He owned property and he rented out his apartments, but I remember Mr. Williams because he was not only barber but he was a philosopher and he was up in age even then when I knew him.  A very dark complexioned man, very, very dark complexioned but one that was always kind of giving out unsolicited advice about something or other.
Story_ID: 624921
Speaker 1: What other things? So describe your friends, you know I mean I'm just trying to get a sense of you know--were holidays important? I mean I just wanna get a sense of, let's just first start with family life you know and within the context of the family or playing with friends outside and.
Speaker 2: Well remember when I'm, when I'm going to the fourth grade this is in 1963 and one of the things that occurred during this period of time was we were in a classroom in the fourth grade and Mrs. Turner [ph.] who is the homeroom teacher comes in your classroom and she's crying and she tells everyone they can go home and there's no explanation given.  Just go home.  And of course while we were unconcerned why we were going home, nobody was opposed to leaving school early, so if we are leaving to leave to go home, the school [Annapolis Elementary School] was on a street called Green Street [Annapolis, Maryland] and three or four blocks is where I would live [on Cornhill Street] and as I'm walking home with some kids, we notice that all of the adults are crying.  We just can't figure out what's going on here.  When we get home my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] and others are gathered around an old black and white television set and they're crying and I couldn't figure out what was going on and suddenly my mother says, "They killed him."  And what she was referring to was our John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been assassinated and all of the television sets was tuned to this assassination and I just remembered hearing just all kinds of comments.  These are all black people talking about how this is bad for black people and he was shot because he was trying to do something for black people.  In those days they refer to them as Negroes and I just didn't know who John F. Kennedy was or why they felt so strongly with his assassination and that sort of affected the entire community and started paying more attention, I did, in terms of what was going on around me and what it meant when someone gets assassinated.
Story_ID: 624922
Speaker 1: Now was there any discussion--so do you remember where you were when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, where were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, absolutely.  I--when Dr. King was assassinated on April 3, 1968 [sic. April 4, 1968], I was thirteen, fourteen year old teenager and it was in my hometown there was a corner.  It was called Richmond's corner, although it was given that name, it was called that because that was the drugstore was on the corner and the drugstore was called Richmond [Richmond Drugs, Annapolis, Maryland] and people referred to it as Richmond's corner. And we all gathered around, just doing what we normally do as teenagers and somebody came by and said, "They killed Martin Luther King, Jr." And in those days if you walked along West Street which is one of the commercial areas, they used to have television sets in the windows as a way of advertising these sets and they would have the TV sets on so you know the people would be enticed to buy them.  And we immediately went up to one of these storefronts and there was this--these pictures of Dr. King and the fact that he's been assassinated and just, it just--the whole town you could feel the tension in it and what they were showing on television at the time was not only the assassination of Dr. King, but the response to the assassination so we could see on television places on fire. Baltimore City [Baltimore, Maryland], Washington, D.C. These various cities that would show all of these things going on and as teenagers we are caught up in that at that particular moment and I remember the then mayor of the city who happened to be a white guy--
Speaker 1: Remember his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still living, his name was Moyer, Roger Moyer.  He came with a group of community leaders and was talking to groups of teenagers who had begun to gather and what they wanted to do was to have us go to some recreation center and have some music played and food given as a way of trying to--
Speaker 1: Prevent?
Speaker 2: Yeah prevent--
Speaker 1: Riots.
Speaker 2: --riots from occurring and many of us was so taken light by Dr. King's death that that was not enough so one of the guys who happened to be white who I would later get to know very, very well was a Jewish white guy and he owned a radio station WANN radio station [WANN Radio, Annapolis, Maryland] and he said, "Listen why don't you come on this radio and just share your views about how you felt about Dr. King's death?"  And I think that did, that helped to avert a probable catastrophe because we were given an outlet as teenagers on this radio program to be able to say what we think. And Annapolis [Maryland] was one of the few cities that was spared from the riots.  Annapolis had no significant rioting at all because of that.
Story_ID: 624923
Speaker 1: What are you like as--so, so Carver [George Washington Carver Elementary School, Lexington Park, Maryland] leads you to the--
Speaker 2: Annapolis Elementary [Annapolis Elementary School, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: --Annapolis Elementary and then you go from there to what?
Speaker 2: Annapolis Junior High School [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Junior high then Annapolis High School [Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why don't you talk about Hoppy Adams you know 'cause--
Speaker 2: Well Hoppy Adams was a deejay that was part of this radio station that--
Speaker 1: Was this around the same time or is this a little later?
Speaker 2: No, he's the same time.  He's a very popular deejay that's on the air.  The radio station WANN [WANN Radio, Annapolis, Maryland] was owned by whites, Jews, but the music it played was orientated to African American so it was a very popular radio station. And Hoppy Adams was a popular deejay who had one of his famous lines was tonight, tonight, tonight.  He would sort of promote various events that would take place. And Hoppy Adams was the first African American to not only be on the air as a radio personality but he was also executive vice president of this company, him and Mr. Blum [Morris Blum] were very close and through that relationship I would eventually get a job there at the radio station doing radio interviews as a host moderator for a local radio program.
Speaker 1: And you're at what age are you doing that? Is that--
Speaker 2: Fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 624924
Speaker 1: You know we often, we don't think sometimes about how youth--how, how--though it's been talked about much talk about and written, but how much youth were involved in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: You know because they had to be, they were allowed with the support of their parents, right?  So what are your parents [Ora Brown Snowden and William Snowden], I still wanna get this whole thing and I'm trying to get an idea of family life and you know the reason I'm asking is that you know your father's Catholic, your mother's Baptist, you had said earlier that I agreed it's some interesting dynamics but I'm not getting that and I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Well I think here is how it comes about.  Really for me--
Speaker 1: And then the Seventh-day Adventist, were you raised Seventh-day Adventist?
Speaker 2: No.  What for me I think when I go to Annapolis High School [Annapolis, Maryland], I should back up and tell you by the time I get to Annapolis Junior School [Annapolis Junior High School, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And you're at what age?
Speaker 2: Then maybe thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not a very good student, maybe a C student pushing C at that, just not interested in school at all.  I eventually get to Annapolis High School, I'm in the tenth or eleventh grade at Annapolis High School and it's there that a series of events occurred that I would have certainly had a profound impact on me.  I'm in Annapolis High School, schools have been recently integrated in Anne Arundel County [Maryland] because previous to that you went to all segregated schools, there was only one in the entire county that African Americans could go to and that was a school called Wiley H. Bates High School [Annapolis, Maryland].  No matter where you lived all blacks went to that school until they closed it in 1966.  That was the last graduating class it would have.  So in 1969 three years later, I'm at Annapolis High School going from 1969 to 1970 and not very much challenged as a student at all and one of the requirements, we had an English teacher who required that everybody had to read a book and then come back and give a report on the book.  And I was given an assignment of reading 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] which was hardback and it was a very thick book.  And I didn't wanna read 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X.'  This English professor said, "You either read this or you won't graduate," so, so I took 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' and it was my intention to read the foreword, read a couple of the chapters, come to school the next day and give an oral report just kind of fake it.  And when I picked up 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' it had an interesting, the cover was very interesting and I started reading the first chapter which is called "Nightmare" and I literally could not put the book down.  It was the first book I read from--in one sitting from beginning to end.  Spent all day reading it.  I was so amazed by it.
Speaker 1: What amazed you?
Speaker 2: Oh everything.  Malcolm X was the first person that ever had me thinking about the question what color is Jesus.  I had always assumed that Jesus was white.  It had never dawned on me that he could be anything else.  But Malcolm X in telling his story was so gifted and being able to just raise basic questions. He got me involved in thinking with geography.  I credit him to this day with history. Just asking me to kind of think through some things.  Now remember in his autobiography, there was a--he was in prison at the time and there was this minister he had just recently I think gotten involved in or an interest in religion and he was trying to demonstrate that Jesus had to be black and the preacher who happened to be white was arguing with him.  And so Malcolm was part of a debate and then Malcolm would talk about how he went and got a, got a map of the world, looked up the history of the people who lived in that era and what their color was and after getting this debate with this guy, the guy finally conceded that Jesus wasn't white, but he wouldn't allow Malcolm to win the argument that he was black, he told Malcolm that he was brown and Malcolm said that was enough for him because he at least gotten him to admit that he wasn't white. And I thought wow. Malcolm once said research is history's best reward and that really set off a reaction in me.  I read everything.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anything I could get my hands on I read.
Story_ID: 624925
Speaker 1: So what else were you reading around that time?
Speaker 2: Everything associated with black history.  He had opened up this desire for me to know.  I read W.E.B. Du Bois, I read James Baldwin, who I just kind of fell in love with.  Claude McKay [sic. Claude Brown] wrote a book called 'Man--,' 'Manchild in the Promised Land' was the name of his book. Julius Lester.  Just lots of different authors had come up and it was sort of an awakening in me.
Speaker 1: So you got the fire in the belly?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So are your friends reading too?
Speaker 2: No, but I, I--no in fact, what has happened as a result of this, I'm just changed.  My whole I told you I was once introvert, I'm now much more extrovert, I'm more, I'm just telling things and you know I'm only fifteen or sixteen at the time. And so one of the things that happens, I go to this school Annapolis High School [Annapolis, Maryland] and then I'm kind of more conscious about the lack of African administrators and teachers and there's no black studies program at the school I'm going and I got this intense interest in this subject matter and there's no black studies program.  Wasn't even one being thought of at the time.  And so we're in an assembly in a classroom.  I mean a building, the class has been--the students have been brought together for a school assembly, it's with five hundred students, we in a building called Maryland Hall is where the students gathered.  And it was a typical school assembly and they're playing country and western music and all of the participants on the stage are white, including the student president and we're sitting in the audience and they're playing this country and western music and one of the students shouts, "We want soul music, give us some soul music."  And the white student president, government association president comes over to the microphone, takes the microphone and says to the audience, "This is our assembly.  If you don't like it, you can leave."  Then some other students started applauding him for putting the heckler in check.  And I was maybe, had just finished reading 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and all this and maybe it took ten seconds.  I said, "This guy is right.  I don't like this, why am I sitting here?"  And so I got up to leave and in the assembly when you got up the chair is flat, so I got up my chair went flap and I started walking out and suddenly flap, flap, flap, flap and 150 black students followed me out, which would be the beginning of our boycott of classes to protest. And we then decided we weren't gonna go back to class until they met some of our demands which was more black studies, black teachers, wanted soul food and soul music to be played and things of that nature and we had borrowed from students who were protesting against the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] a tactic.  They boycotted classes but they didn't boycott schools.  They would come to school and have what was called teach-ins.  And so we decided to emulate them.  We came to school and we would have teach-ins.  We'd go down to the cafeteria, we'd have people come in and different people would teach things they learned.  Like I told you I read stuff on Malcolm X and all this.
Story_ID: 624926
Speaker 1: The administrators initially thought it's a one day protest, two days they'll go back to business as usual, but what actually happened was the numbers started growing.
Speaker 2: Of people, kids participating?
Speaker 1: Right.  The school [Annapolis High School, Annapolis, Maryland] was one fourth black at the time and what started out as 150 black students was now growing, we have three, four hundred black students, a tremendous number of students, so maybe after the eighth day of this occurring, the administrators called in the mayor of the city, the white guy I told you had previously helped to--
Speaker 2: His name again?
Speaker 1: Mayor Moyer [Roger Moyer].
Speaker 2: All right. Please spell that?
Speaker 1: M-O-Y-E-R.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who had helped to avert rioting and it was very, he was liberal, very well liked by members of the black community.  They also brought in the NAACP president [Samuel Gilmer] and other NAACP officials and they came to talk to us and they essentially told all the students there how much they supported us and thought we were right, but we should go back to class because you know we've made our point but it's now time to go back to class.   And the president, the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] gave a passionate speech and nobody budged.  The mayor got up and you know gave a speech and nobody budged. And this guy named Walter Blasingame who was then the president, excuse me he was then the chairman of the education committee from the NAACP, he got up and spoke and I remember him saying to the audience, "You give us one month, just thirty days and we'll have these problems solved," and students said, "No," and they started booing and he said, "Three weeks, in three weeks we can have this problem solved," and again students booed.  Then he finally said, "Well, give us two weeks, we can do it in two weeks," and then students booed him.  And I'm sitting there thinking two weeks is not bad you know for the kind of changes that we're looking for.  So I got up and I addressed the students and suggested that--oh and Mr. Blasingame also said, "And if we don't do, keep these promises in two weeks," there was a popular slogan in that day it was called you can do your own thing, and he ended the speech with that, "you can do your own thing."  And so I got up and talked to the group and said look you know two weeks is not forever you know.  If we can get black studies programs and all of this, let's do it.  And I convinced the students to go back to class.
Story_ID: 624927
Speaker 1: And what I didn't know at the time was that they had no intention of putting together, nor was it really possible to create a black studies program, to have black teachers hired and all that within two weeks.  What they were able to do within those two weeks is put together a security system where they would have people and monitors in the hallway and tighter security there to prevent students in the large numbers from gathering. So the two weeks came and went and literally nothing happened.  So on February 12, 1970, which was [President] Abraham Lincoln's birthday, a group of us had met, said let's resume boycotting the classes and we'll pick Abraham Lincoln's day to do it for symbolic reasons. And one of the students, female students had the responsibility we had come up with a flyer and in those days you had to mimeograph I mean it's hard for people to vision this, but you had to have a mimeograph machine and you had to mimeograph these flyers, print them up and send them out.  So it was her job to mimeograph these flyers and since we didn't have access to a mimeograph machine, she was gonna do it at the school [Annapolis High School, Annapolis, Maryland] because they have a mimeograph machine, she had access to it.  So she went in with the flyer to mimeograph it that morning. She was intercepted by an administrator who saw the flyer, read it and immediately alerted the principal and others about this boycott that was gonna take place the following day.  So unbeknownst to them, they had assumed that this flyer she had had been distributed to all the students.  They didn't realize she only had one flyer and they had the only flyer that we had had.  So they got on the public address system and announced to the students that it was their understanding there was gonna be this protest the next day, what time it was gonna be et cetera, et cetera and if anybody go to the protest, what the ramifications would be.  Well, as a result of them making the announcement on the public address system, they informed all the students that we were not able to reach for the proposed protest and this is something I would later learn was a valuable tool, which is the last thing you wanna tell young people is what they cannot do and so the next day hundreds of young people showed up at the cafeteria where we'd previously met and it was at that occasion that would later lead to a melee taking place at the school and students subsequently getting suspended and eventually expelled.  I was one of those students.
Speaker 2: You were?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And you were expelled for how long?
Speaker 1: The principal, the superintendent of the schools, a man named Dr. Edward Anderson [Edward J. Anderson] said that, "As long as I'm superintendent of schools, public schools in Anne Arundel County [Maryland], you will never go to a public school," and he kept his promise.  So I was never allowed to go back to a public school.
Speaker 2: But you got into a private school?
Speaker 1: A group of, right, a group of people--
Speaker 2: Now who were the group?
Speaker 1: Persons who had been reading about our protest who sympathized with us in terms of what we're trying to do in terms of getting more black studies, it was white and black persons who had come together and decided that they would underwrite scholarships for us to go what was then called the Key School which was an exclusive private school in Annapolis [Maryland].  It was the most exclusive private school.  Couldn't get any more exclusive than that.  And so they raised the money and had four of us gave four of us an opportunity to go to Key School which how I completed by got my education.  Had it not been for the Key School I don't know what might have happened.
Story_ID: 624928
Speaker 1: So what, what, what are your parents feeling about this?
Speaker 2: Well remember I told you I have now changed.  I'm not the introvert any more, I'm very outspoken.  I'm quoting Malcolm X a lot.  I remember my father [William Snowden] and I had a debate one day and I referred to him as a house Negro which is a term that Malcolm used and my father said, "I might be a house Negro, but this is my house and you leaving, Negro."  So I mean it--we got this kind of--I mean I'm just, things are happening very, very rapidly to me.  My view of the world is changed tremendously but I'm also impacting other people.  I'm not out soliciting students, getting them involved, we create a group called Truth and Soul which is a teenage group.  We begin to have marches and demonstrations and I hear my parents one night having discussion about me, and my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] is telling my father I'm just going through a phase.  "He'll, he'll be over this soon, you know, it's just a phase he's going through."  And my brothers and sisters were seeing just a different person.  I'm just totally different and relatively young.  'Cause I mean I'm in the Key School [Annapolis, Maryland] and one of the things that happens when I went to--when I go to Key School, I told you there were four of us that were given an opportunity to go to Key School--
Speaker 1: And there--
Speaker 2: --there were fourteen that was expelled (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're in your junior, junior--
Speaker 2: I'm in my junior year.
Speaker 1: --your junior year?
Speaker 2: Right.  And one of the things that was required to go to Key School you had to learn two foreign languages.  It was just a whole different curriculum, much, much more diverse--
Speaker 1: Robust.
Speaker 2: --than I had been, than I had been used to. And I also ran into, there were four of us that went there, but I was the only one that stayed because it was a very different environment.
Speaker 1: So you lasted and the others didn't?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: I see.  Oh that's interesting, okay.
Speaker 2: And when I went there I graduated from the first class, graduating class there.  Key School is now fifty years old as an institution but, but what happened was--
Speaker 1: You mean it was just getting started then?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh yeah, I was a--
Speaker 1: But what was the concept behind the Key School then?
Speaker 2: It was created by a group of liberal students or former instructors from what was called St. John's College [Annapolis, Maryland] and so what they wanted to do was give students--they had this belief that you should have fewer, fewer students in a classroom.  They talked about small classes and I had a very small class. There were only twelve of us in our graduating class, and so you got a lot of individual time.  It was a college bound curriculum.  I was the only African American in my graduating class.  There was a woman came who was a junior behind me who was an African American and it was really geared toward upper middle income people and one of the things the Key School taught me was the value of opportunity.  I--when I was going to Key School as I mentioned to you, I had to learn four languages and I was having difficulty with French as a language and so was a friend of mine who happened to be white named Barbara [ph.]. She too was having difficulty with French. And part of it was for me we were instructed to go home and speak French at the table and there was just some certain assumptions made about what existed in everybody's home and so it got to the point where in order for me to graduate I would have to take French over the summer for summer school. So would Barbara who was this friend of mine, so of course I signed up for the French so Barbara told me she would be taking French--she would not take French during summer school.  I said, "But Barbara but if you don't take French, you're gonna fail," because it was required, you had to pass French.  She said she had went home talked to her parents and they have decided that at the tender age of sixteen rather than her spend the summer at the St. John's College with a French tutor learning French, they're gonna send her to Paris [France] for the summer because there was something called French immersion which the philosophy was or the thought was if you're around people that speak French, you're forced to learn the language and pick it up quicker and they were right.  When Barbara returned, she got an A.  I passed French with a C.  And that's when I realized opportunity makes a big, big difference. And the students who I would graduate with parents were like one guy's father Lapides [Morton M. Lapides, Sr.] owned Pepsi-Cola [Pepsi-Cola Company; PepsiCo] franchise and these were very wealthy people and these contacts would prove to be useful later in life.
Story_ID: 624929
Speaker 1: Now how are your father [William Snowden] and you getting along during this period?
Speaker 2: One of the things that happened that I was not made aware of until many years later, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] has opened up, there's a program called COINTEL- COINTELPRO, it's a counterintelligence program, it's run by J. Edgar Hoover and it was set up in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] and it was designed to target activists. And so the government would open up these files on people and I didn't realize it at the time.  I would later come to discover that I would have one but they had opened up a file on me right after the incident at Annapolis High School [Annapolis, Maryland] and so during my final year at Key School [Annapolis, Maryland], because now I'm active in anti-war movement, anti-Vietnam War movement, during my final years at Key School, the FBI came and they interviewed my professors, they interviewed fellow students and, they interviewed my parents, who never told me this that they were being interviewed by the FBI.  And when I asked my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] why she didn't tell me this she said, "Well, they said not to tell you," because you know they were conducting this investigation, they were really concerned with my wellbeing and all this kind of stuff, and so she never told me.  So during this period with my parents, I think the great struggle was, was I getting myself involved in something that could ultimately do me harm because from their perspective when the FBI comes to visit you, they wanna know things about your child, something is terribly wrong.  So I think at this period it was great, great concern.
Speaker 1: And, and that was a strained relationship--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --I hear, that's what I hear.
Speaker 2: It was strained only because I think the views were so different.
Story_ID: 624930
Speaker 1: So are y- who, who's mentoring you at this point now?
Speaker 2: I'm now involved with--I've, I've met some professors who I've grown close to who have given me some ideas and some direction.  I'm very much influenced as I told you by the readings I'm doing and the writings of people I have tremendous respect for and then I'm just wherever I can information.  In fact I discovered I had an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] file quite by accident.  In 1977 I went to hear a lecture--
Speaker 1: Just hold on one second.  We're gonna come to that.  I'd like to go back more chronologically.  So you, so this, this time period is a growth period for you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know you sort of found your step and you're in really a nurturing environment and, and you're still allowed to sort of voice your views and grow with them right?  Now is there a mentor of yours at the Key School [Annapolis, Maryland], that's what I'm trying to understand 'cause you go there at sixteen right and you--
Speaker 2: Remember one of the things I mentioned to you was Morris Blum who is the owner of a radio station [WANN Radio, Annapolis, Maryland] gives me an opportunity to host my own radio program.  So I'm not just going to Key School, I've got a radio program and I'm interviewing people.  And as a result of my ability to interview people, the people I'm interviewing are James Baldwin, who I get to meet in person and do an interview with him.  I had to interview Alex Haley, who at that time had not written 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley] but I'm interviewing him because of 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] I interviewed [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], these are activist and people who were well known.  Jack Anderson who is now deceased but was then a famous journalist investigative reporter, I interviewed him.  I interviewed Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] who was then a congressman.  So--
Speaker 1: You're a youth reporter?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I've got, yeah, I've got the credentials and so I'm literally going to various lectures, recording people.  I've got an interview where I did with Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] when he had left the Nation of Islam and then went back to the Nation of Islam.  I've got those. So I'm meeting people, I'm talking to them, I'm getting a lot of information. And Mr. Blum who is the owner of this radio station is allowing me to go out and get these interviews and to have a format and a program in which to do it.  Now the program is only fifteen minutes long.  It's called 'Community Viewpoint' but that would be the springboard for some other things that would later happen relevant to television as I mentioned to you with Oprah Winfrey, the ability to be able to do television.
Story_ID: 624931
Speaker 1: So when you graduate, you graduate at eighteen?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen okay.  And then what are, what's on your plans there?  Are you--
Speaker 2: By then I'm adopted by an aunt her name is Willie Hardy [Willie J. Hardy].  Part of what happens is I started getting around I get to meet people and one of the women that I met her name is Willie Hardy, she was a member of the Washington, D.C. city council [Council of the District of Columbia] and she encourages me to continue my education because remember I just graduated from high school [Key School, Annapolis, Maryland] and so she gets me to come to Washington, D.C., to live with her and to go to school in D.C. at the same time and so Washington, D.C., is about thirty-five, forty minutes from Annapolis [Maryland], relatively short distance from driving, but the two worlds are like night and day (laughter).  D.C. is a very cosmopolitan city.  At that time there were--the activism is unbelievable.  There's a man named Julius Hobson, Sr. who now deceased just a brilliant guy, absolutely brilliant, he's on the city council, I get to meet him.  I meet a lot of people in Washington, D.C., go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] at that time they would have numerous, just lectures from some of the giants of that day and I'd go listen to them, still doing the radio program ['Community Viewpoint'], even though I'm in Washington, D.C., do an interview, edit the tape, bring it back and get on the air [WANN Radio, Annapolis, Maryland].
Story_ID: 624932
Speaker 1: During this particular period of time I'm afforded the opportunity to do these interviews.  I would later get a job that would allow me to continue my activism while employed and that's what the Community Action Agency, which is anti-poverty agency that is taking place in Anne Arundel County [Maryland] so I'm working with that agency (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the agency is called what?
Speaker 1: Community Action Agency.
Speaker 2: Is that associated along with VOTE [ph.]?
Speaker 1: No that's a different--
Speaker 2: That's a different, that's an insulator?
Speaker 1: Right.  VOTE is an organization that we would create which is designed to get people to vote, register people to vote.
Speaker 2: Okay but let's go back to Community Action Agency. Who funded that agency?
Speaker 1: It's a federally funded agency.  It's an anti-poverty agency that's being, being funded by federal funds and local funds and the woman Yevola Peters who, who's the executive director at the time hires me in the program as director of their youth development program.
Speaker 2: And this is really probably still part of these funds are part of the war on poverty?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Absolutely, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Funds going into the urban area?
Speaker 1: Right so the Community Action Agency would be a funding programs like the Head Start programs, weatherization [Weatherization Assistance Program], Model Cities, these are the kind of programs that came under that Community Action Agency.
Speaker 2: Okay and you worked there for how long?
Speaker 1: I was working there for almost ten years.
Story_ID: 624933
Speaker 1: Oh so you worked there and you, you went to now--
Speaker 2: I went to the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Columbia okay.
Speaker 2: --which I would drop out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then I would--
Speaker 1: Activism is in your blood?
Speaker 2: Activism is in the blood and my first son is born when I'm twenty-four so there's some responsibilities that have to be taken care of there as well.
Speaker 1: Who's your wife?
Speaker 2: Marilyn [Marilyn Snowden].
Speaker 1: Marilyn okay.
Speaker 2: We get married, the first son, and when I come to Annapolis [Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Can I ask--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you a question that I found 'cause you know during this time and I know this both of your you know your children, your sons have African names but you, neither you or your wife, right? So you don't change, do you change your name at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Abayomi [Abayomi Snowden], my first son's name is Abayomi Hamase Malik and Abayomi means born to bring me joy and there's a story behind that.  Hamase [ph.] means born on Thursday and Malik was named after Malcolm X, El-Hajj Malik Shabazz and the reason my first son is called Abayomi because he was not my first born.  My first born was a, was a girl who died at birth.  No one ever knew why.  It was one of these crib deaths. And my wife was very concerned about having a second child.  And when she Abayomi, she was very concerned that something was gonna happen.  I mean she just very, very concerned and she wanted to name him Carl Junior and I said, "Look, let's get this African name," and we went through the book and agreed upon Abayomi and of course when he was born it was a moment of joy.
Story_ID: 624934
Speaker 1: When he's [Snowden's son, Abayomi Snowden] born you're twenty-four years old right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm twenty-four and this is when we discovered the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]--
Speaker 1: I see. Let's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and its investigation.
Speaker 1: So that's right.  So let's talk--'cause that's 1977 so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --let's talk about now how that.
Speaker 2: What happened was I went to hear a lecture by Ralph Nader who was then more noted for being a consumer advocate.  He was the one that with cars and General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and stuff but I went to hear him speak and he was speaking at an event, but he wasn't talking about consumerism, he was talking about big brother, the government, and how the government had begun spying on people and keeping them under surveillances and he went through this long discussion and this was right after you know the kind of Watergate period where we have Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and the Plumbers [White House Plumbers] and all this kind of stuff. And he, Ralph Nader, said to the audience gathering, "If you've ever been active in anything it's likely that you have an FBI file." And people laughed kind of nervously.  And he said, "No I'm serious.  And if you don't believe me," 'cause I know there was a federal law that was passed which is called a Freedom of Information Act [Freedom of Information Act of 1967] which allows citizens to get certain files that the government had on them.  And because of the reforms that took place in Watergate it was much more liberal than it is even now you could get files.  So he suggested that we write and I almost jokingly said, "Well I'm gonna do this."  So I sent a letter to the FBI, not thinking I'm gonna get anything back except no, we don't have a file on you.  What I get back is a letter from the FBI that says we do have a file on you however, because of the various exemptions under law, we're not permitted to give you anything.  And I then met someone who is become later a very good friend a guy named Alan Legum who  had just graduated from law school, Jewish white guy, and he needed a case and I needed a lawyer.  It was a perfect partnership. And so he agree to represent me.  So we filed a lawsuit against the FBI and probably to his surprise and certainly to mine, we won a ten thousand dollar award.  We won the right to the FBI files so we got to see what was in the FBI file and we also got the right to have that file expunged and I became one of the first and only Marylanders to ever successfully sue the FBI under this Freedom of Information Act and one of the things that was in the file to give you some idea how incredible FBI was in that day, there used to be a park called Jonas Green [Jonas Green State Park], it was like a lover's lane, like teenagers would go and you know go and, and participate, kiss and hug and all that kind of stuff.  So the FBI had recorded the fact that I went to this park with a girl Juno [ph.] who's fifteen years old at the time, this all in the FBI file and that they put the time that we went in and the time that we left out and they recorded us.  So when we got ahold of the FBI file, we made it public.  It was the first time that locally people seen the kind of thing the government was doing, the FBI was doing and of course got a lot of attention.  And as a result of all this attention you know my notoriety grew as well.
Story_ID: 624935
Speaker 1: You've not gone back to school though. This--
Speaker 2: Not yet, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) activism is there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and this you know we're in the, well we're actually approaching you were really we're approaching the '80s [1980s] you know the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years.
Speaker 2: I returned to school in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay so this--so what is happening how has the Annapolis [Maryland] community changed in some respects and what changes you know through community action network, what changes are you finding, you know what are the issues you're fighting, who are the political leaders that you know you're going up against, what are you, what are you doing speaking in terms of the black community, that's what I--
Speaker 2: Right.  Congressman Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] is the first African American elected from Maryland to the United States Congress.
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: And Parren is elected in the '70s [1970s]. And I get to meet him.  He's one of the people I would get to meet and Parren Mitchell is giving guidance to black people all over the state just because of the kind of issues he's speaking out against, et cetera.  At this point, the kind of issues I'm dealing with is housing.  There's a lot of problems related to housing for poor people. And we created an organization called the Poor People's Rights Organization which eventually leads to this group called VOTE [ph.].  But the Poor People's Rights Organization is an organization that was designed to work with poor people to make sure that their rights was respected and protected and one of the things we were able to do was the law allowed what was called rent strikes and again teaming up again with this lawyer Alan Legum one of the things we were able to do in the '70s [1970s] and part of the '80s [1980s] was to go into subsidized housing developments and organize rent strikes and in one of the places we did this in 1976 was a place called Kenmar Apartments [Annapolis, Maryland] which had the longest rent strike in the history of the state.  It went eighteen months before the government eventually conceded that the issues we raised were appropriate issues. But organizing these rent strikes would allow me to work with residents or tenants in those particular neighborhoods and be able to get them involved in bringing up changes.  A lot of the changes that occurred was in improving the housing which people lived in, putting more protections on the law books for residents who are tenants and bri- (clears throat) excuse me, bringing to the public attention the kind of issues that they were concerned about.
Speaker 1: Okay now what's the minority population, what are the numbers in Annapolis?
Speaker 2: One third, it used to be one third African American.
Speaker 1: At this time is it one third?
Speaker 2: A little less than that now.
Speaker 1: Okay but back then you're saying in the late '70s [1970s] it was one third?
Speaker 2: Right, it was definitely one third.
Speaker 1: It was one third?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what are the, are the jobs that people really what are they, what is certainly more of the black jobs?
Speaker 2: Right.  Once--my father [William Snowden] is a good example, if he worked at the United States Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland], that was considered to be a good job because you got all the government benefits with it, you got a retirement, you got a pension, et cetera. Annapolis is a government town meaning that most of the people who worked, either worked directly for government or some related industry to government.  Annapolis has four branches of government.  It's represe- the United States Naval Academy which is the federal government exist in Annapolis, it's the capital of Maryland so the state government and it's office is over there. They would have the county government which is also housed in Annapolis and then the City of Annapolis.  So you have these all four levels of government and people typically would work for one of those four branches of government or something associated with that.
Speaker 1: Now did you--the, the Naval, I wanna ask about the Naval Academy.  Are there, are there--are you involved at all in blacks attending the Naval Academy?  Is that any of the issues or are you really primarily housing?
Speaker 2: No we eventually will get into the Naval Academy because as you know I'm--eventually I get elected to the city council [Annapolis City Council] so I got a different relationship with the Naval Academy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --over the years.
Story_ID: 624936
Speaker 1: You went back to school you said in 1982 right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: Went to a master's program called--at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], the master in human services program. And what happened was one of my professors at that time at Lincoln University was a man named Dr. Zee [Szabi Ishtai-Zee] who was blind.  And Dr. Zee would give these incredible lectures and one day, one of his lectures essentially what he said to us students, dreams are things that people have and so many people lead their lives having dreams.  But few people, few people pursue their dreams.  And so what happens is people wind up saying "I wish I had did so and so or such and such and so and so."  So he asked a group of students, "Where are your currently working?"  At the time I was working for the Community Action Agency and he said, "Imagine ten years from now, what will you be doing?  Will you be at the same agency?  And will you be doing anything differently?"  Well at the time I was the chief program officer which was like second or third in command but the woman who was the executive director had no plans on leaving. And it was not until he actually had me kind of think about what the future was gonna be that it dawned on me he's right.  Ten years from now I might be doing the same thing.  And so Dr. Zee told the group that if you are uncomfortable with the notion that you'll be doing the same thing, you need to do something about it now.  If you're satisfied you're going to be doing the same thing then you might as well not be in this class 'cause you don't need it.  And he went on to tell me or tell the group and it resonated with me. I was thirty-two at the time, he said that, "There are periods in your life that you can make a mistake and rebound from it.  There are periods in your life that you overcome obstacles."  But he said, "At some point in your life, you'll never get those opportunities again because what you can do at twenty-two, you will not be able to do at seventy-two. That's just a reality."  And he said, "If you ever wanted to own your own business, this is the time to do it and if you wait you will regret it."  So his lecture had such an impact on me that I decided that I was gonna leave my job, which was with the Community Action Agency, he gave the lecture in November of 1982 and I decided by January 1st, 1983 I was gonna open up my own business and I went and told my then supervisor, Mrs. Peters [Yevola Peters], and she said, "You crazy.  Why you gonna go an open up a business you know you don't have a business plan, you don't have the capital you know it might not work," was her advice to me.  And Dr. Zee had already said that people may not see what you can see.  And to be careful of dream busters.  You just gotta go.  And he said, "Worst thing that could happen if you would fail, so what.  You're young enough to bounce back but if you don't try you'll never know."  And that had an impact on me.  And I went on January 1st with the savings I had, opened up my first business, Carl Snowden and Associates [Annapolis, Maryland] and it was probably one of the smartest things I did 'cause it just open up doors that I hadn't even thought of.  Just gave me opportunities.  One of the things that occurred when I opened up the business I spent a lot of time and energy trying to figure out how to make it work 'cause previous to that remember I'm working in an agency, everything's kind of laid out for you, you know you really, you're part of a bureaucracy but as an entrepreneur you don't have the responsibility to collect a paycheck.  You have the responsibility to create payroll and there's a difference between creating payroll and collecting a paycheck as I would soon discover and I met people and just, just a lot of good experiences, got to travel, which I probably would not have had it not happened.
Story_ID: 624937
Speaker 1: Now the nature of the business [Carl Snowden and Associates, Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: It was a firm that specialized in civil rights.  I had--The Wall Street Journal did a profile on my business because it was so unusual.  I've been doing all this activism, helping people to organize, doing various things that it dawned on me that there are a lot of people who have the need for the kind of services I could provide, they just don't have the skills and maybe people would be willing to pay me to help them do things that I've been doing for free and so I began to become a consultant for different groups that existed and was hired and that's how I got started with doing this business.  And so we would for example there was a group called the Black Officers Association [Annapolis Black Police Officers Association] who is concerned about racism within the Annapolis Police Department and they needed an advocate and they couldn't really afford an attorney and they needed somebody who had skills to sort of negotiate, navigate the system so they hired me and I began--that was one of the first clients I took on and then I went into partnership with Alan Legum who was an attorney and we had worked together on other issues, we collaborated and so you know there were services I provided and when the client needed legal services we would collaborate with him and things went very well.
Story_ID: 624938
Speaker 1: --Can talk about 'cause I think it was in '78 [1978] that you had started the TV--
Speaker 2: 'Square Off.'
Speaker 1: --'Square Off' so can we talk about--and you're still at Community Action Network [sic. Community Action Agency], but how--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --how that came about?
Speaker 2: As I mentioned to you I was doing the radio program ['Community Viewpoint'] and I also told you that as a result of suing the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], I'm getting this notoriety so the local newspapers and the Baltimore [Maryland] newspapers as well as The Washington Post have certainly profiled me because of the kind of activity I'm doing.  So I get a telephone call from a guy who produces a television program called 'Sunday Live' and he asked would I be willing to come in and do some commentary, where you write up commentary on various subjects. Told him yes.  So I go in and I did his commentary and they like it and he said, "Well, would you like to try out for a new program that we're doing and it's called 'Square Off'," and 'Square Off' was similar to the old crossfire where you get people different points of view expressing their point of view.  So I said, "Okay," I go in and Richard Sher is the host moderator, he's the local personality and we do 'Square Off' and--
Speaker 1: So he was the conservative and you were the--?
Speaker 2: Well he was the host moderator, they brought on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. They had other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a guy named John Lofton who was very conservative and they had all but conservative personalities.  My role was to be more liberal, more progressive and we'd have different people on the program.  In fact, the late Governor, William Donald Schaefer who was from Maryland who was somewhat of an icon, we were on the television together debating some subject matter and there at the time in Baltimore City [Baltimore, Maryland], guns and violence and crime was very high and the mayor had come up with a phrase called Charm City because he was trying to attract people to come back to the city and that sort of thing. So I'm debating him.  And he called Baltimore Charm City and I said, "Mr. Mayor you mean it's Arms City," and he got very agitated by that and he promised Richard Schaefer [sic.] that as long as I was on 'Square Off' he would never come back on the program and he never did.  And then he would go on to become governor and I would run into him and he kept saying, "Yeah I remember who you are, you thought my city was Arms City."
Story_ID: 624939
Speaker 1: So it was that kind of program. And 'Square Off' gave us an opportunity to meet a lot of different people, which is how I met Oprah Winfrey.  What had happened was Max Robinson, who was then the first African American to become a national host of a program on ABC.  I would later meet his brother too, [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson, but Max Robinson was just as smooth and good at what he did.  He was so good that he affected other markets including Baltimore [Maryland].  At the time demographics were changing and networks were looking for at the local level to pay our people off and so they brought in Oprah Winfrey, that's how she came to Baltimore.  And then I would get to meet her.  In fact I had her come to a couple of functions in Annapolis [Maryland] and when Oprah came to Baltimore, she ran into great resistance because Jerry Turner who was then the sole anchor just never liked her, they just never, it just didn't work.  And so she was forced 'cause she had been brought on to be a co-anchor of the six o'clock news [on WJZ-TV, Baltimore, Maryland] which is a pretty prestigious position but because of his dislike for her she eventually was put into a program called 'People Talking' [sic. 'People Are Talking'] as a way of making sure that her contract--'cause she had a contract with them--they would use her in some capacity.  That's how I got to meet her.
Story_ID: 624940
Speaker 1: So I'm doing television, and as a result of doing television, it comes on primetime on Saturday evenings and you know it just takes off in terms of people knowing me, having an opportunity to hear my views on various subject matters and now instead of just being in the City of Annapolis [Maryland], I'm all over the state dealing with different issues.
Speaker 2: And so that, all that sort of helped with your start of your business [Carl Snowden and Associates, Annapolis, Maryland]. It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Oh absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So and were you disagreeing at all with how Community Action Network [sic. Community Action Agency] was run or--
Speaker 1: No it was, it was I tell you it--
Speaker 2: It was just opportunistic? Time--
Speaker 1: No, it was, it was a--Dr. Zee [Szabi Ishtai-Zee]--
Speaker 2: It was him talking about it?
Speaker 1: What dreams being pursued.
Speaker 2: Okay I understand.
Speaker 1: What dreams and how important it is for people to follow their dreams in that the thing I think that resonates then and even now, time is neutral.  It's neither friend nor foe.  You gotta know how to use it and so I just knew he was right, that there are things if you wanna do it, you better do it now because you know who knows what the future would bring.
Speaker 2: Now was there a lot of civil rights firms like that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You know 'cause that's what was sort of unusual--
Speaker 1: Try The Wall Street Journal profile.  It was the you know it's highly unusual for a Wall Street Journal to profile a mom and pop business that's not the way it norma- in fact it was so unusual that they were the first to profile it.  They later, The Baltimore Sun and other newspapers kind of did profiles as well, but it was The Wall Street Journal that saw the uniqueness in it.  In fact as a result of the story getting published in the New York--sorry in The Wall Street Journal, I got calls from people to utilize the services.  A couple of them I turned down which may be in retrospect it was too idealistic or too much idealism.  I didn't wanna represent any of the power companies for example, BG&E [Baltimore Gas and Electric Company] or any of the electrical companies and had an opportunity to do so.
Story_ID: 624941
Speaker 1: Now this is you know these are during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years that, that this is happening and things are being cut back you know and interest rates were high.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry inflation is high--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and, and what happens with you know your run for office?  Now my understanding's that the fifth ward [Ward 5, Annapolis, Maryland] was created?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay so let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what had happened was once I started my firm Carl Snowden and Associates [Annapolis, Maryland], one of the first things I did was take on clients who was using the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  This is a federal law that was said that African Americans and other minorities had to be treated fairly as it relates to redistricting and voting. And I mentioned to you earlier that the City of Annapolis [Maryland] had a third black population but there were only one black on a nine member city council [Annapolis City Council].  Clearly African Americans weren't properly--appropriately represented and it was the way lines were drawn so that you diluted the black voting strength.  I got involved in that voting rights thing and we started filing these lawsuits I partnered with both Alan Legum, as well as a man named Chris Brown [C. Christopher Brown], another attorney, and we started bringing lawsuits all over the State of Maryland, Somerset County [Maryland], Cambridge, Maryland, Hurlock, Maryland, just different locations around the state and we were winning because it was clear that these jurisdictions were violating the Voting Rights Act.  So we said what's good for those jurisdictions ought to be good for Annapolis.  So I became a plaintiff along with a woman named Eliza Mae Robinson and we filed suit against the City of Annapolis and we won.  So they had to create a new majority black ward.  The problem was we didn't have a candidate.  So the concern was we created all of these issues and we don't have a candidate.  So it was suggested that maybe you ought to be the candidate.  We can't, would be embarrassed after going through all this and not have a candidate.  So I became a candidate and got elected to the city council.  And I served on it for twelve years.
Story_ID: 624942
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the structure of the council [Annapolis City Council] and it's you know there in Annapolis [Maryland] and its relationship to the mayor, so how are, are do counsel, do you all represent certain districts, how many of them are you?
Speaker 2: It's called a weak mayor form of government similar to what we have here in Chicago [Illinois] except that weak is a misnomer especially if you know anything about Chicago politics, but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was gonna say.
Speaker 2: We have what is called a weak mayor form of government, it's where in our case in the City of Annapolis the mayor is actually on the city council.  So he has a vote on the city council, he has no veto power, but he's elected citywide.  With the council members, they're each elected from an individual ward so there are eight wards in the city and then you have the mayor who runs citywide but the mayor is the chief executive officer, he's a fulltime employee and he is responsible for running city government.
Speaker 1: So he's like a city manager.
Speaker 2: He's--well they actual--the city has a city manager.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So he supervises the city manager.
Story_ID: 624943
Speaker 1: So when I came on the city council [Annapolis City Council], there were only two African Americans, myself and a man named Sam Gilmer [Samuel Gilmer], and the rest were white and during my years on the city council, it was probably we had a lot of social activism was what was the thing that I was most involved in because that's where my concerns were.  So one of the things I was able to do shortly after coming onto the city council, there was a movement in the country at the time, anti-apartheid movement.  Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was president.  Ronald Regan was not willing to, to move against apartheid South African government as quickly as many thought he should have and so there was a grassroots movement that got called disinvestment where activists (clears throat) excuse me, activists around the country was getting people to disinvest from companies that do business in South Africa.  So I introduced a bill that would have done just that, made sure that none of the City of Annapolis [Maryland] funds would be invested in any company or business in South Africa, which was considered very controversial at the time and as I recall there were only two of us that were African American on the council and there was a lot of discussions about how this might affect the city's status in terms of its bond rating, et cetera, et cetera, just a lot of reasons were given to be opposed to it.
Speaker 2: So who was the other black on the council at this time?
Speaker 1: Sam Gilmer.
Speaker 2: Sam okay it was Sam Gilmer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And by the way he was--Sam Gilmer was--
Speaker 2: Was he--
Speaker 1: --he was also the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] when I was in high school.  He's the one that came and tried to prevent us from--encouraging us to go back to school as opposed to boycotting class [at Annapolis High School, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 2: So he was old school and you're new school.
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so he's on the council, I'm on the council; I introduce this bill about South Africa.  The mayor at the time [Dennis Callahan] was cool toward the bill to say the least, very cool, but he had gotten elected because of black voters so he was sensitive to the fact that he couldn't come out against this bill because he would need black votes if he was gonna be reelected.
Story_ID: 624944
Speaker 1: So an opportunity came which was the following, a lobbyist for South Africa, the Republic of South Africa, came to the then mayor of the City of Annapolis [Maryland] and said, "This is a bad bill, the blacks in South Africa don't want this bill.  If this bill is introduced all you're doing is creating trouble for blacks in South Africa, they absolutely opposed to this bill.  And to prove to you that they opposed to this bill, we will pay your trip to South Africa so you get to meet blacks and they will tell you it's bad."  Well the mayor at the time was a man named Dennis Callahan and he knew that politically for him to go to South Africa, apartheid racist South Africa, would be a problem.  So he proposed to the guy, "Look, why don't you invite both [HistoryMaker] Carl Snowden and me to go to South Africa?  That way we both can go, we both can look."  So the guy says no problem.  So he then invited both of us to go to South Africa and I would go to South Africa.  When we get to South Africa at that time, it's hard to believe this but its true (laughter)--
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: --you would have to be a honorary white citizen.  This is before Mandela's [Nelson Mandela] release.
Speaker 2: I know but you know what year?
Speaker 1: This is in '86 [1986] or '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Okay and your second son was born, Kojo [Kojo Snowden] in '85 [1985] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-five [1985], right.  So I go to South Africa with the mayor as part of this delegation, gets to South Africa, oh by the way it's my first trip to Africa, the first time I've ever been to the motherland and one of the reasons I wanted to go because I had this particular experience, get to South Africa and it's unbelievable.  We went by; they don't even make the plane [Aerospatiale/BAC Concorde] any more.  It's a plane that broke the sound barrier.  It was a French made plane.  I can't think of the name right now, but we got there in no time at all.  I mean the government of South Africa paid all the expenses and make sure that we were in first class.  We get to South Africa, remember I grew up in a southern segregationist experience, so when I get to South Africa, what I'm seeing, I can relate to.  I know exactly the attitude, the mentality all of it.  So we get to South Africa and I get to meet government officials who are white and black and they you know sort of roll out the red carpet treatment.  What they didn't know was that prior to me going to South Africa because of my activism, I'd been involved with TransAfrica [TransAfrica Forum; TransAfrica], which is a group that [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson founded and they had incredible contacts with Mandela's group [African National Congress] that was outlawed in South Africa and so they tell me that when you get to South Africa to give me some things, "We wanna really show you what the real South Africa is like because the government is just gonna give you their version of it."  So when I get to South Africa they had planned, the South African government has planned, a safari where people can go on and it's really nice and you get to see animals in their natural state and all that kind of stuff. (Cough) I told them I couldn't make it that day because I wasn't feeling well because I was supposed to meet with this contact from TransAfrica, so I'm in the hotel room, this woman comes knocking on the door, who is a South African.  It turns out she's part of, of, of Mandela's group and I'm staying at the Johannesburg Cape [ph.] which is in Johannesburg, South Africa, really nice hotel. And she takes me to Soweto [South Africa] at night and it's the most incredible experience that I've ever had, just absolutely incredible.
Story_ID: 624945
Speaker 1: What happened was when I went to Soweto [South Africa], there were thousands of black people as far as, far as the eye could see. And the word had gotten to them that a black man from America was coming and it was like it was just unbelievable, unbelievable experience and I got to talk with them and they were sharing with me what it was like to be in South Africa and they had something called necklacing at that time.  What this was, this was part of a mass movement that was going on and they would take gasoline, put it in an automobile tire and for people who were traitors, they'd put them on 'em, horrible way to die.  And these groups were very angry with apartheid government and the public regime and what had happened was instead of people being able to elect their representatives, the government was appointing people, black people, to these various posts.  So after spending a number of hours with these people getting all kinds of perspectives on what life really was like in Soweto, the next day I met with the mayor of Soweto and they were not too fond of the mayor of Soweto.  So we go through a long discussion.  I said, "Mr. Mayor, I met some of your constituents last night," and that's when we got into this whole dialogue of discussion.  So the guy that was a member of--de Klerk [F.W. de Klerk] was then prime minister and a member of his family we had an opportunity to meet with and they were trying to convince me as to why blacks in South Africa wasn't ready for freedom and I remember this guy, older guy, photographs of this exchange, he's telling me, he said, "You blacks don't understand in America, these blacks are different here.  These blacks have no way of governing, they, they just don't know.  These blacks will be ready maybe in thirty years, maybe forty but certainly not now.  We turn this government over to them; the whole government would go up."  I said well we go back and forth I'm debating him and he says, "There's no comparison to what's going on in America and the blacks here in South Africa.  These blacks they're so, you just don't know they have nothing going."  So I remembered we're going back and forth and I remember communicating with him we're just at an odds and then I remembered something that dawned on me.  It was a quote by [President] Thomas Jefferson and when I gave him this quote by Thomas Jefferson, 'cause earlier he had been telling me about his grandchildren and you know his concern that they be safe and that sort of thing and under black rule, there would be black mob and all kind of horrible things would happen.  And he was a member of a Christian church, among many things we talked about, and the quote that Thomas Jefferson gave was: if there's a just God, I'd pray for my country and I tremble for my children.  And I talked to him about this quote and it was at that level the light bulb went off because he realized a change was gonna be coming to South Africa and the question was whether or not he would put his children or grandchildren in this case in danger and we spent hours that evening just going back and forth in terms of the future of South Africa.  When I got back to the United States, I was more convinced than ever that we needed this bill to pass and it passed on a five to four vote and Desmond Tutu who I had written to when I was in South Africa had sent me back a response basically applauding me for putting this legislation in and that letter along with some public demonstrations was what got the legislation passed.  And the mayor [Dennis Callahan] who went there was reluctant but he did vote for the bill.
Speaker 2: Now you're talking about legislation, you're talking about in, in--
Speaker 1: In Annapolis [Maryland].
Speaker 2: --in Annapolis okay.
Speaker 1: Right and we were able to divest city--
Speaker 2: Resources.
Speaker 1: --resources right.
Speaker 2: Right because that was a big thing going on all over the place you know.  That really [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson and Louis Sullivan, Dr. Louis Sullivan [sic. Leon Sullivan].
Speaker 1: In fact he actually the Sullivan principles preceded this movement.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.  In fact, in fact the anti-apartheid movement was a step because the Sullivan principles didn't work because the Sullivan principles basically say that these companies would agree--American companies would agree to pay black workers what they paid white workers in South Africa, but that wasn't working.
Story_ID: 624946
Speaker 1: Now I wanna, I wanna ask, so this--how much time did it take you to get used to being the political you know leader I mean someone who--because it's different you know you had been in community--and I'm not saying people don't but you know just learning how it works and learning how to conduct yourself and you know in dealing with your constituencies and things like that.
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that ironically would turn out to be a plus, although it was not intended to be, was having the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] at such an early age at sixteen to twenty-four is when they had opened up this FBI file and as a result of that, I probably was prevented from making mistakes I might have made, either out of youth or foolishness or whatever.  Knowing that the government had this watchful eye doing certain things and knowing what they could do made me a lot more conscious of the, the need to be careful and not to do things that might have been standard practice politically speaking but would be deadly.  When Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III], I think I told you I met him I had great admiration for Congressman Mitchell, and one of the things he told me in fact when I was gonna get involved in politics, he's one of the first persons I sat down and had a conversation with about politics. And he gave me a practical lesson that I now share with other people who are interested in running for political office.  Politics have always been an expensive proposition.  You could run political office, it cost money.  And I told you I had gotten, I was very well known at the time and Parren Mitchell told me he said, "I tell you what I want you to do.  I want you to make a list of twenty people, your friends, your family, twenty people and I want you to send them a letter and I want you to tell them you're interested in running for public office," at the time it was for mayor, I would later run for city councilmen [Annapolis City Council], "and in two weeks I want you to come back with me and tell me what your response was."  So I was--said, "Okay." I didn't get it.  So I wrote twenty people, good friends, relatives and others.  Two weeks later I went back to Parren Mitchell and he, he already knew what the answer was but it was a good lesson for me.  He said, "What was the response you got?"  I didn't have a single response, including my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] (laughter) who I had made the solicitation to and Parren's point was that if it's difficult for your friends and your family to give you money to this dream that you want to be mayor, imagine what it's like for people who don't even know you?  And he said, "Your first lesson in terms of politics is to understand that idealism alone won't do it," and that was a very valuable lesson for me.  He also told me, "When people are shouting 'Encore,' leave, don't come back."  Because his point was that when you're at the top of your popularity politically, that's the time to leave.  When you come back, you will disappoint, just the nature of politics and that--and he by the way practiced what he preached.  He could have been probably congressman from his district until he died if he wanted to be. But he felt that our people are effective up to a point and then they begin to lose their effectiveness and that the problem in the past that has been with our leadership is not only do they only become the leader, but they never wanna leave.  They never want to give up the limelight and they invariably just over time it has a adverse impact and that the voters would kick you out of office 'cause they get tired as well.  So I thought that was great advice he gave me.
Story_ID: 624947
Speaker 1: So you, you said 'cause he was really an icon in many ways right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And his family was one of that's now one of Maryland's first, it's the Mitchells--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You have the Mitchells, and you have the Afro American [Afro American Newspapers]--the Murphys--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The two (unclear) right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.  In fact the Mitchells used to be referred to as the black Kennedys.  They had, they had black people in various offices, they had a congressman--Clarence Mitchell, Jr. [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.] the 101st senator came out that family.  They had state senators, they had delegates.  The Mitchells' name at one point was an incredibly well respected thing, no question about it.  The persons who inherited that legacy did a great harm to it.  They really did.  The Mitchells you know when I think of Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III], I think of all the great work that he did.
Speaker 1: A lot of women's rights, too.
Speaker 2: Oh wo- minority businesses.  He was, he was a champion of that.  But politics is what he had pointed out, it could be, it easily can, it easily can take people and put 'em in a place that they need not be.  It is not for everybody and the political process, one of the, one of the things I know as a result of being involved on a political level, what is possible in politics and what is not.  And you really gotta know the difference between the two. And there is the politician, which we have a lot of, and then there are people I think who get involved in politics for the right reason and there are very few of those today, for the right reason.
Story_ID: 624948
Speaker 1: So you're saying you ran for mayor first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened was--
Speaker 1: But who did you run against?
Speaker 2: No here's what happened, I was gonna, when I first decided to run for public office it was gonna be for mayor of Annapolis [Maryland].  And I told you I went to consult with Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] who thought that was not a good idea.  He said you know, "You gotta understand the political process you know I would not run for mayor."  But he said, "Don't take my word for it, go talk to some other people," and I did.  I met with then Mayor Marion Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] in Washington, D.C.  I met with a man named Mayor Sam Abbott [Sammie A. Abbott] who is the mayor of Takoma Park [Maryland].  I met with some other people and it became clear to me in listening to them they're running for mayor I wasn't ready for that for a host of reasons so I then ran for city council [Annapolis City Council] which I won.  And then after twelve years on the city council I decided to run for mayor.  What happened though I lost a Democratic primary by 155 votes.
Speaker 1: Who did you, who did you run against?
Speaker 2: I ran against the guy I went to South Africa with, Dennis Callahan.
Story_ID: 624949
Speaker 1: What happened was when I decided to run for mayor over those twelve years, my twelve years was social activism I mean really, really into it.  And one of the things, one of the bills I introduced which would hurt me later when I ran for mayor, I introduced a bill that required private clubs which bylaws discriminated against people based on their gender, their race, their religion, or their national origin to have the alcohol beverage license revoked.  At the time, one of the largest private clubs in Annapolis [Maryland] was a club called the Elks club [Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks] which is an all-white male Elks Club, had fifteen hundred members and they were furious with this bill because part of their policy had been that women couldn't be a member of the club and blacks by tradition wasn't a member of the club 'cause the only way you could become a member of the club somebody who was in the club had to nominate you.  And for whatever reason for the almost hundred years they were in existence, nobody who was a member of the club nominated a black to be in the club so it was an all-white male club.  When I introduced that particular legislation, the private clubs in Annapolis were very much opposed to it because as I told you when I was growing up in Annapolis there was a tradition in Annapolis.  People knew where to go and where not to go and the private club bill was very, very controversial and it only passed by one vote and I was able to get it through with one vote.  It was challenged by the Elks club.  It went to Maryland's highest court, Court of Appeals, and it was upheld but the Elks rather than conform with the new law, they moved their office out the City of Annapolis, which is why we don't have them in Annapolis any longer.  There was a club called the Eastport Democratic Club which at the time didn't allow blacks or women to be a member and as a result of me being successful with the Elks Club, a white woman applied to be a member of the Eastport Democratic Club and the way it worked was the way people voted was with little black marbles or white marbles so they would pass, pass around this bowl and if anybody put a black ball in it you get blackballed.
Speaker 2: Now who's they?
Speaker 1: The Eastport Democratic Club--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --members, who were white males. You either put in white or black and it was done secretly so you really didn't know supposedly who did it.  Well this white woman whose husband was a member of the Eastport Democratic Club decided she would join the club and she got blackballed and she call me up and was very upset over the fact that she had been blackballed and she said, "You know I can understand if I was colored, but I'm a white woman and they blackballed me and I'm really upset by it."  Now (laughter) here, here she's telling me that she could understand if she were colored sort of saying it's okay if it happens to black people, it just shouldn't happen to me.  What I found amazing about it was that her husband who is a member of the club, she didn't get a single white ball because everybody in there voted against her, including her husband, but she probably didn't figure that out.  Now as a result of that bill that got passed, those clubs are now integrated.
Story_ID: 624950
Speaker 1: When you talk about the politics of you know Anne Arundel County [Maryland] and Maryland, someone told me that even families are split between Republican and Democrats and they were called, I think the kids are called whatever the Republi-cats (laughter) or whatever--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --but you know that people go between both and that overall it's basically a very conservative area.
Speaker 2: Right.  Let me give you the black version first which is if you lived in the City of Annapolis [Maryland] and you understand politics in this historical context, you will discover the following.  African Americans have served on the city council from 1873 to the present, which meant that the first African American to get elected in Maryland was an African American elected to Annapolis City Council eight years following the Civil War.  Civil War ends in 1865 a black is elected in 18--I mean 1873 first black. Blacks continue to serve on the city council.  'Cause I told you that one third of the black population--one third of the Annapolis population is black, they continue to serve up until 1909.  In 1909 the Maryland General Assembly passes what's called a grandfather act which simply says if your grandfather couldn't vote, you can't vote.  So blacks are disenfranchised.  It's the Republican Party which in that day was the progressive party.  Blacks who voted, blacks who got elected were Republicans because they were the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] so from 1906 until 1915, there's no black representation on the city council because of this bill that was passed.  The supreme court overturns that and blacks have been serving ever since on Annapolis City Council.  In 1981 it's not until 1981, first black is elected in 1873, it's not until 1981 that the first black Democrat gets elected to the city council, which was Samuel Gilmer, the man I mentioned to you previously, is the first Demo- black Democrat to get elected.  From 1981 to the present, all the blacks who gotten elected been Democrats and again that's reflective of the changing of the roles of the national parties.  Now the role of blacks on the city council have always been interesting to me.
Story_ID: 624951
Speaker 1: As a result of becoming a member of the city council [Annapolis City Council] I got very much involved in the history of blacks on the city council and one of the things that I discovered when I was on city council was a man named Louis Snowden who is not related to me, came to me one day and he said to me, "I want you to look into something." And what he wanted me to look into was his brother was named John Snowden.  John Snowden was the last African American that was hanged by execution in Anne Arundel County [Maryland].  His crime was that he allegedly raped and murdered a pregnant white woman [Lottie Mae Brandon].  He was an ice man, he being John Snowden.  So partly because his name was Snowden, the surname, I was curious a little bit about who he was, I decided to do some research and what I found out was that indeed in 1918 [sic. 1917] when the alleged crime took place, he was arrested for that crime and February 28, 1919, he was executed by hanging. But what made this a fascinating story was that African Americans who was alive during that era including my mother [Ora Brown Snowden] who was born in 1917 had heard the story about John Snowden being handed down from generation to generation, saying that he was unfairly hanged for a crime he didn't commit.  So while a member of the city council, I wrote to the then governor William Donald Schaefer same man I had a problem with 'Square Off' and relayed to him this story about John Snowden, asked that he investigate and see whether or not this guy get a posthumous pardon now that he--'cause he was deceased but see whether or not there was any truth to the, to the story that he had been unfairly executed.  The governor then promised to look into it, never did anything.  I had then left the city council and got appointed to the cabinet of Janet Owens [Janet S. Owens] who is the first woman elected county executive.  The first day of going to work at what was called the Arundel Center [Annapolis, Maryland] which is where the sheriff's office used to be where John Snowden was hanged, I run into a black man who's walking back and forth in front of the building and I'm under the impression that he's elderly, that he doesn't know where he's going.  So I started to tell him this is the building where you pay your taxes, et cetera, et cetera.  And he quickly tells me, "I know what this building is.  The reason I don't wanna go in this building 'cause this where they killed that Snowden guy." And I thought it was providence that he would bring that up.  As I went up now in my new position as a cabinet member and I wrote the current governor at that time was Parris Glendening who was the governor that succeeded William Donald Schaefer and wrote him the same identical letter that I written to Governor Schaefer.  Governor Glendening promised that he would look into it.  He did look into it.  They did an investigation and they concluded that in all likelihood, John Snowden did not commit the murder and had been put to death for a crime that he didn't commit.  And they based that on three things that they later discovered.  One is that when John Snowden was executed an anonymous letter was sent to the local newspaper saying that they killed the wrong person.  Twenty-one of the--sorry, eleven of the twelve jury members during that day asked that the--asked that the governor reconsider the sentence that had been given to John Snowden 'cause now they had doubt as well and the governor thought given the racial climate that occurred during that period of time in all probability he probably didn't get a fair trial so John Snowden was the first man in Maryland's history to be pardoned for a crime that had to do with race and violence.
Story_ID: 624952
Speaker 1: So with Snowden that was--how has that materialized then? You know your findings (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's got, he's got a effective--there's a pardon, the first one that was ever issued in the history of the country but it also led me to something else. Because what John Snowden had later discovered because one of the things we find out is that he was executed in Anne Arundel County [Maryland] but he was tried in Baltimore County [Maryland] and the reason we find that he was later--would later find that he was tried in Baltimore County because unbeknownst to me until I did the research, in 1906 another black man by the name of Henry Davis on December 21, 1906 was accused of assaulting a white woman. And the reaction to that assault was so strong that the white community went into the jail that Henry Davis was at, broke him out of the jail, took him past a predominantly black church, took him over to St. John's College [Annapolis, Maryland] which is one of the oldest colleges in America, lynched him from a tree but the weight of his, his--the tree couldn't sustain his weight so he falls to the ground and the vigilantes shoot him a hundred times.  But rather than had done with that, they did something that was unheard of.  They got photographs of this mutilated body and made souvenir postcards which they could then send to friends around the country and Henry Davis was allowed to lay in the street for three, four days.  The governor named Ritchie [sic. Emerson Harrington] at the time decided when the thing with John Snowden happened which was like ten years later, they didn't want the same kind of incident to happen, which is why they took him to Baltimore County. And in Annapolis [Maryland], we created a memorial called a memorial to the victims of lynchings and so we would list every person that we know of who's ever been lynched in Annapolis--I'm sorry in Maryland and it's thirty-two of them and you know the date, the time and the location.
Speaker 1: All from what period of time?
Speaker 2: It was it goes all the way up to 1932, '33 [1933] I think was the last known lynching.
Speaker 1: And the first known lynching you said was--
Speaker 2: Back in the 1800s (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen hundreds [1800s].
Speaker 2: Eighteen--right after, right after slavery.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Story_ID: 624953
Speaker 1: We haven't talked about the Martin Luther King--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Day celebration, I think we need to go back--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know to that and so how did--what was your desire to do then?  You're still at the time you do that you're still in city council [Annapolis City Council] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In city council but what happened was I had started a Martin Luther King, Jr. memorial breakfast [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Breakfast] which is--which will be thirty-one years old next year and the breakfast was very successful but the clientele that generally came to the breakfast was mostly academia and it was people who could afford to take off of work.  This was before King's birthday becomes a national holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day].  And my sense of it is that a lot of people, working people, who would've liked to celebrate Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday, but they can't afford to take off or don't take off, so we create the Martin Luther King, Jr. dinner [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr Awards Dinner].  There's already a breakfast, it's been going on fairly successful for six years previous.  So we now create this dinner and the difference between the breakfast and the dinner is night and day, ones at night versus day.  And it allows people to be able to come and to participate and it grows.  I mean it's now larger than the breakfast.  More people turn out to the dinner than the breakfast.
Speaker 1: But tell me what, what this means, what does the breakfast and dinner meant historically for the black community there. And I mean I would like you to talk a little bit more about the black community and the history of the black community and you know in Anne Arundel County [Maryland] and Annapolis [Maryland] 'cause I know you said they represent a third, but you think of Annapolis as relatively wealthy.
Speaker 2: Right.  One of the things about the Martin Luther King, Jr. memorial breakfast and the dinner, one of the things I personally was very concerned about, how do we preserve his legacy. And what I'm acutely aware of is how quickly we forget just the nature of being Americans, quickly forget the history and unless there's something done to preserve the legacy of Dr. King it won't mean very much to future generations.  So we decided by having this breakfast and dinner and honor people who keep his spirit and his dream alive by the deeds they do, it reminds each new generation of who he was and what he did.  And Dr. King, as I told you when I was thirteen or fourteen was assassinated.  So it's not--I mean I was influenced by Dr. King, I heard Dr. King, I saw Dr. King as a teenager and so I've always admired him as an individual.  I give him and Malcolm X credit for helping me better understand my place in the world.  And one of the things that I felt we could do is pay homage to him by doing things.  For example in Maryland, though we have a large black population in the State of Maryland, 30 percent of Maryland is African America.  It's very large.  But despite this fact and despite the fact that we have Baltimore City [Baltimore, Maryland] which has a black mayor and a black council, we have Prince George's County [Maryland], per capita the richest county where black people live.  Up until a few years ago there was no memorial to Dr. King in the State of Maryland at all. Not in black Baltimore City, not in wealthy Prince George's County.  So we decided we had to change that so we built this memorial to Dr. King in Anne Arundel County and we did the same thing with Coretta Scott King 'cause we wanna make sure that people who are--who go to Anne Arundel Community College [Arnold, Maryland] where the King Memorial [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Arnold, Maryland] is located or the Sojourner Douglass College [Edgewater, Maryland] where the Coretta Scott King memorial [Coretta Scott King Memorial Garden] is located, will remember who these people were and what their contribution was.  I've done a lot of research on both Dr. King and on Malcolm X and one of the things that I'm convinced of is that these were special men because were not--they were extraordinary men. And to appreciate them is to have some working knowledge of the sacrifices they made and they were extremely interested in the progress of their people, extremely interested.  In fact I've lived long enough to be able to say this to you without fear of contradiction, I don't see that kind of commitment nationally with any of our leadership today.  I mean it was an unselfish leadership and it was one that absolutely was genuinely sincere about improving the lot of black people.
Story_ID: 624954
Speaker 1: So, this is out of biograph- I mean chronological context, but so what are your feelings about the King Memorial [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.] now?
Speaker 2: Well one of the--the national one?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I, I'm struck by in terms of the national memorial is the mistake that was made there.  And it's a huge mistake that I hope we'll be able to correct in the future.  If you go to that memorial and--it's a great memorial of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the problem is it leaves you with the impression it was just Dr. King and nothing would be further from the truth.  He'd be the last one to tell you that all the progress we've made was because of him.  That wasn't who he was.  And one of the things that I am just convinced that they made a terrible mistake on, I knew Coretta Scott King.  I had an opportunity to talk with her. And like all human beings we have our strengths and our weaknesses, but her strength was her determination to preserve his legacy and she gave her life to make sure that happened and not to have one single reference to her at the national memorial, I think it's disgraceful.  I think Coretta Scott King's place in history has not been secure.  I don't think people really fully appreciate what she did.  As I've done more research on her as an individual, I've come to admire her even more and the example that I think that stands out for me most people know that when Martin Luther King, Jr.'s home was firebombed, it's Dr. King that you see in front of the camera telling people to be cool and calm and don't be violent in reaction to it.  What few people realize is Dr. King was not home.  Coretta Scott King was home with her only daughter [Yolanda King] at the time.  Her home is firebombed and yet it's Coretta Scott King who does not lose her cool, does not become emotional, does not--I mean she's the one that has to tell Martin, calm down 'cause he's angry, rightly so.  But she's the one saying to him, "You gotta go talk to these people.  They cannot see you in this state of being upset."  And so she's not credited with that and it's that kind of history that I think a lack of knowing that history I think takes away the appreciation of why she should be given her credit that's due her for the kind of sacrifice she made.  So one of the things that I think she represents are women in general.  We have now, one of the things we do in Anne Arundel [Anne Arundel County, Maryland], we've been doing it now for sixteen years, is we honor women with what's called the Fannie Lou Hamer Award because most people don't know who Fannie Lou Hamer was outside of Mississippi and yet it was people like Fannie Lou Hamer, the nondescript individuals who really made the movement what it was and the role of women are generally underplayed as it relates to the Civil Rights Movement.  So trying to put more emphasis on telling the complete civil rights story.
Story_ID: 624955
Speaker 1: I mean, I know that you're--you've been able to continue that, you know, that whole mission and you have the Coretta Scott King garden, memorial gardens [Coretta Scott King Memorial Garden, Edgewater, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) dedicated last year in 2002 [sic.], I wanna go so you serve on the council [Annapolis City Council] for twelve years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so who do you lose to at that point or do you decide--
Speaker 2: No, I'm running for mayor.
Speaker 1: --you're running for mayor so you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I step down.  Right--
Speaker 1: You decide to run for mayor?
Speaker 2: I decide to run for mayor and as I told you I lost by 155 votes in a Democratic primary in part because of the position I took on the private clubs bill, which I don't regret by the way, and I also learned from experience of losing public office, there is life after politics in terms of elected officials and also one of the things that turns out to be very fortunate for me, there is this expression that goes something like this, when one door closes a window of opportunity opens and there are opportunities that has come to me that had I won the mayorship I might not be having this conversation with you.  There are lots of things that have occurred that I think turned out to be beneficial.
Speaker 1: You lost the election in 1997?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go to work for the Governor Parris Glendening.
Speaker 1: Now can you talk about your relationship with him before--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --going to work with him?
Speaker 2: What had happened was 1998 there's a huge demonstration.  The Ku Klux Klan [KKK] has come to Annapolis [Maryland]. They're in Annapolis--
Speaker 1: Okay but let's have some context first.
Speaker 2: Excuse me it's actually 1994.  I misspoke.
Speaker 1: Okay but let's have context for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah in 1994 what happened was the Ku Klux Klan was angry over the fact that Martin Luther King's Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday has been made a national holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day].  So they decide that they will hold a protest in Annapolis to protest the holiday and black people in general.
Speaker 1: So why Annapolis? Is it 'cause--
Speaker 2: It's the state capital.  It's the state capital, it's where the governor's mansion is, it's where they can get the most attention.  So they come for that purpose and we organize a huge counterdemonstration to that. And Governor Glendening participates which is how I get to know him.  And we develop a relatively good relationship from a political standpoint back and forth.  In 1997 when I'm running for mayor of Annapolis, he's encouraging me.  And in 1997 when I lose the election, he calls me and says in effect, "You ran a good race you know.  If there's anything I can do for you, let me know."  And I said, "Well governor, there is something.  You know I'm not on the city council anymore; I'll be looking for a job."  He said, "Yeah, tell you what, you go to Florida," because I was taking a vacation to Florida after the election, "When you get back you call my chief of staff and I'm sure we can find something for you."  And that's how I became employed with Maryland state government as an administrator.  He literally had his chief of staff find a position for me in state government working for the Department of Juvenile Justice [Department of Juvenile Services] as an administrator.  That's from '97 [1997] to '98 [1998]. Then Janet Owens [Janet S. Owens] who I not met previous to this, she's a woman running for the first time for county executive [for Anne Arundel County, Maryland], and she says, "I'd like you to give me some support."  And I didn't know her but I liked the fact that she was a woman, I liked the fact that she was talking a very progressive platform.  So that's the vote of her campaign and she wins.  And then she invites to become a member of her cabinet and I become her second appointment.  So I leave Governor Glendening to work for eight years with the county executive.
Story_ID: 624956
Speaker 1: What do you learn about the county government that's different from the city government?
Speaker 2: What's--the difference was it's a larger government, more (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many employees and--
Speaker 2: Yeah with the City of Annapolis [Maryland] just to give you an idea, the City of Annapolis has approximately four hundred employees and the county government have seven thousand. Big difference.  The city budget is approximately fifty million [dollars] and the county budget is almost a billion.  But one has a constituency of thirty thousand another has a constituency of five hundred thousand so just it's just a bigger playing field.  The politics of its similar though.  I mean you know you need X number of votes on the County Council in order to be able to get legislation passed.  The county executive has a much stronger impact 'cause it's a strong executive form of government.  And while working in the county government, I got a greater appreciation for how taxpayers' dollars, particularly African American dollars are rarely, rarely targeted.  I mean we, we don't even get anywhere near our fair share of the resources that we should be getting just as taxpayers, it just doesn't happen.  And part of it has to do with lack of knowledge of how the system works.  You know how to determine where resources go. So when there are predominantly black institutions, they generally do not get their fair share of the resources and I remember as an example going to an event with the county executive and one of the black groups had gotten the five thousand dollar grant and they were all, they're so happy.  I'm saying--I you know they just, just didn't understand the amount of money they were putting in this five thousand dollars wouldn't even, you know it just wasn't even a drop in a bucket.  But they didn't know.  They actually thought this is a big deal.
Speaker 1: Now how many people on the--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: --on the council, the County Council?
Speaker 2: Only one African American.  Only one African American (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) One African American.  Is that always the case? Or?
Speaker 2: Well no, there had been no African Americans until he got elected five years ago.  They've only been two African Americans since I was served.  One was a woman back in the '70s [1970s] and now we have a man Daryl Jones, who's on the current County Council, but no, it had been--they all-white County Council over the years.
Story_ID: 624957
Speaker 1: Let's talk about going to you know, let me see, what about--okay then let's go to 2007 when you go into the civil rights you know the division going into the Maryland attorney general's office?  And how that came about?
Speaker 2: Right.  As a--I served for eight years in county government and typically when you get appointed to a cabinet position when the term is up of the person who appointed you, you're not expected to stay on.  The county appointing official or the appointing official bring their own people on and what that mean by they own people, people who politically support them.  So when Democrats are in, generally Democrats get appointed.  When Republicans are in, Republicans get appointed. So it's not unusual.  Sometimes people you know there is a, people stay on but that's not the norm.  So in 1998--and the other thing I should point out is that a county executive is term limited.  You can only serve two terms.  So Janet Owens [Janet S. Owens] had served her two terms and a Republican is now succeeding her and of course he'll be bringing in his own people so I knew that I'd be leaving government.  This was in 2006 when the election was taking place so I'm, and I'm prepared to do that.  There is a race going on for attorney general of Maryland and there is several people running for the post including African American I know named Stuart Simms [Stuart O. Simms] and I had not met the current attorney general Doug Gansler.  I didn't know him but a part of the campaign he comes to Anne Arundel [Anne Arundel County, Maryland] of course he's looking for support. So he and I have an opportunity to talk and dialog and discuss various things and he makes it clear that he's interested in being a progressive attorney general and the kind of issues that he's interested in. And we talk of course my background is civil rights and I'm not an attorney by training got a master's degree in human services and I've been involved in civil rights activity. So one thing leads to another and he says, "You know I think if I get elected I'm gonna create a civil rights division."  Because up to that point there's no civil rights division in the office of the Maryland attorney general, there never has been.  And he said, "And I like you to consider being my director."  So the election is held and he wins and he offers me the position and I've been doing it now five years and that's how I came about.
Story_ID: 624958
Speaker 1: So what has been your--the things that have been important to you in that position?
Speaker 2: Mostly, because again now I'm that I'm with the state government where I was dealing with five hundred thousand people at the county level, at the city level I was dealing with thirty thousand now try 4 million.  As a result of being at the state level, I'm dealing with people all over the State of Maryland.  The issues that are existing are issues that don't surprise me at all.  One of the, one of the examples I use, I teach a course called the Psychology of Racism and it's my contention that racism is corrosive to the spirit and to your wellbeing and that you need to know how to combat it or it literally will kill you.  And most people don't see that.  They just think well you know people, discriminate against people, too bad.  Well here's an example that I give the students that they get.  If you're working in a job as many people often are. If for some reason your supervisor is incapacitated, dies, leaves office whatever and your, the powers to be say to you, "We want you to fill this position in an acting capacity for the next six months and then what we're gonna do is we're gonna put out a request and you can apply for the position like everybody else."  So for six months, you do the job, and you do it well, there's no question you're capable of doing the job.  And they post the position; you apply for the position like everybody else apply.  You don't get the position.  They give it to somebody who happens to be white.  And then they tell you, "We'd like you to train the person that we've appointed so they can learn to do the job."  So many black people have had that happen to them and the effect it has to have on the spirit.  They really can't say what they wanna say because of the economic situation they're in so it burns deep inside of them and it's corrosive, it's not good.  Men have a tendency to take it out on they spouses or significant others when they get home because they're not allowed to articulate how they really feel. And so what we're trying to do through this course of psychology of racism is get people to understand what's happening to them and to give them the tools necessary to make them well.  So in my position as civil rights director, what I'm trying to get people to do is deal with the issue not just accept the fact this is the way it's been, it's the way it's always gonna be and leave it alone because it really is corrosive, it will lead to early death, lead to illnesses that you don't even think has anything to do with racism but racism produces its own level of stress which can have all kinds of other problems going on and it's important people deal with it.
Story_ID: 624959
Speaker 1: The thing that I, I'm curious to ask and I--is you know you recently were last year appointed to the housing authority [Housing Authority of the City of Annapolis], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I think about this because you started your, your community activism, not started but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was revving around the issues of housing so in that nearly forty almost fifty year period, what have the issues--what, how have the issues changed?  And what are you finding you know now as opposed to before?
Speaker 2: Well with public housing residents, public housing residents, we changed the paradigm. You know the history of public housing for people who don't know it was not started for black people.  When Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] started public housing in 1937, it was part of the New Deal and what the deal was for service people, primarily white, who were coming out of the [U.S. military] service, coming back home and this was an opportunity for them to get what was called transitional housing and if you go back and look at the history of public housing, you'll find that there were housing that was built for whites and there was housing that was built for blacks because it was during the era of segregation.  And so the idea was this would be transitional housing.  The idea you go into public housing, as your income improved, as your academic status changed, you get better income, better jobs and you move on.  It was never intended to be permanent housing.  Somewhere in the '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] a shift came about where for poor people, particularly black people, it was not only the housing of the last resort, it was the only housing. And so generations started living in public housing, just one generation after another.  Generally public housing was built where there were inferior schools, lack of jobs; it became a trap for a lot of people.  Over the years what I've noted is that people have--I've heard women say of their children, that what they would like is for their children to be able to get their own public housing, subsidized housing, that's they dream, that they child get they own apartment.  And to me that was an indication of dreams being killed at a very early age.  So, since becoming the director of the--chairman of the housing authority, I put together this program that basically goes this way, all of us know how you get into public housing, what I wanna do is give you the key to get out of public housing, a tool, and the way we do that is change the way we think about public housing and so what I've been saying to residents of public housing you live in public housing like Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], the White House [Washington, D.C.] is public housing.  It's fund- subsidized by the taxpayers.  You live in public housing like the governor because it's subsidized by the taxpayers.  You live in public housing like the midshipmen, the four thousand that go to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  But the difference between them and you, it's all public housing, is they know that they are not residents, they're stewards and there's a difference.  As stewards of public housing, the White House, Barack Obama knows that when him and Michelle [Michelle Obama] leaves whether it's in four years or eight, they, they need to leave the place better than they found it 'cause there's others that will follow who will need it.  So it's transitional.  The governor, same thing.  If he's lucky and gets two terms, he's there for a maximum of eight but again he is a steward of it.  If you're a midshipman, you get four years sometimes five if you're a little slower, but you're not there longer than five and you have to move out.  And so what we need to have residents do who go into public housing, traditional public housing, is have a game plan to get out.  So if I come in as a single parent, the question that I need to be asking myself: what is it gonna take to get me out of here?  And if I don't ask myself coming in, I'll never leave out and so what we're trying to do now is when residents come into public housing is look at what tools they'll need to get them out of public housing.  For me the great equalizer is education.  I don't think you'll get around that and so if you can't get out of public housing because of your certain problems you may have, then let's still plan for your children so that that child's not trapped in public housing but have a game plan on getting out and--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) part of it's gotta be training.
Story_ID: 624960
Speaker 1: But we've been talking about training and housing and economic development for a long time.  So you, you know when I was asking you your occupation and you know when you said government employee but--government I'm sorry official.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: But wouldn't you more classify yourself as a civic activist?
Speaker 2: I think that's a fair description.  I think others might use that more but I think that's fair.  I think that's a fair description.  Let me just say we have not been talking about economic development really.  I mean I know some of us have but I'm talking about collectively.  If you really look at--which is what Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: I'm saying economic development was the mission in the black community in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think they, I think there some people said that.  I think Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] for example talked about black capitalism and I think there was this effort but when I think of Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] here in Chicago [Illinois], the black expo [Black Business Exposition], but I think when you look at economic development collectively across the country for black people, I don't think so.  You know I think there are some examples of some blacks who did very, very well but I think we're just getting around to the notion of, of  the need to do more economic development and we're running into some stark realties 'cause the economy is changing.  I was talking to your mom earlier and she was bemoaning the number of black businesses that used to be here in Chicago for example and how they're now almost nonexistent.  And part of it has to do with, part of it has to do with the changing world that we in.  You know when you had a segregated system where its clientele was black people and you could depend on that, that was a model. But many of the schools, many of the institutions that blacks used to run when integration came in and people could take their dollars elsewhere, we tended to take our dollars exwhe- elsewhere as opposed to investing them in our institutions.
Story_ID: 624961
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My biggest hope, my biggest hope is that we learn the lessons of history which is that not only can it be repeated, but you can find yourself in a far worse situation than you previously were.  The notion that progress is not only inevitable but continuous I don't think a good reading of history proves that to be the case.  One of the things that, that I have discovered you take Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], the first president, first African American our people think that's the first time we been here, it's not.  We been here before, but in a different context.  You will remember what I'm about to tell you, you have to because it just happened in our era.  When Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] became the first African American governor in Virginia and he won by the slimmest of margins, people thought hey this is a new day, I mean it's gotta be.  When Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] won the mayorship in New York [New York], it's gotta be a new day.  And my favorite city is here with Harold Washington, it's a new day.  And why that was progress it wasn't permanent.  Just as it came it went and if you look at some of the numbers in Virginia, in New York and I would even imagine here in Chicago [Illinois], if you look at where blacks were then as opposed to now, you'll see the regression I'm talking about.  That's what I mean it's not permanent.  So my hope is that we a) understand how the system works, how to negotiate and navigate that system to our advantage and there's something I'm pushing now called the wisdom of the geese, which is just theory, which focus on getting us again to once again think of how we move our community collectively forward as opposed to individuals.  As proud as you are and I am of Oprah Winfrey, who I knew, the truth of the matter is she's not the first.  Now what do I mean by that?  If you take Oprah Winfrey in the 21st century and you go back to Madam C. Walker [Madam C.J. Walker], you'll find she was a very wealthy woman in her day, tremendously wealthy but the exception isn't the rule and what we need to do is make sure that more people benefit by the progress that's made versus one or two people we can point to as an example of success.
Story_ID: 624962
Speaker 1: I have I think just three last questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about the significance of African American history within the State of Maryland or Anne Arundel County [Maryland].  I like you to since you're a history buff, to talk about--
Speaker 2: Well one of the things I, I tell students that with Sojourner, Sojourner Truth as you know was an uneducated, illiterate woman who was called by God and she was a feminist before the term was even used.  Got a great speech she write, Ain't I a Woman Too? [Ain't I a Woman?] and she talks about the great New York speech she gives in New York and then you have Frederick Douglass.  Frederick Douglass was a self-taught, well read man who many would say was the leading abolitionist or leading voice in his day and so you have this image of Frederick Douglass as this great orator and very intelligent man and then you have Sojourner Truth who is supposed to be illiterate and didn't, did not master the King's English and the story I like to tell is the one that deals with what happens when Frederick Douglass and his fellow abolitionist discovered that the [U.S.] Supreme Court, 1836 [sic.], passes the infamous Dred Scott decision [Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857], which by the way was written by a Marylander, the chief justice was a man named Roger Taney [Roger B. Taney].  They have a statue of Roger Taney in Annapolis, Maryland, at the statehouse.  So Chief Justice Roger Taney writes the Dred Scott decision and it is a decision that simply says that blacks have no rights that whites are bound to respect.  So up until this period of time, this great progress is going on and suddenly the Supreme Court lends down this decision that is considered devastating. And so Douglass and others meet, talk about where do we go from here and it's pretty gloomy because I mean it's the Supreme Court that laid down this decision and frankly they're at wits end of what to do.  In walks Sojourner Truth who's late for the meeting and she noticed the crowd is so somber and very gloomy and her question is, "What's wrong?"  And Frederick Douglass trying to figure out how he can tell this woman in language that she'll be able to understand the impact of the Supreme Court decision, how bad it is.  And so almost in a patronizing condescending way, he describes what this decision means.  And when he finishes it, she looks at him without missing a beat and said, "Oh Frederick, is that all?" And he thinks she must not have gotten what I just said.  The Supreme Court has laid down this decision that's gonna put blacks back for generations, get on board.  And then she says to him, "Frederick, I didn't know you followed any Supreme Court.  I thought you followed Supreme Being.  Boy keep your head on the North Star. Our God didn't bring us this far to leave us.  Ain't you got no sense?"  And it's that kind of faith in the future, that kind of optimism, that kind of determination that no matter how bad things are, it's gonna be better because one of the remarkable things about our history and I wish most of our children would know this, there's no group of people none, in America, who came under the same conditions that we've come and have gone as far as we've come.  One of the things I told your mom to look at blackdemographics.com. What it is, it's a website that's dedicated to showing the status of black people in America.  And when you see the numbers, not the mythology, but the numbers, there are 43 million of us.  There's this story that's going around that there's more black men in prison than there's in college.  It's just not true.  The numbers speak for themselves.  There are more black men in college rather than prison.  When you look at the fact that 82 percent of all black children are high school graduates in America.  No other ethnic groups in the period of time we're talking about 1865 to the present time, can boast of the progress that has been made.  And the numbers I think show a much better success rate than many of us think. And when you look at the numbers across the country, I looked at this demographics where are blacks at in America, what are--how many black you mentioned scientists that shows just how many black scientists there are in the country, that shows how many black millionaires in the country, multimillionaires, things that we I think when we begin to look at the bigger picture, we, we, we see the progress that's been made.  And that's not to say obviously that we couldn't do better and there are not improvements being made but I think from a historical standpoint, when you look at how far we've come in a relatively short period of time and under the great obstacles that we face, I think it's important for our children to have faith in the future and technology is gonna be our new tool.  It's gonna change everything.
Story_ID: 624963
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  That's a very good question.  And I think the best way to summarize is like with what I told you previously when asked what's my best saying, which is nobody can do everything, but everybody can do something.  Just that--did my something.
Speaker 1: So what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Doing my something, whatever that something is.  People will remember for different reasons.  Some will obviously think the King Memorial [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Arnold, Maryland] is that something, others will think it's the legislation that was passed that prohibit private clubs or you know some other something.  But it's doing something and I think that it's important that we each do our something and I'm more convinced today that the something need not be something huge, just something. You know even if it's working with kids and getting them inspired to make their lives better or focusing on rebuilding communities.  I'm convinced of three things, one, I'm totally convinced of this.  There are things that the government cannot, will not and should not do. And one of those thing I'm absolutely convinced it's not the government's responsibility to do is to raise our children. That's our responsibility and we you know we've gotta take that responsibility on.  It's not the government's responsibility.
Story_ID: 624964
Speaker 1: One last question, your family, can you talk about the importance of family in your life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I've got, I've got two sons Abayomi [Abayomi Snowden] and Kojo [Kojo Snowden] and recently I became a grandfather and one of the things I thought was gonna happen when I became a grandfather, I thought I'd spend most of my time kind of looking back, but now I find myself looking forward thinking what her future is gonna be like, what other kind of things that will be impacting on her as we go forward and I think family is the continuation.  I think that's how you live on.  One of the things I said earlier to you and I feel deeply about it is that Parren Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III] legacy got tainted and members of people's family have a responsibility to preserve the legacy and expand it.  When we built the Kunta Kinte Alex Haley Memorial in Annapolis [Maryland], I remember Bill Haley [William Alexander Haley], his son, coming to me and saying we should have something far more significant than this memorial and my response is, well build it.  There's nothing stopping you from building and I think when people have fathers and sons or fathers and mothers who've done great things, it's the children's responsibility to preserve that legacy which is why when you think of Malcolm X's kids or the King family kids and I see some of the foolishness going on, you have to ask yourself what went wrong.
