Story_ID: 283200
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Michael [A.] Schultz, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, S-C-H-U-L-T-Z.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 11/10/38 [November 10, 1938], Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a film director, a television director, a theater director, a traffic director (laughter).  I'll direct anything that moves.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I think it's October 5th, nine--2004.
Speaker 1: That's right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are conducting this interview in my offices in Santa Monica, California.
Story_ID: 283201
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That is a tough question because I, I'm so eclectic in my taste, in food, music, art.  I like everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up red was my favorite color.  It's, it's now blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I love it all.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't, basically 'cause I don't remember any of it.
Story_ID: 283202
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Leo Schultz] side of the family.  And--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what I can remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and I'll start with your mother's side.  Now--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother was Katherine Leslie, K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, L-E-S-L-I-E (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Katherine was born in Chicago [Illinois] in 1917, September the 17th.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not very far back.  In--my mother had one sister and two brothers.  And half of them were from a different father.  My grandmother, her mother, had been married five times, was a very attractive looking Cherokee, high cheekbone looking woman but very wild.  And so I, I knew a couple of her husbands, only by the name, their nicknames, very colorful nicknames like Grandpa Whiskey (laughter).  And, and she, she worked on the boat that went across from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to the other side of Michigan, Muskegon [Michigan] or whatever.  And her mother was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian [Native American].  So I knew her, and she lived to be about a 104.  And as a kid, I just knew her as the oldest looking person I had ever met, you know.  But that's about it on my mother's side, the uncles, who were from Indiana.  My favorite uncle was a trumpet player, whose name was Bob, Robert Leslie [ph.].  And he and my mother were very close siblings.
Speaker 1: Now did you know your mother's father at all?
Speaker 2: No, never, never met my mother's father.  As a matter of fact, I think he had passed away before I was born.
Story_ID: 283203
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that [maternal] side of the family about, I don't know, life in the 19th century or how they got up to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]--were they always from--had they been in the North a long time, or did they come from some other place?
Speaker 2: You know, my mother [Katherine Leslie] never really talked about her, her past.  And, and she was, she was a workaholic in a way.  She raised my brother and I as a single parent, and so we didn't see her around a lot.  She, she worked.  When she wasn't working, she was sleeping.  You know, she, she would work maybe two jobs, and then she went to school, very industrious, very committed to working in the community.  So we didn't have a lot of family talk around time, and so I never heard any of those stories.  Most of the stories I heard were from my father's [Leo Schultz] side.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did your mother talk about growing up and you know, where she went to school and that sort of thing?  Did you ever hear anything like that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --about that.
Speaker 2: Nope, that's why this will be a short interview (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  So she grew up in Milwaukee though, right?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Milwaukee.  She went to school early in Chicago [Illinois].  She was traveling from Milwaukee to Chicago to study nursing.  She wanted to be a nurse, and--
Speaker 1: Did she study at Provident Hospital [and Training School for Nurses, Chicago, Illinois] by any chance?
Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: That was a black hospital there, you know, 'cause I'm, I'm--I just wondered.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Could have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess there were other places, too, but I know that was a place where a lot of black nursing students went.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They, they, they had a school of nursing there.
Speaker 2: Right.  So she never quite finished the nursing thing because I came along.  My father was a very attractive trumpet player.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Story_ID: 283204
Speaker 1: My father was Leo Schultz, L-E-O.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: He was born in Springfield, Illinois, and I'm not sure what his date of birth was.
Speaker 2: And was he older than your mother [Katherine Leslie] or younger?
Speaker 1: He was older, and he was older by a couple of years.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so maybe 1915, '16 [1916]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen twelve [1912] I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right. Well, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 1: Again, only one generation deep.  I, I never knew his father, although he talked about him a lot.  His father owned a coal mine in Kentucky.  And so Leo had four brothers, and they, they all worked very hard and came up through that whole [Great] Depression era, period.  And during that period, the coal mine went bust.  And he wanted to be a musician anyway and kind of struck out on his own.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, so your father's father, and what, what, what, do you, do you know his name?  Do you--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --remember is name?
Speaker 1: I don't.
Speaker 2: Your father, your, your grandfather?
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: Okay, owned a coal mine in Kentucky?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, was, are they black now?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: African Americans in Kentucky--
Speaker 1: --absolutely.
Speaker 2: --and owned a coal--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --mine, okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, they, they were--you know, I, I doubt that it was a very large coal mine, but it, it was enough to provide an income and, and put a bunch of people to work, you know.
Story_ID: 283205
Speaker 1: One of my aunts on my father's [Leo Schultz] side did a whole family history book and traced the family from the Schultz side back to how the Schultz name came to be.  And I have to say I never read the book, but I've just heard bits and snatches of it.  But my great--great-great-grandfather was the head quip on a large plantation in Kentucky that was owned by an old German man named George Schultz [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is a, a large plantation where?  I'm sorry, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, there was a town called Schultz, Schultz Town [sic. Shultztown, Ohio County], Kentucky.  And George Schultz, when he died, willed the land to my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Do you suspect that they were related, actually?
Speaker 1: I don't think so, because it was a huge split in the white Schultz family.  They were outraged that, that George had willed all this property to his head slave.  So, (laughter) this guy had a lot of, lot of moxie.  So, he said, "Well, I have the land.  I might as well take the name," so he became the black George Schultz.
Speaker 2: Okay, so his name wasn't Schultz before he took the land.
Speaker 1: It was whatever it was, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But no, he adopted the, the name George Schultz, and because he had run of the plantation, there were a lot of Schultz children sired from him.  So, there's a huge Schultz, black Schultz population spread all over the country, actually.
Speaker 2: Now, the name Schultz is a German name, I take it.
Speaker 1: It's a German, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And there are other black folks with German names, but you know, you know, it's, it's rare.  You don't hear as many.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There are some Stoudemires.  You hear of them, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --more often.  But that's one German name that, that comes through a lot, and, and Schultz every now and then that you run into a Schultz.  But is there any story connected with what part of Germany they come from or what they were--
Speaker 1: If there is, it never came down to us.
Story_ID: 283206
Speaker 1: How did your father [Leo Schultz] grow up?  Do you know how he grew up and what he--was he able to go to school or anything, or, and how he--
Speaker 2: No, no, he was, I think he dropped out of school in the fourth, fifth grade because he had to work, work in the coal mine.  He grew up working in, in the fields and in the mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were owner, owners of a coal mine, but it wasn't the kind of situation where they could just sit back and--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --profit.
Speaker 2: They were, they were the worker/owners (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot different from most--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  No, they were, they were entrepreneurs, you know.  And had they been in Oklahoma, they would have, they would have been oil riggers, you know, and, and staked out some land, so.
Speaker 1: So I guess the scenario might have been that the, the coal was on a--they, they discovered the coal on the land after they acquired it or something and, and then started--
Speaker 2: No, I think, I think he actually purchased a working coal mine and, and set about to work it and turn it into a business.  And, and I think the, the [Great] Depression kind of put a halt to all of that.  So, it, it was a definite business move.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father talk about how he learned how to play the trumpet or anything?
Speaker 2: He didn't, other than a lot of it was self-taught, the way he taught himself to read and write.  He--he was a very kind of self-motivated guy.  And since he didn't go to school, he just learned it all by watching and doing.  And he did the same with music.  He had a very innate music talent.  And his cousin is Harry ["Sweets"] Edison, Sweets Edison, who died a couple of years ago recently.  And they were very close and--
Speaker 1: Now, now, is there a story behind how he was born in Springfield [Illinois] and then, you know, basically raised in Kentucky, or?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  I don't know.  Since, since I never--he and my mother [Katherine Leslie] split when I was four, so I never really knew him growing up.  And it was only toward the end of his life when he wanted to reconnect again, and I've learned some of the history of what he was about.
Story_ID: 283207
Speaker 1: How many people then were in your household when you grew up?  It would be you and your, your [maternal] grandmother, your mother [Katherine Leslie]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother lived upstairs.  We lived in, in one of those duplex houses.  My grandmother lived upstairs.  My mother, and my brother and I lived downstairs.  So whenever she was not watching over us, my grandmother was, you know.  So, I spent most of my time in, in school as did my brother, so that was a great place for me to just explore the rest of the world.
Story_ID: 283208
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember (laughter) we had a backyard, and, and this was, oh, I might have been seven or eight.  And there were still coal furnaces, so whenever the coal deliveries were made, you know, I remember that tumbling down the chute and the smell of that through the house.  My [maternal] grandmother kept live chickens, you know.  And so when it was time to eat, I remember her wringing those chickens' necks, you know, and, and chopping it off, and headless chickens running around the yard (laughter).  And there was no such thing as, you know, frozen foods or, or McDonald's, so what you got was fresh, cooked.  And you actually knew what it looked like before it hit the pan, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: You might even have named it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  And what other smells and sounds?  Walking to school, we always had to pass a Wonder Bread plant and Hershey [Foods Corporation; The Hershey Company] chocolate plant.  And of course and Milwaukee [Wisconsin] is the land of beer, so there were all the smells from the, the breweries, you know.  But trying to get from home to school without getting hungry was a major chore (laughter) 'cause those were just great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are powerful smells.  And anybody--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --that's lived next door to a bakery or a neighbor with a bakery or, or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --even a Hershey factory--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --oh, gee whiz.  That's--so, anything else?  Any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: No, not really, you know.  Those were like the most, most powerful.  The, the sound of silence when those major snow storms hit.  And the snow banks would be above your head when you were five or six years old, you know, and you could almost jump out of the second story window into the snow bank and not get hurt.  And the sound of cars, you know, going through the slush, I remember that.
Story_ID: 283209
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood?  I mean was it an all-black neighborhood or a mixed neighborhood, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in, in an all-black neighborhood.  And growing up I didn't know it was the hood, you know, but it, it was all-black.  Milwaukee [Wisconsin] was very segregated in a--in a kind of uncanny, unmarked way.  It was a black neighborhood; there was the Polish neighborhood; there was a Jewish neighborhood; and there was a German neighborhood.  And you knew when you moved from one to the other, you know.  The area that I grew up in no longer exists 'cause a freeway kind of took that out, but it was, it was 10th [Street] and Vine [Street] at the time.  And there was a school next door, the elementary school, so we didn't have far to go in terms of elementary school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  I wish I could tell you.  I want to say Lincoln, but I know it wasn't that, so.
Speaker 1: Been a long time ago, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and also I didn't have great, fond memories of elementary school, so.  There are almost none, so (laughter), except I was, I, I was very motivated and, and I think without trying hard, I pretty much knew what, what was being taught in the classes or picked it up very quickly.  So I was the teacher's pet and always had to face that down with the, with the guys in the class.  So, I learned how to run quick; I learned how to fight good (laughter); and I learned how to talk my way out of, out of situations, so.  But I was like the, the, the nickname for me was the gray-eyed nigger, you know (laughter) 'cause of these gray-blue eyes.  So, growing up, you, you got real tough if you didn't look like everybody else, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I imagine, yeah, that would cause some, that does cause some--the inner conflict in the black community of color.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you had to watch what you said to people and a lot of people things I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was very interesting.  That whole, the whole color caste system in the black community in that period of time never made sense to me, you know, so.  My mother [Katherine Leslie] always--you know, if I went out with a girl who was darker than me, you know, that was like a no-no.  And so I would just go that way, just (laughter), just 'cause it didn't make sense to me, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I--yeah, it was like, yeah, I--I've heard those kind of conversations and stuff, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --that people have.  Those are the days if you call somebody black, you know, those were the days before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fighting words. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah--before black power.  It was, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they'd get angry.
Story_ID: 283210
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid?  What kind of a kid were you?  What did you like to do, and what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I was, as a kid, I was a little pudgy, you know.  They--matter of fact, it's funny, my brother, who was always skinny, and I was always pudgy, they, they called me Mickey Mouse, and they called him Porky Pig (laughter), so I couldn't figure that one out.  But I liked sports, but I didn't like sports like basketball where you had to dress up in shorts and, and a t-shirt because I, I was self-conscious about my body.  And the school that I went to, they kept trying to get me to play basketball, you know, 'cause I was a pretty good athlete.  I, I liked baseball.  I liked football, but I spent most of my time in the library studying or reading books or that.  But, but it wasn't, I wasn't like an indoor kid totally.  I was outdoors a lot, and riding bikes, and, and playing baseball, and, and I loved tennis growing up.  But there was no way that we could afford that equipment, and a tennis racquet was out of the question.  You could get a glove, get a ball, but that other stuff was too expensive.
Speaker 1: Now did you have to work when you were coming along, up as a kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I didn't start working 'til I was about fourteen.  And my first job was in a, working in a fish market.  And, and that didn't last too long 'cause I hated the smell (laughter) of fish and scraping the gills off and stuff like that.  But I've, I've done many, many jobs.  And, and oh, I had a paper route before the fish market thing.  Fish market paid well though.  Drove a truck, Milwaukee Journal [Sentinel] truck up to Green Bay, Wisconsin.  And then when I started working in college [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], I worked in a steel mill, worked and then went to school part time, worked at American Motors [Corporation] building Rambler [American] cars.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we don't hear too much about them anymore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're--
Speaker 1: --but that was--
Speaker 2: --they're gone.  But, but they're also classic items.  I, I just saw a list where there's a, a Rambler that if you can get your hands on it's worth like $50,000, you know, so.  But I learned very quickly why America was not going to be able to compete in the automobile market, just from working on the lines, the assembly lines.  It was disaster (laughter), so.  So, but that was later on, you know, when I was college age.
Story_ID: 283211
Speaker 1: When you were a kid, so you, you worked when you were fourteen.  Now, did, was, was church an important--play an, a role in your life when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, at a certain point my mother [Katherine Leslie] got, got the spirit and wanted us to become Catholic, so we actually, since we had no choice--we were kids--we were, we converted to Catholicism.  And I think part of that was that the Catholic schools were the better schools, and she wanted to get us in Catholic school.  And so I think that's--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --also where I got my, my love of theatrical, the, the theater and theatrical dealings, because the church was great theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, which, the Catholic church or the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Catholic church.  I mean they had built great structures to God, you know.  And incense was flowing, and the right music was playing, the organ music, and the, and the Latin chants.  It was all very theatrical.  And, and the idea of being able to move, move people by speaking really appealed to me, although I didn't want to be a speaker, but I loved the idea of being able to affect people's, the way people thought and the way people lived their lives.
Story_ID: 283212
Speaker 1: Okay, now we were talking about church being like a first exposure to some kind of theater, you know.  And, but what did you--how were you influenced by radio, television, or the movies?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, my mother [Katherine Leslie] took us to everything that came through.  And one thing about Milwaukee [Wisconsin] was it, it was a cultural hub, okay, like Chicago [Illinois].  A lot of music went through there.  All of the, the dance companies went through there.  They had a couple of really good theatrical houses.  So, I remember, not well, but I remember being dragged along to this ballet or this play or this music thing and never really appreciated it when I was going through it, you know, but it was kind of steeped in the DNA somehow.  But the movies were my favorite thing, the Saturday afternoon matinees, the--Tom Mix and, and Zorro [Don Diego de la Vega] and all these cliffhangers, you know.  So we'd spend the whole day in the movie theaters and watch it over again, too.  So, that was, you know, probably our biggest escape in the form of entertainment besides going to parties later on, but as a kid, it was movies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you were a kid, did you have, did you have any sense at all of how movies are made?  I mean nowadays, they have a lot of TV shows about how they made this movie or made--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that movie, or even on the DVDs they'll show you how they made it after the, after it comes out.  But in those days, did you have any idea how they were made at all?
Speaker 2: No.  And as a matter of fact, I, I just got so totally immersed in the, in the characters in the stories.  You know, I'm, I'm Tom Mix, or I'm Zorro, you know, or whatever and (laughter) so, there was no sense that it was like an artificial thing happening.  It was just a window into a world that I would like to be a part of, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --be the hero.
Speaker 1: Now, what about radio?  Did that have any--I know 'cause radio was bigger than TV--
Speaker 2: Radio--
Speaker 1: --and through that in those days.
Speaker 2: --was always bigger than TV, but I can't tell you that I had any great memories of listening to, you know, classic events like "[The] War of the Worlds" ['The Mercury Theatre on the Air'].  I probably did, but it, it, it didn't make the same impression I think because I'm more a visual person than an oral person because radio was there.  And we had one of the early televisions in our neighborhood, and the kids would all come over, you know.  And, and that was great 'cause all--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --all those, Sid Caesar and Imogene Coca, you know, and 'Texaco [Star] Theater' shows, I remember those somewhat more vividly, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite television show when they first came out?
Speaker 2: I think I liked, you know, '[The] Howdy Doody [Show],' you know, that kid's show, this puppet, all of the comedians, Red Skelton and, and Sid Caesar just did hysterically funny bits, Imogene Coca.  Before Lucille Ball came, these were kind of the people who were moving from vaudeville to television.
Story_ID: 283213
Speaker 1: We were talking about television and the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --your shows--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, the great--
Speaker 1: --or shows you were talking about, your show with Sid Caesar, Imogene Coca and that crew and--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and all the, the TV comedians.  I guess Milton Berle was supposed to be the Mr. Television in those days.
Speaker 2: Milton Berle, he wasn't my favorite though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The guys--I thought that Imogene, Imogene Coca, Sid Caesar, Red Skelton were like the funny--
Speaker 1: They, now--
Speaker 2: --the really funny people.
Speaker 1: --those are the ones that did a lot of improvisational stuff, you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they would crack each other up, you know (laughter).  So, they were so funny that, that their, their co-workers wouldn't know what would, what was going to come up.  And if they enjoyed it, they just, they went along with it.  You know, and you could see that fun happening in real time, so that was great fun, you know.
Speaker 1: And sometimes they couldn't get a line out when they'd look at each other.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 283214
Speaker 1: When did you first get a chance to participate in something on stage?  Did you ever--I mean in, in high school [Riverside High School; Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], in grade school or in high school?
Speaker 2: In, in elementary school I was probably one of the class hams, you know.  So I, if ever there was a play or whatever I would get in it.  And I, I couldn't tell you what the plays were or what the parts were or any of that.  I just, I, I was involved in, in elementary school plays, not so much in high school, though.  In high school I think I was too embarrassed, you know.  I, I was too bashful to do any of that stuff.  So I got my taste of it in elementary school, and then I went through my whole sports and girl phase in high school, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when, when you were in grade school, were there any particular teachers or, or mentors otherwise that, that affected your life?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I couldn't tell you their names.  But I probably had one of the worst math teachers in the world, and it actually kept me from becoming [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell (laughter), 'cause that was my, my great ambition, was to, to fly jet planes, and, and be a general in the [U.S.] Air Force, and go to the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado] and all of that.  And I would have been there all except for my math scores (laughter).  So, so that influenced my life dramatically, you know.  I had no intention of being in the movies or being a director or any of that.  None of that was within the realm of possibility in my world growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you say you went to the movies, and you identified with the heroes in the movies, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, yeah.  I mean you could go to the movies and look at them, but, but being black and working them and maybe acting them, but I didn't want to do that, you know.  So, direct them, the, there was no possible way that a black person was going to be directing a movie.
Story_ID: 283215
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Riverside High School; Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], did you have any, any--did you know the names of any directors at all?
Speaker 2: No.  That, that wasn't even, in, in high school, this business wasn't even in my frame of thinking.  I was going--I was going to graduate with high honors.  I was going to the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado].  I was going to be a career general, you know, and fly jet planes.  That, that was my total focus.  I was a very, I had some artistic ability, won some contests drawing airplanes and stuff.  I was very science-oriented.  I was a Boy Scout.  I knew how to do anything that needed to be done on a manual, physical level.  I was a sportsperson.  I was not into--I didn't go to any theater when I was in high school, I don't think.  I definitely didn't go to any ballet stuff.  You know, I, if I went to movies, it was only for the, for the big event movies.  I was too busy doing sports and, you know, and studying.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned the big event movies.  When you were in high school, I guess 'The Ten Commandments' came out.  I guess you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you were about fourteen or fifteen when that came out?
Speaker 2: Probably, but all of those.  You know, I, I went to 'The Ten Commandments' and--
Speaker 1: 'Spartacus,' I guess.
Speaker 2: All of Sidney Poitier's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Any, anything that Sid Poitier was in I was going to see, you know, 'Spartacus,' yeah, exactly.  I probably saw all the movies.  I (laughter), I'll take that back (laughter).  I probably saw every movie that came through 'cause that was the thing to do, you know, so.  But there was no inkling of a thought in my head that I would be involved in that.
Story_ID: 283216
Speaker 1: So when you're a senior, did you, had you chosen a college to attend then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was a, when I was graduating high school [Riverside High School; Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I was going to the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado], as I got an appointment.  I mean I, I went through all the tests.  I was the second highest scoring person in the State of Wisconsin.  So I was on a track to go to the Air Force Academy, and I took all the tests, and my math scores kept me out.  So, I, I was like the second alternate, the, the second highest person, so I was the alternate.  They were taking one person from each state to start the first class of the Air Force Academy.  And so the guy who was ahead of me decided to go, so I got an appointment to go to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] instead of the Air Force Academy, which I could have taken.  But I didn't want to be in the [U.S.] Army.  I wanted to be in the [U.S.] Air Force.  My whole dream was flying jets, you know.  It, it wasn't really about killing people and shooting people.  It was about--something about flight, you know.  And so I turned down the appointment to West Point and decided to go to the University of Wisconsin[-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] and because they had a great astronautical engineering program.  And I said, "Well, okay, I can't fly jets.  I'll fly rockets.  I'll be first black astronaut, go to the moon," you know (laughter).  That, that was in my, in my frame of reference, so.
Speaker 1: Now, now, now you were coming out a time when they were announcing the, the Mercury Seven, right, astronauts--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --then?  They--
Speaker 2: Right.  I, I graduated high school in '57 [1957], so.
Speaker 1: That's the age of Sputnik and--
Speaker 2: Right, just when, you know, all that energy about going to the moon was, was big, you know.
Speaker 1: That's right.  We were at a space race with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Russia [Soviet Union] and the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 283217
Speaker 1: So I went to the University of Wisconsin in Madison [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] to their engineering program and discovered very quickly I was not cut out to be an engineer, so.
Speaker 2: So was it math basically that was a big--
Speaker 1: It was, it, it was math, basically.  I, in high school [Riverside High School; Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] I'd, I almost didn't have to study to get A's.  It came very easily 'cause I spent a lot of time doing my own self-study.  So I was an A student in, in high school.  I get to college and I take astronautical engineering, and I take calculus.  And calculus was the first subject that I got a, a D in.  I had never seen a D on any of my papers, you know, so I was shocked.  I was just--I said, "Well, I really have to bear down and study now," get over that freshman, you know, college thing, you know, where you're moving into--out of a school of nine hundred people into a college of thirty thousand people, and you feel like you're just a number.  (Laughter) So, I said, "I'm really going to study."  I studied so hard the next semester and got an F in calculus.  So I said--the universe was telling me you are not cut out to be the, you know, to do this.  And I kind of discovered in my freshman year that I was more of a people person than a, a numbers person.  And I spent my next, my sophomore year trying to figure out what I wanted to do because now all my dreams were crushed.  My--I was not going to be in the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado].  I was not going to be an astronaut, and so I took all the courses that I, I really enjoyed.  You know, I, I studied Russian; I studied Chinese, 'cause I knew that those were the nations that we would be dealing with in the future, and I thought that I might be in the [United States] Foreign Service and be a diplomat, you know.  I studied astronomy, and my counselor said, "Well, you can't go on like this; you have to pick a major."  I said, "Well, who's paying for this?" (Laughter) You know, I'll study what I feel like studying, you know.  And, and what I really studied was chess in the, in, in the student union.  I studied sailing 'cause the University of Wisconsin in Madison [Wisconsin] has, is surrounded by four lakes with great sailing, you know.
Speaker 2: It's a nice looking campus in Madison (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's great (laughter).  And, and I spent most of my time in the movies watching [Federico] Fellini, [Franco] Zeffirelli, [Michelangelo] Antonioni, Ingmar Bergman, watching all these great foreign films that, that never came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], but they came to a college campus.  And I'm watching these master storytellers tell stories in a way that Hollywood never did, you know, that, took you into the world of imagination and dreams and nightmares and all of that and, and had a great, powerful way to communicate.
Speaker 2: Did you start to then, then take note of who was directing--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Then--
Speaker 2: --movies?
Speaker 1: --then I was, I was really interested in who the makers of these powerful movies were, you know.  They weren't movies.  They, they were films now, you know.  And they, it was art not just entertainment, and so yes, I, I started finding my favorite filmmakers, you know.
Story_ID: 283218
Speaker 1: I went to Riverside High School [Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which was basically an all-white high school.  At the time that I went into high school there was, there was no busing kind of thing going on.  But if you could get yourself to a high school, you could go.  You didn't have to be in the neighborhood.  And my neighborhood high school was the all-black high school that really was very slim on education.  And, and I wanted to get a really good education, so I went across town to this basically white high school.  There were, in my class, there were probably seven of us.  And so we were the oddity in the school, you know.
Speaker 2: Did your mother [Katherine Leslie] encourage you to do that, or did you just kind of, did that come from your own--
Speaker 1: She supported it, you know, but it was essentially what, what I wanted to do.  I, I didn't want to go to a school where it was going to be more about trying to survive than trying to learn, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now, well, back to--so, you, you graduated from Riverside in nineteen--what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], okay, all right.
Story_ID: 283219
Speaker 1: So now at, at University of Wisconsin[-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], now you're watching these foreign films, and you're--did you take a--a film course at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You just--
Speaker 2: No.  I wasn't, I wasn't actively pursuing that.  I, I just--they were, they were being show in the, in the college theater or the theater, you know, near the college campus.  And for me it was an escape from, in trying to figure out what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was it, the blurbs that, about the films and the--
Speaker 2: Right, the content.
Speaker 1: --and the directors and the content that--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --that, that started to educate you about who was producing these?
Speaker 2: Right, right, and who--yeah, your--in the universities there were always really good critical analysis of movies that were coming.  So, as a student, you get interested in, in the intellectual content and what was, what was being, the experiments that were being attempted in filmmaking, you know, and who was doing what.  And they were all foreign.
Speaker 1: Now did you pay any attention to [Alfred] Hitchcock at all at that point?  He's one I think like English filming--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that, that he, he got a lot of publicity.  I just wondered if you--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.  Hitchcock was, was on the list of, of the Hollywood filmmakers 'cause he made great suspense movies, you know, so those were always fun.  But to me they weren't art, you know.  They, they didn't take you into that dream world that [Federico] Fellini and [Franco] Zeffirelli were doing, you know.
Story_ID: 283220
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite film in those days that you saw that you--
Speaker 2: I would--my favorite films were 'La Strada,' 'Wild Strawberries,' 'Last Year at Marienbad,' which is a Godard [sic. Alain Resnais] film, very cryptic but fascinating, 'La Dolce Vita,' '9 1/2' [sic. '8 1/2'], all of the [Federico] Fellini movies.  I, I was a real fan of, of what he was doing.  And, and [Ingmar] Bergman, even though he was kind of murky (laughter), in that kind of Northern European gloominess, I thought he was fascinating in his--and then I started trying to find the old Russian classic movies, [Sergei] Eisenstein and [Vsevolod] Pudovkin and the, the guys who were on the forefront of filmmaking when the art form was just beginning, and they were discovering montage and editing and--
Speaker 1: Yes, is that one '[Battleship] Potemkin' or something that--
Speaker 2: Battleship--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Potemkin.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.  So, so that was all the, it was all just kind of entertainment escapism for me but really being affected by the, the power of the medium but absolutely no thought of being involved in it.
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you this, and the answer's probably no, but at this stage, had you ever heard of, of any of the black filmmakers, you know, of the thir--'20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] I mean, so--
Speaker 2: No, no, being in Wisconsin and being in basically all-white environments, you--never heard of the classic black filmmakers like Oscar Micheaux and that whole, the Lincoln [Motion Picture Company] movie company.  I never knew any of that existed until I got into the film business.
Story_ID: 283221
Speaker 1: So what did you, did, did you change your major eventually to--
Speaker 2: No, what I did was I dropped out of school [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  It--because I had gone through all these tests for the [United States] Air Force Academy [Colorado], I was prime draft material.  And so when I was in school, I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and Naval ROTC [NROTC] and all of that.  And I, I was really getting discouraged with not knowing what I was going to do with my life, and I was tired of being a poor student.  So I decided to drop out, go back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], get a job, make some money for a change, you know.  So that's when I went to work in the steel mill.  And I was working at night so that I could take a couple of classes during the day to stay out of the, the draft situation 'cause I had no intention of becoming cannon fodder (laughter) and being drafted.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, you know, there wasn't a real active war going on necessarily, but we had like--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --troops in Germany and in Japan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now we're talking--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --we're talking the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the Vietnam [War] was--
Speaker 2: Like '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: --starting to--
Speaker 2: And Vietnam was starting to heat up.
Speaker 1: They, yeah, we had these so-called advisors there then, in '60 [1960]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sixty-one [1961], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  So the handwriting was on the wall in terms of where, where we were headed.  And, and the draft was in effect, so they were making no bones about if you were eligible you were going to be in some branch of the service, you know.  And I was determined not to be in if I couldn't be in on the highest level, you know.
Story_ID: 283222
Speaker 1: So what, what happened?  Did they get you, they draft you?
Speaker 2: No, no, actually, I, I was kind of shielded (laughter) from, from all of that.  I decided--I spent about a year working and going to school part-time at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And during that year I had saved up enough money to do something.  And I decided that I'd better get my butt back in school because that was the only way I was going to stay out of the--the draft was getting heavier and heavier.  And I said, "If I'm going back to school, it has to be something that I would really love to do."  And almost out of the blue, it seemed to me at the time, I, I said, "Well, I could go study theater," you know.  And I couldn't afford to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] or USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] for their film schools, so that was out of the question.  And Milwaukee [Wisconsin] had a great theater school at the university, at Marquette University [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that was a Jesuit college.  And friends of mine told me about it and said, "Well, why don't you go check it out," you know?  Now during this year of working, I, I had also gotten involved with a community theater and wound up being in a production of 'Finian's Rainbow' in the chorus, you know, and all of that.  And I was telling my mother [Katherine Leslie], you know, I really love--I, I could, I could do this for a living; I could be in the theater.  This is great fun, you know.  And she was always the encouraging type.  And her attitude was, whatever you want to do, just be the best at it, just do it, you know.  So when I decided to go try and get into the university, to Marquette University, it was kind of a, a long shot because it, it was a private college, university, and I didn't have that kind of money.  And when I went to talk to the priest [Reverend John J. Walsh] who ran it [Marquette University Players], I said, "Look, I'd love to be involved in theater, but I can't really afford it.  Do you have any scholarships?"  And it just so happened that the student who was designing the lights for the theater was leaving, and they needed to replace him.  So, he made a deal with me: if, if I learned how to design lights and became the lighting director, that I'd get a scholarship.  And that's how I got through Marquette.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what year did you come out of Marquette?
Speaker 2: I graduated Marquette in '63 [1963]--'64 [1964].
Story_ID: 283223
Speaker 1: You graduated in '64 [1964].  Now when you were at Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], now did--what, what--now you, you got on technical side first.  Was that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You consider that lucky or, or--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the school, the, the theater school, it was a very interesting situation because, although it was in a university, it was not really supported by the university because the Jesuits kind of had a, a thing about theater is a tool of the devil, you know (laughter).  So, so they, but, and the priest [Reverend John J. Walsh] who ran the theater had gone to school with Elia Kazan, great Broadway and, and movie director.  And so he kind of acquired the similar aesthetics that Kazan had in terms of theater.  And--
Speaker 1: Now for those days, that, that's like cutting edge stuff in those days.
Speaker 2: Ex, exactly.
Speaker 1: That's Marlon Brando's 'On the Waterfront,' an Elia Kazan--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --movie.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean that, that's, that real, realistic type--
Speaker 2: Of, of theater acting.  And so he had real, a real good pedigree, and he was a true artist.  Although he was a priest, his passion was in, in theater.  And so he would do plays designed to shock the nuns and the priests, you know (laughter), and, but always classical, always in good taste, but always cutting the edge of, of, of propriety, you know, but very commercial in his approach.  So, he was a kind of guy who he could talk the university into letting him have a space in the library or in the engineering building or whatever.  And we would build a, a theater in whatever space they would let him have and build it in a way that it would cost the university way more money to remove it than to leave it there.  So he was, in a way, a guerrilla theater guy (laughter).  And since the theater [company, Marquette University Players] was not being given money by the university, the money had to come from ticket sales.  So here was this situation, and I didn't know it at the time and didn't appreciate it until much after I got out, is it, it was a situation like being in a real off-Broadway theater where you had to survive by the quality of the work.  In other words, if people didn't come and pay their money to see what you were doing, you couldn't buy lights; you couldn't buy costumes; you couldn't, you know, put on the next show.  So it, it became a very, very popular theater, so much so that when Marquette got rid of its football team for homecoming and all that, the theater became like the big thing because it was the most popular aspect in the university besides the basketball team.  So, it was like football, basketball, theater were like the big draws for entertainment in this university, in, in this university.
Speaker 1: Now was there a name for the theater that--and what was the name of the theater?
Speaker 2: Boy, I should know that too (laughter).  I'm terrible with--
Speaker 1: We can find out some, some other place, but that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --but the point of it is really something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was, it, it, it was really like a major event.
Story_ID: 283224
Speaker 1: So, the year that I was coming into the theater [at Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] or thinking about it, they had replaced the, the football team as the big event.  And Father [Reverend John J.] Walsh, who was the director [of Marquette University Players] and the priest at that time, Father John J. Walsh, had staged this elaborate production of 'The King and I' in an outdoor setting [Paul Claudel Theater, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that thousands of people came to, you know.  So I'm looking at this and saying, wow, this is right here, this is right here in my hometown.  This is a pretty hot theater.  This would be a good place to learn what I need to learn.  So, it, it was also a kind of place where you couldn't just do one thing.  If you--hold on.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: The, the theater was, it was a kind of place and the training was such that you couldn't just do one thing.  If you became a part of the theater company, you had to ballet classes and dancing, which, for me, I was a Milwaukee [Wisconsin] street kid.  And the idea of getting into tights, I said, you know, "You've gotta be kidding."  He said, "No," (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you had to actually go get tights and--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I had to do all of that.  And the thing that made me, made it okay was I, I looked in on a dance class, and all the guys were lifting up the girls, you know, and do--I said, "Oh, okay, well," (laughter) maybe the tights aren't so bad after all, you know.  I could get used to this.  You had to take dance class; you had to take voice class, singing, and speaking; you had to take acting classes, and you had to do something in the technical side, build sets, do costumes, design lights, you know.  So it was a, a completely well-rounded training.  It was set up that way because everybody had to do more than one thing in order to have the theater survive.  So little did I know--and, and the classwork, your [William] Shakespeare, or your English, or your French, or whatever you were taking as part of the, the college experience, that was secondary; theater was first.  You did your class work whenever you had time, but you had to be involved in the theater.  So it, it was an all-immersive experience and the best training that anybody could ever get.  So I was very fortunate in being able to be a part of that.  I didn't know what I wanted to do as a student then, and, but I learned very quickly I didn't want to be an actor.  I was too self-conscious to be out there in front.  I knew (laughter) definitely I didn't want to want to be a ballet dance, although a very great ballettmeister [ballet master] came out of that school a year before me, a guy named John Neumeier, who is head of a German ballet company [Ballettzentrum Hamburg; Hamburg Ballet, Hamburg, Germany] that's world-renowned.  And several, you know, known actors in the television world had come out of that school.
Story_ID: 283225
Speaker 1: I learned there [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that I really wanted to direct 'cause I watched this master [Reverend John J. Walsh] work with people at--
Speaker 2: So did Father Walsh direct all of the--
Speaker 1: He directed--
Speaker 2: --plays?
Speaker 1: --everything, right.  He was the Nazi director (laughter) and very temperamental 'cause he's Irish, you know.  And gay--it was not--he was a hard taskmaster, demanded utmost perfection in everybody.  And so you really had to deliver.  He didn't deal with students as if they were students.  He dealt with them as if they were professionals, so he was great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Great training.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you act in any of the productions?
Speaker 1: I, I acted in everything (laughter), badly.  I danced in everything, badly.  I also, you know, I designed the lights.  I did that very well, actually.  We built a couple of theaters.  We built an outdoor theater [Paul Claudel Theatre, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] in a courtyard that, again, became a permanent theater because the university couldn't afford to tear it down.  And so he, he would expand his theater empire, and, and we were the beneficiaries of it because we learned how to build.  We learned how to do everything that-- union people do in New York City [New York, New York], you know.  So when I came to New York, any job that needed to be done I could, I could have done, so, and also had the confidence to do that.  But I knew when I left there that I wanted to direct.
Story_ID: 283226
Speaker 1: What did you do?  Where were you going when you left [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: I went directly to New York [New York].  A, a group of us went as a matter of fact, and--
Speaker 1: But did you have a job in New York or--
Speaker 2: Nope (laughter), no, no.
Speaker 1: Somehow I didn't think that.
Speaker 2: No, no.  When I, when I left, I think two or three of us went directly to New York.  What I had in New York, was I had a, a contact who had just graduated from the school a year before me, so I had a place to stay.  I had a roommate.  And they were all taking acting classes at a, a company at, called Wynn Handman's acting class, and so I got involved in that.  I didn't have a job, but I got a job almost instantly, two or three days after I got to New York, and 'cause it was the start of the [1964/1965 New York] World's Fair [New York, New York].  And I got a--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, the New York World's Fair.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964], summer.  And I got a, a plush job working for an insurance company, dressed up in suits and stuff, you know.  And, and our job--there were five of us--our job was to escort VIPs to the front of the line to get into all of the events in the World's Fair.  And for this we were making $350 a week or something like that.  And in 1964 that was like major money, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed, that was, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I'm going to this acting class at Wynn Handman's and learning a great deal.  And, and he is starting a new theater called the American Place Theatre [New York, New York], which became a world-class theater.
Story_ID: 283227
Speaker 1: He [Wynn Handman] asked me if I would come and work at, at the [American Place] Theatre [New York, New York] as a stage, assistant stage manager.  And I said, "How much are you paying?"  He said, "$75 a week," (laughter).  I said, "You can't live in New York [New York] on $75 a week," you know.  "I'm making $350 working for this insurance company."  He said, "Well, you want to work in insurance for the rest of your life, or you want to be in the theater?"  And my father [Leo Schultz] had been--become a insurance salesman, you know, and I knew I didn't want to do that.  I knew I wanted theater, so I bit the bullet and, and took the job working in this new theater that was set in a church, called St. Clement's [Episcopal] Church [New York, New York] and on--in Hell's Kitchen [New York, New York] on 46th Street on the far West Side [Manhattan, New York, New York].  And it was the best thing I ever did.
Speaker 2: So how do you spell Wynn Handman?
Speaker 1: W-Y-N-N, H-A-N-D-M-A-N.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the Amer--
Speaker 1: One of the, Wynn, Wynn was one of the finest acting coaches in New York City [New York, New York] and just had an amazing insight into what made an actor work.  And he and [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, who became dean at Yale drama school [Yale School of Drama, New Haven, Connecticut], who we were talking about early, were like the best acting teachers in New York, bar none.  So when he started this theater, so I get this job as an assistant stage manager.  And basically, I'm the, I'm the coffee gofer.  I'm carrying (laughter) coffee back and forth to people.  And, but I get a chance to watch the director [Jonathan Miller] working, and it's an all-American play.  It's a three one-act play.  It's written by a very famous poet, whose name I will think of (laughter) in a minute.  But trust me, he's very famous.  And it was three, an evening of three one-act plays, 'My Kinsman, Major Molineux,' [Nathaniel Hawthorne, adapted by Robert Lowell]; 'Benito Cereno' [Herman Melville adapted by Robert Lowell]; and then some other play ['Endecott and the Red Cross,' Nathaniel Hawthorne, adapted by Robert Lowell], which I've totally forgotten.
Story_ID: 283228
Speaker 1: I'm watching this English director work [at American Place Theatre, New York, New York], Jonathan Miller, who's a brilliant guy, used to be a doctor, came out of a group of four comedians [Miller, Peter Cook, Dudley Moore, and Alan Bennett].  I forget their name.  And I'm watching him, saying, "I can do a better job than this," you know.  This 'Benito Cereno' [Herman Melville, adapted by Robert Lowell] is really the story that [Steven] Spielberg did about the African slave ship on film.
Speaker 2: 'Amistad.'
Speaker 1: The Amistad incident.  It's the same incident that Robert Lowell, the poet, had gotten from some historical account of this African slave ship that almost reached the shores of America and was greeted by an, an American ship.  And they came aboard and thought the Spanish were running it, but the African slaves were actually propping up the Spanish commander, 'cause they had taken over the ship.  So this play was a brilliant piece of theater that explored the whole issue of slavery and American might, almost a precursor of Mr. Bush [President George Walker Bush] and his attitude about, you know, American power.  And because I was there, and they needed an actor that fit my description, I also became one of the actors in the, in the play, although I didn't want to be, you know.  And I, I was Frank Langella's understudy, and he was playing the Spanish captain [Don Benito Cereno].  And [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne was playing the, the head slave [babo].
Speaker 2: Oh, so this is some good company here, Frank--
Speaker 1: Oh, this was--
Speaker 2: --Langella, Roscoe Lee Browne.
Speaker 1: Roscoe Lee Browne, I, I was a in the midst of great actors, and the play wound up winning five Obie Awards [Off-Broadway Theater Awards] for the best of everything: the best acting, the best play, the best writing.  And this is my first professional experience in New York [New York] theater.
Speaker 2: This is in 1964, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Wow, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's probably, yeah, it opened at the end of that year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Langella made his big, most people knew him from the 'Dracula' movie when that--
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --but he was a--
Speaker 2: --now, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was a brilliant actor before he did 'Dracula,' did any of that stuff, so.  So that was my New York experience.  And, and I continued to try and convince Wynn Handman to let me direct one of the plays (laughter).  And he, he wa- he was unwilling, but he let me design the next play, do the lighting design for the next play.  And, and then finally a friend of mine, a classmate [from Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] of mine, came back from London [England], the Royal Academy [of Arts, London, England], and was taking over a theater in Princeton [New Jersey] at the McCarter Theatre [Center, Princeton, New Jersey] and invited me to join the acting company.  And I said, "Well, I don't really want to act, but if I can direct one of the plays, I'll come join the company, if you bring my wife [Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)]," (laughter), "who's also"--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --"acting."
Story_ID: 283229
Speaker 1: Now that brings up an interesting--now, where did you meet your wife [Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)], and what happened?  I mean how did that happened?
Speaker 2: Ah, well, it was also tied in with my first broad, off-Broadway experience at the, at the American Place Theatre [New York, New York].  I was walking down the street toward Broadway [New York, New York], and I see these two beautiful women walking opposite me toward my theater.  And I turn around to check them out, you know, 'cause I'm from Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  I'm a Milwaukee boy, and you know, women like this just don't appear in Milwaukee (laughter).  So, I turn around to look, and, and she turned; I catch her turning around to look.  So I forget where I was going.  I turned around and followed them, and it turned out that they were going to my theater.  And so when they started up the steps of my theater, I, I caught up with them and said, "Can I help you ladies with anything?"  And they, they told me they were going to go see one of the, the young men who was in the acting company.  So it turned out that her girlfriend was married to one of the guys who was playing one of the slaves in my, in my play.  So that's how I, that's we met.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's, that's, so that's where; it was at Wynn Handman's--in, in the play Benito Cer, Cer, Cer--
Speaker 2: 'Benito Cereno' [Herman Melville, adapted by Robert Powell].
Speaker 1: --Cereno--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: So she was working in a Broadway play.  She was in the chorus and had a couple of lines in a play called 'Ben Franklin in Paris' [Sidney Michaels].  So, of course, she invited me to come see her play, and we exchanged invitations.  And when I saw her on stage I fell totally in love with her, 'cause she was absolutely gorgeous and talented.  And, and she wanted to become a serious actor.  And I got her involved in Wynn Handman's class, and she eventually became an award-winning actor.
Story_ID: 283230
Speaker 1: So, you [Schultz and his wife, Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)] all, you both go to Princeton [New Jersey] then, to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: By that time, we were married.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1960-what?
Speaker 2: We were married in '65 [1965]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in December, December 7th--6th (laughter), December 6th, 1965.  And yeah, so we both went to Princeton.  We were both in the acting company [McCarter Theatre Center, Princeton, New Jersey].  I got a--I was assigned to direct one of the plays in the repertory.  It was a Shakespearian, you know, classical, classic American play repertory.  And it was run by John Lithgow's father, Arthur Lithgow.  John was still in London [England] studying.  And they were doing a play there called 'Waiting for Godot,' [Samuel Beckett] and they couldn't find a director.  And it, it was coming up before--my play was all the way at the end of the season, so I had to kind of suffer through acting, doing [William] Shakespeare acting (laughter), just to get to what I really wanted to do, which was to direct the 'The Emperor Jones' [Eugene O'Neill].  And I volunteered to--I went to Arthur Lithgow and said, "Look, I know this play like the back of my hand.  Let me direct it, and if you don't like the job I do, you can fire me.  I don't have to direct 'The Emperor Jones,' you know."  'Emperor Jones' had a black actor in it, you know, so it was kind of like, oh, let the black guy direct, you know, this (laughter), so.  No, 'Waiting for Godot' was like a totally classic play that had nothing to do with race or anything.  It had to do with, with what life's about and neoism, and man's relationship to God, and man's cruelty to man and all of that.  I said, "I know how to do this.  I, I, I can do this better than Zero Mostel and Burgess Meredith did it on Broadway," (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So, so he, he gave me the job, and, and it wound up getting great reviews, being favorably compared to the Broadway production.  And then I did 'The Emperor Jones' after that, and that was a totally different kind of theatrical, from a directing standpoint, very theatrical.  And, and so I came back to New York [New York].  I had two brilliant reviews under my arm.  And my wife, who was constantly pushing me to do things when my self-confidence would waiver, she'd say, "No, go do this."  Gloria would say, "Go put your resume on [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward's desk."
Story_ID: 283231
Speaker 1: A new theater was starting to, to emerge called the Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York].  And the Ford Foundation was funding [HistoryMaker] Robert Hooks, and [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward and Jerry Krone [Gerald Krone] to start a black theater company on the Lower East Side in Manhattan [New York, New York].  And so I dropped my resume on his desk.  And we [McCarter Theatre Company] were on our way to Yellow Springs, Ohio, to do a summer, a theater festival there, and so he came down to Yellow Springs.  I was directing 'Infantry and 38' [ph.] or some wild classic play.  And Douglas Turner Ward came to Yellow Springs to see my work, and he came with all the plays that he was going to do that first season.  And the one play that really interested me was a play that he hadn't gotten translated yet called the 'Song of the Lusitanian Bogey' [Peter Weiss].  And it was, it was a play about the Portuguese oppression of Mozambique [Africa] in Angola [Africa] that you would see a little tiny paragraph in the back page in The New York Times.  You know, you'd hear all this stuff about Angola and Mozambique and how brutal the Portuguese oppression was.  But Peter Weiss, who had written 'Marat/Sade,' did a play about it and did it--the Germans called it a singspiel, a song-play.  And Douglas knew what the play was about, but he didn't, he didn't have it completely translated, so he kind of told me the idea.  And I said, "Well, let's see if we can find some German-speaking people here in Yellow Springs, and, and we'll get them to read it to us," you know.  So the theater company helped us find some people who spoke German, and we went over to their house.  They read the play, and I said, "Yeah, I'd, I'd like to do that one," you know.  And that was the play that opened up the, the Negro Ensemble Company's inaugural season.  And what was brilliant, brilliantly serendipitous about it is that, that he was forming a new theater company.  And they had gotten enough money so that they could rehearse--assemble the actors, train them with a voice coach, train them with an acting coach--[HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards was the acting coach; Kristin Linklater was the voice coach--train them with a movement coach.  And the training was, was going to go on for about two months.  So, he cast people like Moses Gunn.
Story_ID: 283232
Speaker 1: Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in its inaugural years.
Speaker 2: So, (laughter) right, so this German couple in Antioch [Ohio] reads the play ['Song of the Lusitanian Bogey,' Peter Weiss] to us, and I tell [HistoryMaker] Douglas [Turner Ward], I say, "Yeah, this is--I don't know what it's all going to be, but this sounds really fascinating," you know, "so I'll direct this one."  And he offered me two plays that year, saying I'll direct, 'Kongi's Harvest' [Wole Soyinka], you know, big African ethnic epic.  So, he gets this group of wonderful actors together, but they, they, they were like all of us were, knock-around actors, because it was no set place; there was no national theater, you know.  So this was as close as America was going to come to a national theater for black actors, black directors, black playwrights, black technicians.  It was a space that was, was, was going to be guaranteed to be in existence by the Ford Foundation's money for a certain period of time.  And like that old adage, if you build it, they will come, we, we saw that proved true in what we were doing, because actors like Moses Gunn, Rosalind Cash, Esther Rolle--oh, I wish I could remember them all and--
Speaker 1: Diana Sands one, or--
Speaker 2: No, Diana--
Speaker 1: She wasn't.
Speaker 2: --was before the NEC, and she--like, there were always these brilliant lights that would come, like Sidney [Poitier], and Diana, and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, you know.  And they, they, they--and oh, anyway, just several, many, many fine black actors came before the NEC and kind of paved the way.  Cicely Tyson and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, they were all before the NEC.  But this group kind of moved eventually from New York [New York] to Hollywood.  And Esther Rolle, of course, you know, became the mama, you know, in that television show called--what was it?
Speaker 1: 'Good Times.'
Speaker 2: 'Good Times.'  Rosalind Cash became a movie star, you know.  And Moses Gunn was always, you know, a, a figure in film, not so much television.  But that play, because it wasn't traditional, the, the way it was written there were no roles written out for people.  There were just numbers for characters.  And so it meant that I could get beyond all the ego stuff that actors usually work with like: how many lines do I have, or I have the lead role, or you know, I'm, I'm a supporting role because I only have a few lines.  So we kind of got beyond all of that traditional theater stuff.  And everybody had to work as a unit, and this wouldn't have happened in any other kind of situation.  The play hadn't been translated yet.  And when the actors started working they were training.  They were doing, you know, voice, and movement, and, and acting training.  And I knew what the play was about, but I didn't know all the dialogue 'cause it hadn't been translated yet.  So I started teaching them improvisational classes.  But it was really a subterfuge to get them actually improvising what the play was without them knowing it.  So they were actually creating a lot of the play without knowing it.
Story_ID: 283233
Speaker 1: And I would have the, the composer, who was Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson, and the choreographer, who was [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, I'd have them come, and the set designer, who was [Edward] "Ed" Burbridge, I would have them come and watch these improvisational classes, where I was taking the actors [Negro Ensemble Company (NEC), New York, New York] through every step of the play and having them create rather than learn, you know.  So, traditionally, you got lines, and you figure out what the character is supposed to be doing and what your relationship is, and you learn it all.  Well, these actors were learning it from the gut outward, you know, and the lines came later.  Finally, maybe two weeks before we were going to open the play, we had a translated version of the play.  And the actors finally saw what, what parts they had and what lines they had to say.  And then some of the egos came out, but we got past all of that, you know.  And, and they, they were creating their own songs.  And Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson kind of wrote the music behind the improv- the improvisational songs that the actors were doing.  The way we built the--it was called the 'Song of Lusitanian Bogey,' [Peter Weiss] and so there as an image of a giant robotic kind of monster that caused all this havoc.  And the actors created this in the course of the play, and, and they kind of portrayed the, the brutality that was being visited upon the, the African population, you know.  And the play was so powerful and so visceral that, with, with the combination of the movement and the music and the acting, that it just floored New York [New York] audiences, just there, there were no people who came into that theater who were, who were not moved, you know.  And so the play won, I think I won the best directing for that year, the Obie Award [Off-Broadway Theater Award] for best directing, total shock to me.  But more than that, it kind of set this theater on a course of national recognition.  And had, had the lure of Hollywood not been there, we could have made a dramatic impact on, on theater.  I think we did anyway.  But eventually everybody was siphoned off to, to Hollywood, including yours truly (laughter), 'cause my, my dream the whole time was, I had decided somewhere in the middle of, of my theater work at Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I said, 'cause I always wanted to direct movies, I said, "I don't know how to do that.  But if I make a reputation in theater as a director, somebody will offer me a movie."  That was what was in my head about being able to get into the film world, and that's actually what happened.
Story_ID: 283234
Speaker 1: Well how did it happen?  I mean what, tell, walk us through this.  Now, who, who, who discovered you on that?
Speaker 2: Well, after, of course, I became like the hot off-Broadway director, you know, directing this wonderful black theater company [Negro Ensemble Company (NEC), New York, New York].  And the next play I did was a big kind of African spectacle, 'Kongi's Harvest,' written by a brilliant Nigerian playwright, Wole Soyinka.  And then I got offered a job to do a Broadway play called 'Does a Tiger Wear a Necktie?' [Don Petersen].  And I cast in that play Al Pacino, Hal Holbrook, my wife, Gloria [Schultz]--[Lauren] Jones was her stage name--Roger Robinson, some wonderful actors.  I wish I could remember them all.  I didn't do my homework for this, this interview, but M. Emmet Walsh and Michael Brandon and, and some just wonderful actors.  And this was a serious dramatic play on Broadway about young people who were drug addicts, addicted to, to drugs and in a halfway house and kind of the stuff that they go through.  And Pacino won a Tony Award for best acting.  I got nominated for a Tony Award for best directing.  My wife, Gloria, got nominated for best actress.  We were up against 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler] that year, and so they won the best play, you know.  And it, it was just an incredible experience, very dramatic for the audience, you know.  And a producer, Robert [Stigwood]--oh, boy, this is terrible.  I'll remember his name later (laughter).  I have name, name memory genes that are missing.  The producer came up to me after the, one of the performances and said, "I'm doing a movie called 'To Be Young, Gifted and Black,' based on the stage play [by Robert Nemiroff].  Would you like to direct it?"  And I said, "Does a bear shit in the woods?" you know (laughter).  "Yeah, sure, of course.  Give me the script," you know.  And he said, "Well, that's one of the problems; we, we don't have a script. We have the play.  And you write the script, and, and, and you got the job," you know.  "And we have to get it done in the next month."   So, so, had I known what I was doing, had I known anything about what it takes to make a movie, I probably would have said no.  But I had read all the books that you could read about making movies, and I had dreamed it and lived it in my dreams, but I said yes.
Story_ID: 283235
Speaker 1: Turns out that we wound up shooting this film on 16mm film.  He [Robert Stigwood] had, he had gotten a deal to do the play but to do it on videotape for NET, WNET [PBS, Channel 13] in New York [New York].  But he wanted a, a film, so he hustled up enough money to get it done on film, hired me as a director, and a young cameraman who was really good, young female editor who was really good.  And I said long as somebody is with me who knows this whole movie thing.  I know what I want to see.  And we wound up cat, getting a great cast.  We had [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, Al Freeman, Jr., Blythe Danner, Barbara Barrie, my wife again, [Gloria Schultz] Lauren Jones, Claudia McNeil.  It was, it was great--Roy Scheider, was one of Roy Scheider's first things on film.  And all of these wonderful New York stage actors wanted to do it because it was, it was quality work, you know.  And we're all working for nothing, basically.  And we shot fifty-five locations in, in thirteen days.  And all of the actors--again, it was a non-traditional kind of film because it was the life of Lorraine Hansberry.  And all of the actors, male and female, get a chance to be her voice.  It, it was a combination of her essays, her plays, her speeches all brought to life, you know, all visualized.  And so, 'To Be Young, Gift[ed] and Black' was my first film.  And it became a kind of staple of, of the public broadcast group in New York, WNET, for about five years, ran for about five years.
Speaker 2: Now, now, what, what year is that this comes out?
Speaker 1: Let's see, 1969--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --seventy [1970].
Story_ID: 283236
Speaker 1: Okay, now, during the interim here, about the time that you were winning the Obie Award [Off-Broadway Theater Award], I think--now correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems like a big, big--probably the first, you know, black, sort of all-black movie that, with an all-black or mostly black cast came out in '68 [1968], I think that was--I mean of the modern, that era of movies, that was 'Uptight,' right, by, was it Julian Mayfield--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Jules Dassin, and--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --Max Julien.  There's all these Julians--
Speaker 2: Right, right--
Speaker 1: --in it, you know, but--
Speaker 2: --exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: --exactly.
Speaker 1: --had something to do with that.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I don't know, it, it was--yeah, that's a movie based on that John Ford movie, 'The Informer'--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --you know, had--
Speaker 2: --exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, Woodie King was in the original company [American Place Theatre, New York, New York] of 'Benito Cereno' [Herman Melville, adapted by Robert Lowell].  That's where I met Woodie.  We had both kind of come to New York [New York] at the same time.  So he was one of the slaves (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a--they, they, they were--it being lauded in, was it Ebony and Jet.  They--the first time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, a big, I mean, that big a black cast had done a movie in a long time.  There hadn't been a movie--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, about, about contemporary issues in a black community.  I think, I think the other movies like the 'Porgy and Bess' [Otto Preminger] and even, you know, others--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --hadn't really dealt with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, contemporary issues in a black community.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So even though this is based on John Ford movie it had that, you know, edge of riots and the revolutionary stuff and all that.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So did, did we--
Speaker 2: It was the whole precursor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you, did you--I mean that was--did that movie open doors for people in Hollywood to do things, or do you--
Speaker 2: I don't know 'cause I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Hollywood at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were in New York.
Speaker 2: You know, I was in New York.  And I was very steeped in theater, and I was just making the transition.  The, the, 'To Be Young, Gifted and Black' was like a perfect opportunity for me 'cause it was about a theater person, and it was steeped in theater.  But it was a film, so I, I was able to translate what I knew from theater into the film and learn something about film in the doing.  I, I, I learned all my stuff on the job, you know.  I didn't go to film school.  So, the real work was my film school.  So, I, and I was so consumed with that that I don't even think I saw 'Uptight,' you know.
Story_ID: 283237
Speaker 1: So, well, what happened next?  Did you, I mean how did you end up in Hollywood with--
Speaker 2: Oh, it took, it took, it took a while because I didn't want to come to Hollywood.  I wanted to make movies, but I didn't want to come to Hollywood.  New York [New York] was the place where all the cultural energy was, all the activity, the real art, you know, the dance, the art crowd.  Everything was in New York.  The, very little was in Hollywood except the, the movie industry.  So my whole theory was, you know, I, I'm so brilliant, you know, that somebody will come (laughter) and just give me a film, you know.  And my agent said, "You, you'd better--if you want to make movies, you'd better go to Hollywood."  So, I wound up kind of easing into it.  I directed a play in 1970 here at, at the Mark Taper Theater [Mark Taper Forum, Los Angeles, California], Gordon Davidson's theater, called 'Dream on Monkey Mountain' [Derek Walcott].  And I had seen this play at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre [New York, New York].  And I had, had done a lot of work with [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards at the Eugene O'Neill.  And Derek Walcott, who is a Trinidadian poet, playwright, Nobel [Prize], Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and the black Shakespeare, as far as I'm concerned, brilliant poet ability to paint pictures with words just like [William] Shakespeare but comes from Trinidad [sic. St. Lucia], so he, he writes this play called 'Dream on Monkey Mountain,' which is absolutely marvelous piece, starring [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Ron O'Neal, a bunch of people.  But those were the people then that people would know.
Speaker 1: That's pre-'Super Fly' for Ron O'Neal.
Speaker 2: That's right, pre-'Super Fly' (laughter) and Ron O'Neal in the raw too.  It, it, it was, it was just a great play, and we did it first at, at the Mark Taper Theatre.  And so it gave me a chance to come out and kind of get a feel of California, and I still didn't like it, really, but the play made some great press and great waves.  Then we brought it back to New York and did it at the Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York].
Story_ID: 283238
Speaker 1: So, I, I did another little film in Georgia, in, in Atlanta [Georgia], in 1971, before there was any film business going on in, in Atlanta.  And that film never got a theatrical release, but it was, it starred Diana Sands and Calvin Lockhart.  No, I'm sorry, totally wrong.  No, it starred, that film called 'Together for Days' starred a, a young white actress named Lois Chiles and Clifton Davis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it never really got a theatrical release.  And then I did a film in Beirut, Lebanon, right after that (laughter) in, in 1972, just before all hell broke loose in the Middle East there.  And that, that starred Diana Sands and Calvin Lockhart, and that was a film called 'Honeybaby, Honeybaby.'  These producers had done a film called 'Georgia, Georgia' about an opera singer in Stockholm [Sweden] or somewhere, you know, and low budget film, very interesting.  And this was like their second effort.  And that never got theatrical distribution, which I'm glad of actually (laughter). And I usually don't talk about it.  But I had been brought out to Hollywood by Ray Stark.  He saw 'Song in Lusitanian Bogey' [Peter Weiss] and was very affected by it.  Matter of fact, his son, Peter Stark, saw it and brought his father, made his father come and look.  And he asked me to come out and work on a, on a film idea that his son wanted to do that would have made a brilliant movie, called 'Death at an Early Age,' which was a Jonathan Kozol book about the--how the prejudice minds of the teachers in Boston [Massachusetts] actually negatively impact the kids that they're teaching, because they have low expectations, they get low results.  And so he wrote an expose about, you know, how what teachers bring to the students determine what the students become.  And it, it was an ill-fated project because I went off to do-- while Lonne Elder [III] was hired to write to script.  And Lonne had written 'Sounder' and was a really good writer, also from the NEC [Negro Ensemble Company, New York, New York], one, one of the products of the NEC.  And so we got Lonne to work on the script.  And while he was writing, there was nothing for me to do, so I got this job doing the film in Beirut.
Story_ID: 283239
Speaker 1: And I said, "I'll be back," you know, "by the time Lonne [Elder III] turns in his first draft [of 'Death at an Early Age']."  And I come back, and Lonne has had major fights with Ray Stark, the producer, and everything.  And he's gotten fired, and the whole project has gone under.  And then Ray Stark's son [Peter Stark] jumped out of a seventeen-story window in New York [New York], committed suicide 'cause of the way his father was acting, I think.  And so it really had tragic consequences all around, you know.  So that picture never got made, and a, a young life got snuffed out because of whatever was going on in that father/son relationship.  And--
Speaker 2: Did you have any indication of what the conflict between Lonne Elder and Ray Stark was about?
Speaker 1: No, and Lonne never really wanted to talk about it.  But I think basically, you know, that he, he was a very headstrong writer.  And he wanted to write it his way and probably didn't see eye-to-eye with, with Ray Stark, the producer, who was more Hollywood, you know.  Ray made really big Hollywood movies and, and had other kind of ideas about commercial, what, what was acceptable commercially.
Speaker 2: That's got to be really a dangerous mix of people.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you got a book by John--I mean Jonathan Kozol, who's a serious social critic--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --you know, who really--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --deals with what's, you know, what he can, can observe as being real and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then you know, Lonne Elder's a committed writer, and then Ray Stark's trying commercialize it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It seems like it's just not going to work.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so it was that whole--the, the son knew what the movie should be.  The father, you know, was the old Hollywood mogul.  And I, you know, I just think it was a bad chemical mixture, you know.
Story_ID: 283240
Speaker 1: What did you do next now?
Speaker 2: So, (laughter) so there went my really, like, really good movie ['Death at an Early Age'] (laughter) down the tubes.  And so I was moving back and forth between theater and, and film.  And I eventually decided to move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because our [Schultz and wife, Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)] second son was on the way (laughter).  I said well, theater, theater can't support this big family, so I'd better get serious and come to L.A. and get a job working in the industry.  And so I, I came out, and one of the actors that I had worked with in New York [New York], Garrett Morris, was working in a, a TV show ['Roll Out'] that the producers of 'M*A*S*H' were doing.  They, they decided to do a spinoff of 'M*A*S*H' that was about the black transportation division in World War II [WWII].  And so it, this was going to be the black 'M*A*S*H.'  But what they did so successfully in 'M*A*S*H' they were afraid to do with a company of black actors.  So they, they were soft-selling everything instead doing, you know, showing what was happening in Korea, you know.  In the world of 'M*A*S*H' they wouldn't show what was happening in World War II with, with this black division, so the show was kind of ill-fated.  But I got my first professional Hollywood job directing one of--a half-hour segment of, of this show.
Story_ID: 283241
Speaker 1: And it ['Roll Out'] only lasted thirteen episodes, and, and I directed the thirteenth episode (laughter).  And, and when I came in it was amazing because, here I am, I mean I'm a theater guy.  I always wanted to do movies.  And I get my first job, and it's on the big Hollywood Twentieth Century Fox [Film Corporation] lot.  And I walk onto this stage, and there's tanks, there's trucks, there's tents, all these toys, cranes, you know, things that I had never seen doing the other little movies that I had done.  And I'm, I'm in heaven as far as a director goes 'cause I have all these toys to play with.  And I'm there real early so that I can see what's going on.  And the only guy there besides me is the guy who does the coffee, the craft service guy.  And he says to me: "Damn shame, isn't it?"  And I, I say, "What?"  "This was a really good show.  This," (laughter) "was a really good show."  I said, "What do you mean 'was'?"  He said, "Well, they canceled, you know."  Now, the executives who were running the show, the producers, hadn't told anybody.  So as everybody trickles in to work, who tells them that they no longer have a job, the craft service guy (laughter).  The producers don't come down for like an hour or so.  And all the actors, who have, you know, bought big cars and you know, houses and stuff like that had, are learning that they're out of work.  And that was my first Hollywood experience.  It was hysterical.
Story_ID: 283242
Speaker 1: You had a chance to direct some other TV shows, I see here, Starsky--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --['Starsky] & Hutch.'
Speaker 2: --Yeah, when I first came to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well, I did that Fox show ['Roll Out'], and then I--my second son was being born, so I flew back to be in the operating room, in the delivery room, you know, for that and then came back and got a job at Universal Studios directing epi--episodic television.  And I think that my first job there was 'Baretta' or 'Toma,' one of those--, no, '[The] Rockford Files.'  I did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Rockford Files,' right
Speaker 2: --one of the first--early 'Rockford Files' and then 'Baretta,' 'Toma,' 'Starsky & Hutch.'  And I had a clause in my contract at Universal, because I had all this theater experience, that if got a, a, an offer to do a Broadway play or a movie, that they would have to make a like offer, otherwise I could get out of the contract and accept the job.  And when I first went to New York [New York], I had been corresponding with a producer named Steve Krantz, who was developing a little story called 'Cooley High' from a writer named Eric Monte.  And I said, "Well, you know, when I get out to California, Steve, I, I, I can meet you.  I, I'm reading this material.  It's not really a movie yet, but there's some really good stories in it.  Maybe we can work on it."  So as I was doing my television work, I was working with Steve and discovered that he was rewriting Eric Monte, and that's why it wasn't working.  And so I suggested to him, I said, "Look, you know, let me get in the room with Eric for a month, and we'll knock out a script and get this movie made."  So, I'd go to Eric's house every day.  We'd work for about eight hours a day and, and have a, a person come and take notes, a stenographer.  And we would just talk about the stories of him growing up, you know, and my growing up.  And we kind of combined all of that and fashioned a, a, a storyline basically out of his life embellished by things that I had experienced growing up, and that became 'Cooley High.'
Story_ID: 283243
Speaker 1: How long a process did, I mean was this?
Speaker 2: It was pretty short.  We, I think we developed the draft to the screenplay that got green lighted by the studio in, in five weeks.  And then the studio kept working with us, you know, and kept saying, you know, "Find another way to, to tell this story in this scene," you know.  So they were encouraging us to be as, as original, unique as we could in a lot of instances, so.  But they weren't ready to totally green light.  We, we said, "Look, we have to make this movie before X time in Chicago [Illinois] because when winter hits, it's all over," (laughter).  The hawk knows no mercy, you know.  We cannot be shooting this movie in the wintertime.  So I actually sent my wife [Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)] to Chicago earlier to set up an office and start working with casting directors to find the actors.  So Gloria went to Chicago, and she worked with all the casting directors in Chicago and, and went to all the schools, the high schools and stuff to get kids.  And all the people in that movie, with the exception of three, are non-professionals, you know.  The only professional actors were Garrett Morris, and Mary Hilton-Jacobs [sic. Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs], and Glynn Turman, and--
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor from Chicago--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --basically started her Black Ensemble [Theater] company on the strength of that, being in that movie.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was how she introduced herself for lot, for lot, you know, for many--
Speaker 2: Oh, for, in many years, yeah.
Speaker 1: --years, you know, just having been in 'Cooley High.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was great.  Jackie, the girlfriend (laughter), Cochise's girlfriend, yeah.  (Unclear)--Robert Townsend had two lines in that movie, you know.  He was just a kid with, with dreams, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Was Jimmy Spinks [James Spinks] in that one, too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spinks was in 'Car Wash.'
Speaker 1: 'Car Wash,' right--(unclear)--from Chicago--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so a lot of talent in Chicago.  I mean we, we, we were amazed, you know.
Story_ID: 283244
Speaker 1: And the movie ['Cooley High'], this movie I think, ooh, I think maybe more than any other of that era really has a, a life, you know, way beyond--people watch it over and over again.  It's like--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a--
Speaker 1: --a classic movie now.
Speaker 2: I've been really blessed to, to be involved with movies that have wound up being considered classics.  And 'Cooley High' is, is definitely one of them.  It, it's a film that, that resonated in, in the minds of many, many, many people and, and inspired a lot of the young black filmmakers who are working today, because it was real, you know, it was real.  One of, one of my objectives in making that movie, 'cause I came through that blaxploitation period, and I kept looking and saying, you know, where, where is the love, you know, where are the real, where are the real people?  We got the, the, you know, the Shafts ['Shaft'] and the heroic, you know, the kind of figureheads.  And we got the gangsters and things, but where are the real people?  And the one thing that you never see in black films in that period is the real love between people.  And I said if we can accomplish that, we will have done something special.  If we can make the audience really care about these characters, then when they lose one of them, it's going to really be affecting, you know.  And, and that's basically what happened.  People laughed at that movie and, and--
Speaker 1: That's right, it wasn't an upfront comedy, but yet they laughed until they cried at, in the end of that--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --movie.
Speaker 2: --right, right--
Speaker 1: And then they--
Speaker 2: --exactly.
Speaker 1: --I mean the serious scenes are really, you know, heart-wrenching.
Story_ID: 283245
Speaker 1: And the scene at the end [of 'Cooley High'], now did, did you--how did you come up with that?  When I saw that for the first time, I know I, I was in theater, you know, in our local theater group, and I was--but I, and I always paid attention to how--movies are made.  But I--the, the ending with Glynn Turman, you know, running from the cemetery with [The] Four Tops playing 'I'll Be There'--
Speaker 2: Crying, right.
Speaker 1: --but who, who decided to do that?  Was that you or was that--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Eric Monte's idea?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, Eric wrote most of the, he wrote all the dialogue, you know, and really good.  And one of the things that we had, well, he, he wanted to have real street language and have all the cursing in it too, you know.  And I said, I said, "No, we're not going to do that, you know, because it will, somehow it will, even though it might be true, we're not, we're, we're trying to create something that's going to last through time.  And that, that, that truth will bring it down."  I said, "If we're true to the characters and true to the emotion that's happening between them, nobody's going to care if, if nobody says, 'Fuck this,' you know, or, or, nobody will ever care."  And, and that turned out to be so dead on that we never got any feedback from any of the gangbangers who've seen this movie, to any of the street kids, to anybody who said there was no cursing in it (laughter).  And I think that's one of the reasons why it's lasted through time, because you're not taken aback by that, you know.  And, and it proves that you don't have to use that language to portray the truth, you know.  So, that end sequence, the movie was all about Eric, 'cause it comes from his life, escaping the trap of expectations, low expectations, you know, that all these kids, and all, a lot of us grew up with, that you couldn't be this, or you couldn't be that, you know.  There were certain things you could be and certain things you could be.  Well, being a Hollywood writer was not one of 'em in, in Eric's frame of reference, you know.  So the running was escaping the, the tragedy, and the sadness, and the, the loss of his friend but also running to a new future, you know.  And no one appreciated the power of Motown music at the time we did this movie.  And so we got--Suzanne de Passe kind of opened up the whole Motown catalog to us, and we got all that music for almost nothing, you know.  And so I had my pick of the great songs of Motown to put in the various scenes that we did.  So I just went with the music that, that epitomized the, the emotion and energy in each scene.  And, and as a result, you know, from 'My Girl' to (laughter) to Stevie Wonder, you know, when the kids are running through the, the zoo, on and on the music is just right on.  It just evokes the spirit of the time.
Story_ID: 283246
Speaker 1: I think your next major movie was 'Car Wash' after that, right--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in '76 [1976].  Now, 'Car Wash' was a--well, 'Cooley High' kind of came in under the radar.  People didn't really know that 'Cooley High' was going to be that good until they, they got to the movie house--
Speaker 2: The theaters.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In our case it was the drive-in in Dayton [Ohio] (laughter), and so--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Right, one of the, the, the constant issues, and it's, I think it's worth mention, because one of the problems that we have as, as African American storytellers in this industry is that we don't run the industry.  And the people who do run it don't have the life experience that we do.  So they have an idea of who we are and how we act and all of that.  And so they tend to, to want to project what their idea of us is as opposed to who we really are and who we really can be.  So there's always that struggle in getting stories told that really reflect us in our entirety, in our three-dimensionality.  So, one of the struggles in 'Cooley High' was they didn't want me to cast the people that I cast in it.  They didn't want me to cast Glynn Turman for the teacher because he was short, and he was dark, you know.  And their idea of black teacher was Sidney Poitier, you know (laughter).  They didn't want me to cast the girl because she was really light-skinned, you know.  And they said, "Well, she looks almost white, you know. Can't do"--I said, "Obviously, you haven't seen the, the breadth of the rainbow of colors that we come in," (laughter), "'cause she's not an anomaly in, in our neighborhood," you know.  "She's--everybody knows she's black," you know.  So I constantly fought against their ideas of what it should be.  And, and there's one instance in that movie that, that they fought to keep in, and I fought not to shoot and to take out when we were editing, and that was the, when the white guy goes up to visit a prostitute.  And he's being ripped off by, by Steve [Steven Williams]--I forget Steve's name, but he's also become a really big actor in Hollywood.  And I hated that scene, and they wanted it desperately.  You know, they, they, they wanted the white guy getting ripped off by the black guy, you know, 'cause they, they, they were still in that blaxploitation mentality, you know.  And one of their big things was, "How do we sell this movie?  There's no sex; there's no violence," you know, and so they--'cause their frame of reference was 'Cleopatra Jones,' 'Hell Up in Harlem,' 'Sheba, Baby,' all of that.  And so, trying to get the rest of the company to understand how to market this movie was a major job.  And, and that was in 1975.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's no different today, you know.  It's, it's amazing.
Story_ID: 283247
Speaker 1: You were just saying that Hollywood's the same now as it was in '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--it, it's, it's different.  Hollywood is different, but it's the same (laughter).  There--when I came in, it's really interesting 'cause what, it, I came in in '74 [1974], seventy--we moved here [Los Angeles, California] in '74 [1974].  And there was this big social movement to open up the unions to women and minorities.  And so the big studios were being, were, were being integrated in a way that they had never been, especially on the West Coast.  It wasn't happening in New York [New York], wasn't happening on the East Coast.  They were still in the stranglehold of the, you know, the Italian and, and the kind of family--pass it through the sons--tradition.  And so I, I appeared in the film world at a time when things were opening up, and they were looking for people who were qualified.  So, that period lasted, that window of opportunity didn't last more than ten years. In ten years, suddenly the women were starting to disappear from the crews.  There were fewer and fewer brown and black faces around, and it, it had kind of shifted back to the good ol' way, you know, with the good ol' boys' network basically running things.  But the, the--every now and then you'll get an enlightened executive or a producer, you know, who, who is humanistic and compassionate and understands.  And so, a good movie involving African Americans will surface, you know.  But it's like an anomaly, because the, the, the way a lot of the executives grow up is they don't have black friends, you know, and they come from Ivy League schools, or maybe they have one.  But the attitudes haven't really changed as far as what black audiences like (laughter).  They are totally off the mark there.  So they tend to play down to the lowest common denominator, 'cause it's, oh, they'll like that, you know.  It's like this--
Speaker 1: Everybody is attracted to the sex and violence and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --clowning on some level.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, yeah, I--
Speaker 2: Right.  So, so that hasn't changed--
Story_ID: 283248
Speaker 1: Skipping ahead to the present, you know, the experience in doing 'Woman Thou Art Loosed,' which was totally financed by black money, the only people who had anything to say about how the movie was being made were the two of us, myself and the producer.  We called the shots.  We decided what the script was going to be.  We decided how it was going to be done.  And the result of that, of not having to take notes from an outside source, no matter how well-meaning, is that, that we made a film that we knew would resonate with an audience, black and white.  We were a little concerned in not totally knowing about how it would resonate with the white audience.  But we knew that it would definitely hit and affect the black audience, and that relates to box office.  And--
Speaker 2: So [HistoryMaker Bishop] T. D. Jakes produced this, right, I mean for the most part?
Speaker 1: No, T. D. Jakes invested in it, and T. D. Jakes wrote the book upon which the play was based, and the movie was based on the play.  And T. D. Jakes acted in it, but he didn't produce it.  Reuben Cannon produced it.  Reuben Cannon produced 'Get on the Bus,' and 'Dancing in September,' and another small movie.  But he's been in Hollywood as long as I have and one of the, is one of the premier casting directors and now becoming a premier producer, you know.  But the beauty of this experience was that it was totally independent of the Hollywood system.  This picture never would have gotten made in Hollywood.  They would have looked at the subject matter and written it off, and say, ah, this, the only audience for this is like the southern black Christian audience, you know.  And the first film festival  we took it to was in Santa Barbara [California], a 98 percent white audience.  And it won the Best American Independent Film Award of that festival [Santa Barbara International Film Festival], totally enthralling a white audience, you know.  So, the, the only way the, the game changes is that, that we put up, we, we put our money where our mouth is, pay for our own stories, and take our chances, you know.
Speaker 2: Now is this the first film that you've been involved in that, that's been like, that you've got like this kind of control?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean I've done a lot of, you know, Hollywood movies and had a, a certain degree of control.  But my, my theory was if you as a director working in this system get 80 percent of what you want, you're, you're, you're a winner, you know.  Well, working in the independent world, we got a hundred percent of what we wanted, you know.  And it was a lot easier when we didn't spend our creative energy trying to manage and, and compromise.
Story_ID: 283249
Speaker 1: Now what--we, we don't have time to go through all your movies, of course.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Somehow I know this.
Speaker 2: Thank God (laughter).
Speaker 1: Somehow I know this without asking you, but (laughter), but is there, is there a particular movie--you had a lot of commercial successes in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in movies.  You know, one--we just--'Car Wash' is a big commercial success.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of people--that's a very popular film.  Now even when it's, when it's replayed on television.
Speaker 2: Still.
Speaker 1: --people watch it.
Speaker 2: Plays all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It doesn't have, I don't think it has the same kind of depth of feeling attached to it that, that 'Cooley High' has, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it certainly is popular, and people love it.  They, they watch it again and again.  But what, what are your favorite, favorites of the films that you've directed, and then what films have you had the most problems with in terms of dealing with the Hollywood, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, 'Car Wash' was one of them, you know.  When I was (clearing throat)--excuse me--I (laughter), I got 'Car Wash' in a very odd way.  I finished doing 'Cooley High,' and I read in the trades that [Steven] Spielberg, who was supposed to direct 'Bingo Long and the Traveling All-Stars' [sic. 'The Bingo Long Traveling All-Stars and Motor Kings'] was dropping out of the project.  So I went to Universal [Studios], to the head, president at Universal at the time, and I said, "Look, I know you don't know who I am, but I'm the best black director in town, maybe the only black director in town," (laughter).  "But I'm the best guy to do this movie, 'Bingo Long,'" right.  And I, I said, you know, "I just finished a little movie," called car, 'Carbon Copy'--I mean (laughter), "I just finished a movie called 'Cooley High,' and when you see it you'll, you'll understand that."  And he said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's running the 'Bingo Long' deal, you know, so, and he's in Italy doing 'Mahogany.'  So you have to talk to him."  By the time I got to him, he had, they had already hired a white director named John Badham.  But the, the president of Universal remembered that meeting.  And then when he saw 'Cooley High,' he called me up and said, "We have a movie that you might be interested in we think you'd be really good for, and it's 'Car Wash.'"  And when I read it, it was a bunch of, of jokes and you know, slapstick stuff with a hint of drama in it.  And so I read it, and I said, "I don't think I'll do this." I wanted to do the story of George Jackson and [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, you know.
Story_ID: 283250
Speaker 1: That was 'Brothers,' right, I think that--
Speaker 2: It, it was eventually called 'Brothers.'  But the producers had come to me, and then I found out in the course of, of dealing with them that they were trying to do this movie without paying the Jackson family anything, you know.  And [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones was going to be involved somehow.  And I called James and said, "These people are trying to rip off the Jackson family," you know, and, "and I don't think I'll be involved in it."  And, and I wasn't going to do 'Car Wash.' And I, I was talking to Suzanne de Passe, who was [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's right hand at the time.  And she said, "Boy, are you crazy (laugher)?"  You know--car--"This is a Hollywood movie."  You know, "If it's not what you want, you know, do like Booker T. [Washington] and, and make it what you want, you know."  So that was the best advice I ever got.  So I, I took the job and, and decided to incorporate all the drama with the revolutionary Abdullah [Mohammed Akbar], you know, and, and Ivan Dixon, the ex-con who had already been there and trying to keep the young brother out of jail and give him the benefit of his wisdom, you know, and mix that dramatic line with the comic, high jinx that were going on in the, in the 'Car Wash.'  And the studio [Universal Studios] hated that idea.  They, they just wanted pure comedy.  And they kept saying, "You can't mix comedy and drama," you know.  And I said, "You certainly can," (laughter).  "It'll be a lot better," you know, and because I had I done it with 'Cooley High.'  It was comedy, comedy, comedy, and all of a sudden, you know, the dramatic thing that had been laying underneath hits people in the face.  And, and I wanted again to show that connection and that love between black men, which hadn't been done in Hollywood, you know, and a black man crying, you know, big, black, built [HistoryMaker Bill] Duke breaking down and being embraced by Ivan Dixon, you know, the father figure.  You just didn't see that in Hollywood, and they hated that (laughter).  So, so I, I convinced them that I had to shoot the movie in, in chronological order, in sequence.  Movies aren't done that way.  They're done, you might shoot the end of the movie first and the middle of it last, you know, and the first part in the middle depending on what's most economically efficient.  And I said no, because I have all these actors working in the background, you know, like Robert Altman's 'M*A*S*H'--ah, no, Robert Altman's 'Nashville.'  I kind of--it was my ode to Robert Altman and his attempt at 'Nashville.'   I was setting actors who--you know, actors have a way of, well, "I come in when it's my scene, and don't call me to be in the background."  Well, I had my actors there all day long working in the background and in the foreground.  I said this is an ensemble piece, and it has to be that way.  You know, there's no stars here.  And so, by shooting it in, in sequence from the beginning to the end, it gave me time to wear the studio down in our arguments about how the movie should end.  And they finally said, "Well, would you just end, finish shooting," (laughter) "and end it?"  So, one day I'll, I'll do a DVD with the director's cut, because there was a lot that got cut out that, that made it even better.
Story_ID: 283251
Speaker 1: During the change of tape we were talking about Richard Pryor and 'Which Way Is Up?' which--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which a lot of people feel, and I do, too, that it was the closest it came, the closest Richard Pryor came to capture the energy of the standup on the, on screen--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that, that inspired that movie is the producer of 'Cooley High' come to me and said, you know, "What would you like to do next?"  You know, and I said, "I, I don't know. There's so much black talent out here that it, nothing's been written for, you know, and it's a tragic waste."  He said, "Well, like who?"  I said, "Well, like Richard Pryor, for example," you know.  And he, he didn't know who Richard was, you know (laughter).  A lot of people in Hollywood didn't know, although he had made these records, you know, that were just underground hits.  And, and he hadn't come to the stature, you know, of doing the big concert stand-ups yet.  And I said, "Richard Pryor is the funniest man of this century," you know, "and nobody's writing stuff for him."  So, Steve [Krantz] went off and did some homework, and he came back with a movie, an Italian movie called 'The Seduction of Mimi.'  And he said, "Do you think that Richard could do this?"  Well, it, it was a brilliant movie that had a lot of political consciousness in it about Italian workers and, you know, giving in to the bosses and all of that.  I said, "Yeah, we can make an American translation to this and set it in the, in the grape fields," you know.  Cesar Chavez and all that furor was going on in the California migrant worker industry.  And there was a great Mexican theater company called El Teatro Campesino [San Juan Bautista, California].  So in my theater days I had run across these guys, and they were brilliant.  And they were very politically active, and their theater was kind of agitprop theater.  And so I could see a whole American version of this Italian movie utilizing Richard and, and El Teatro Campesino.  And by the time we got Universal [Studios] to green light the movie, the grape season was over, so I couldn't do the grape thing.  So it wound up being in the orange fields, you know, 'cause that was in season.  But I--in working on the script, Richard was doing, he, he took a Warner Bros. [Entertainment Inc.] movie called 'Greased Lightning.'  And so he was in Georgia doing this, and I was flying there working on the script.  And I got the idea to incorporate some of his characters from his, his records, Mudbone, (unclear).  You know, I said, "Well, maybe, Richard, could you play your, your, your father, you know," (laughter) "your grandfather?  And could you play the bootleg preacher?" You know, and the, and this, and we had a real low budget too, so we couldn't do all the fancy makeup that, that the Eddie Murphys of the world are doing today, you know.  But, but the idea of Richard playing those three different parts and giving him an opportunity to do some of the things that he was doing in his standup, I thought was just, you know, a perfect platform for his genius, you know.  And shooting this movie was the most fun thing that I had, had ever done.  And the hardest thing about it was trying to keep the crew from laughing on every take, you know, trying to (laughter)--because he would have people in stitches, you know.  And, and it just kind of shocked, you know, the Hollywood in, industry bigwigs, you know, because it, it was profane in a way; it, it was outrages in a way; and it was very political in a way and kind of tells the story of a man who loses his, his soul and all his friends, you know, for making his way up the corporate ladder.
Story_ID: 283252
Speaker 1: You were starting to talk about Richard Pryor in 'Bustin' Loose' after he, after he had his accident.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, well, you know, after--I wound up taking over 'Greased Lightning,' because [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles had creative differences with the producers and got fired.  And I, I wanted to keep Richard from being in a flop before he did my movie.  He was supposed to do my movie first (laughter) and, and took this other one.  So I, I became movie doctor on 'Greased Lightning.'  And then after the great experience he had with 'Which Way Is Up?' he went to do a movie called 'Blue Collar' with--
Speaker 1: Harvey Keitel was in it.
Speaker 2: --Harvey Keitel and, and Yaphet Kotto and directed by Paul Schrader.  And Paul Schrader's idea of getting good performances out of people was to set them against each other on a personal level.  So he, he had Harvey and Yaphet and Richard at each other's throats through the whole thing.  And it was just the opposite experience for Richard, going from something where he is having a great, wonderful time being creatively funny to being, you know, to hating people and working in a, in an environment just filed with angst and whatever.  And I think that's when he started doing drugs again.  And then that kind of led into his work on the chicken movie, you know, that Sidney [Poitier] did, 'Stir Crazy,' which was a big success, but Richard was doing drugs through that whole period.
Story_ID: 283253
Speaker 1: Then he [Richard Pryor] had this accident where he set himself on fire.  And he called me--oh, he had done another movie called 'Bustin' Loose,' which had been put on the shelf at Universal [Studios]--and it was a project of his heart--that they hired a young director, a new director, who had never directed a movie before, a producer who had never produced a film before--done television--a DP [director of photography] who had never shot a feature before (laughter).  They surrounded him with people who were doing their first movie, and so it was disastrous, and it was unreleasable.  And when the studio found out that he wasn't going to die, he--here he is, guy is laying covered in bandages in the burn ward, and they call him up and say, "Richard, we're glad you're okay.  Will you finish," (laughter), "finish the movie when you get well?" (Laughter) And because it was dear to his heart, you know, he said yes.  And then he called me and asked me if I would come talk with him and, and direct, you know, try and fix it.  So I go visit him.  He's recovering in Hawaii, in his house in, in Maui [Hawaii].  And he, he can hardly move because of the skin grafts, you know, and all of that.  And he sits down on the couch, and he says, you know, "I don't--my heart is really not in this business anymore because it's a waste of time."  And he said, "But I really want to do this picture," you know.  "So, will you help me do it?"  And I couldn't, couldn't say no.  So I got the studio to throw away half of the footage and let me reshoot half the movie.  And I rehired the writer that Richard had fired, you know, the original guy.  And we, we took the pieces that were, that were salvageable, 'cause they had Cicely Tyson doing a wonderful role, and, and Richard, and all these kids, and took the pieces and then created a script around what was salvageable that made sense, you know.  And then two years later the kids had grown, you know, six inches.  Richard was--we're trying to--hide his burns, you know.  And, and trying to make all of that match was a major feat.  And the picture went on to gross $35 million or whatever and be a big success because it had a lot of heart in it.  So that's my Richard Pryor story.
Story_ID: 283254
Speaker 1: A group of movies in the '80s [1980s] that I think I--and if you want to talk, talk about something I'm skipping over, go on and, and, and jump in.  But in the '80s [1980s] at--the advent of hip hop era, there are movies that are now considered like classics that you directed, 'Krush Groove,' 'Beat Street'--
Speaker 2: I didn't direct 'Beat'--
Speaker 1: No, not 'Beat Street' but 'Last Dragon.'
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Krush Groove,' that's right.
Speaker 2: Well, before get, get to that, I'll talk really quickly about 'Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause it was the first time that a black director had been allowed, "allowed" to do a, a so-called white movie, you know.  And, and my vision for it was, it, it predated the music video phenomenon that we're all immersed in now, but it was to do a long form music video, to do images set to the music of the Beatles' 'Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band' album.  And it was hugely successful everywhere but here and in London [England].  I made more money on that movie than, than 'Car Wash' and 'Cooley High' combined.
Speaker 1: Now how, how do you account for the fact that it wasn't successful in here or in London?
Speaker 2: People, Americans and English, really didn't like the, the Bee Gees portraying The Beatles.  They, they were, you know, Beatle phobias (laughter).  So, so I, I think that was the, the biggest negative reaction, you know, for those who were seriously into The Beatles.  It's just that the Bee Gees and Peter Frampton could not be in the same class, you know.
Speaker 1: And the Bee Gees were big in the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Bee Gees were huge--
Speaker 1: That, that was a--yeah.
Speaker 2: --huge and, and so was Frampton, you know.  It was just the concept of, you know, treading on sacrosanct territory.  But the rest of the world at this movie up, you know.  And since I had a piece of the producer's profit (laughter), he, he, and he had--Universal [Studios] had U.S., and Canada, and North America--North America and Canada, and he had the rest of the world, so we did okay; we did real good.
Story_ID: 283255
Speaker 1: And then I discovered a young actor named Denzel Washington and put him in his first movie.  The movie was 'Carbon Copy,' with George Segal.  And this young actor stood toe-to-toe with this veteran Hollywood comedian, George Segal.  And you know, we, we knew that he had a real big future ahead of him 'cause he was very good and very, just like he is today, very confident, you know.  And I went--I was working on a project, and Suzanne de Passe showed me a script called 'The Last Dragon.'  And after reading it, I said, "Suzanne, I have to do this movie," you know.  This, it had a young black heroic character in it who was dreaming that he was like the black Bruce Lee, and, and his name was Bruce Leroy in the movie.  And they had a role for a young black actress, you know, who we wound up casting Vanity [Denise Katrina Matthews] in that.  And I said, "There are no heroic black characters in American cinema," you know, "since Shaft, so, and there are definitely no young ones.  And you put that combination with some beautiful black people in it, and this picture is going to," you know, "make a fortune," and it, it did.  So we went to New York [New York], did this movie, and it was hugely successful and became like a cult, again, another like little cult classic, because it didn't take itself seriously.  It dealt with a lot of racial jokes, stereotypes.  You know, the Chinese guys were trying to be black.  The black guy was trying to be Bruce Lee, but he could kick butt when he needed to, you know.  The actress/singer was immensely attractive, you know, and was the love object, and of course, she's in danger.  And then we, we did a parody of Cyndi Lauper at the time, who was this crazy, girls just have to have fun, you know, songs, songster--excuse me--(clearing throat).  And so it was tongue-in-cheek, and action, and, and heroism, and funny lines all at the same time.  So it--kids would go to that movie, and they knew every line of every character.  And I've had executives today, agents, and, and lawyers, and, and technicians say, "Oh, you did, you did 'The Last Dragon,' wow."  And then they quote lines from it, you know, (laughter) still today.  It's very funny.  But it's, it was a movie that kind of hit a, a nerve in a fun way.  And, and I, we were shooting this movie in New York.  Now this is 1985.  Nineteen seventy-four [1974] I was telling you that, you know, the unions here were opening up.  Nineteen eighty-five [1985], ten years later, we do this movie with a pretty sizable black cast.  There's on--there's a hundred-person crew, and only one of those people is a black, and he was a teamster.  And halfway through the movie he got fired for something, you know.  And the whole rationale was what we heard all the time: "There's no qualified people to do this."  Well, I, I had this big movie to manage and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy to manage, and so I didn't have time to fight that battle at, at the time.  But I swore that I'd come back to New York, do a movie with an all-black crew just to prove that there were people who were capable and, and ready to do it.
Story_ID: 283256
Speaker 1: So I'd come back a couple of months later to do a movie called 'Krush Groove.'  And it had no SAG [Screen Actors Guild] actors in it 'cause they were all rappers and singers.  We did it non-union.  We did it NABET [National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians], you know, which is like the second-tier union in New York [New York].  We did it in twenty-five days, thirteen musical numbers on a $2 million budget in New York City [New York, New York].  It was just miraculous, the, the whole thing.  And we had like an 85 percent black crew.  And, and those crew people went on to become Spike Lee's mainstay crew people at, when Spike was coming up.  Ernest Dickerson did the, he was the DP [director of photography].  And the AD [assistant director], and the UPM [unit production manager], all black.  They, they became Spike's guys.  But that movie was, it was kind, it brought the whole rap movement into national consciousness.  Nobody in Hollywood knew what rap was.  I, I told--I had made friends with Mo Ostin who was the head of Warner Bros. Records [Inc.].  And I told Mo, I said--they, they had just had a big hit with 'Purple Rain,' and I said yeah, I know you, you haven't heard this music, but you sign some of these guys, you know, it's the next level of Prince, beyond Prince, you know, and your kids will be singing this stuff.
Story_ID: 283257
Speaker 1: And it was very prophetic and also very interesting, 'cause in the course of my career, I've had a chance to see, like, the audiences that were segregated, not forcibly, but culturally, you know.  And the theater owners were always nervous if there was a black audience coming into their traditionally white theaters because they thought it would drive the white patrons away, just like the neighborhood, you know.  (Laughter) You bring black people in the neighborhood, all the white people go to the suburb, you know.  It was that same mentality in the theaters.  And so Richard Pryor was the first actor who was able to draw a huge white audience, unlike Sidney Poitier.  I mean, you know, it's like those, those were like the, the, the polite, noble people.  Well, the people that Richard brought were all young, energetic, you know, kind of against the grain and the establishment, and just there for the entertainment, you know, not making any kind of social statements. We were once showing a, a picture in, in Illinois.  And the theater owner stood outside the theater sweating, actually broken out in sweat because he saw this white audience coming in, and then he saw this black audience coming in.  And he was just in, in shock and very nervous.  And of course, nothing happened, you know, 'cause the Richard Pryor audience was there for fun.  Well, when we did 'Krush Groove,' this is 1985, '86 [1986], the same thing was hap--they, they put the film, unknowingly, in areas where black audience couldn't get to it.  (Laughter) So, so, all over the country, when Warner Bros. opened this film, wherever they put the film, black audience came because that was an audience that knew what rap was.  So there were story after story of, of hordes of black kids coming into these white mall theaters and lining up for tickets and being, you know, youngsters but not being rowdy, you know.  And mall owners, being freaked out, thinking something was going to happen, going to the theaters and demanding that the theaters close, and having all these black kids in line wondering why they can't get into the theater, and of course, a riot starts (laughter).  So, so, the--in 1985 you had this kind of, you know, old line reactionary thinking that generated the kind of, you know, the fear generated the kind of activity that they were afraid of in the first place.  And so those stories were all over the place.  And here is this little innocuous movie, 'Krush Groove,' you know, that, that was before the whole gangster rap thing, you know.  And all it did was celebrate the life of [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons, and, and, and Run-DMC, and The Fat Boys and how they became successful, by being entrepreneurial, you know, in their dorm rooms.  And, and this whole social layer on top of it created kind of riotous activity, you know.  So, so now, you know, jump to 2005, where the kids (laughter), the kids could care less, you know.  They, they'll go see a movie, 'Save the Last Dance' for me, or whatever that movie was, you know, where there's the black guy and the white girl, and, and it's a love story.  And the kids are, are not seeing that.  You know, they're not even reacting to that, that there's a color difference there, 'cause they, they haven't grown up with that consciousness.  You know, it's only the people in the, in the positions of power who still have that consciousness.
Story_ID: 283258
Speaker 1: Any other films you want to discuss at this point, or do you think we--
Speaker 2: 'Woman Thou Art Loosed' (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, now that's, that's, that's coming out as we speak.
Speaker 2: Woman, woman--
Speaker 1: It's, it's, it's released as we--
Speaker 2: --'Woman Thou Art Loosed' opened up last Friday.  And I think that, again, it's, it's another movie that will join the, the, the few movies that I've done that, that I think are classics.  You know, I think 'Woman Thou Art Loosed' is going to be its own classic a few years down.  It'll never get old.  It, it will be constantly fresh because it, it talks about a human condition and about an--illness that has gripped our society, and that's child abuse.  And it opens up a lot of conversation about that.  And I think it has some healing power, too.  It, it exposes it; it, it talks about it, but it deals with it in a way that has some, some real beneficial healing because it gets people who may have been hiding this to come out and talk about it.  And the producer [Reuben Cannon] and I have gotten emails from people attesting to that.  And you can see in the audience that it has such a powerful impact that you can hear a pin drop in the theater.  And it's a very interesting phenomenon to watch.  But I think that that's a movie that'll stand the test of time.
Story_ID: 283259
Speaker 1: What is your particular philosophy of filmmaking?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a philosophy of filmmaking, but I, I feel that we as filmmakers are entrusted with a very powerful instrument.  And it's an instrument that can elevate us as a people, as a species.  It's an instrument that, that reaches deep into the consciousness and the sub consciousness of people, and that when you're given that ability to wield the instrument with that much power, that you have to be truly responsible for the results that emanate from the use of that power.  And my philosophy is I want the audience to come out with more understanding than they went into the theater with, to bridge the gulf of communication between people, to make them feel what it feels like being a human being no matter what the color of your skin is, no matter what your position in life is, but to put you in that person's shoes for an hour and half or two hours, and as a result, make you a more empathetic person.
Story_ID: 283260
Speaker 1: When you look back at, at your work and your life, is there anything major that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: If I would do anything differently in my work and life, it probably would have been more courageous and more entrepreneurial earlier and just struck out and found a way to do my own movies my own way instead of trying to work in the Hollywood system.
Story_ID: 283261
Speaker 1: Maybe about ten years after you got started, along came Spike Lee, and Robert Townsend, and, some others that have been, you know, and the, the Wayans brothers on some level, and the Hudlins [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin and Warrington Hudlin] and others.  What, what, what do you think about this new, this new wave of, I mean it was new at one time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now it's a, now it's another new--
Speaker 2: Now it's old.
Speaker 1: --a new, new, new wave now.
Speaker 2: A new, new wave.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I think the new, new wave is, is way better than that intermediate period.  Spike, I, I thought was wonderful, wonderful marketer, a good storyteller but a little muddled in, in, in, in what he's trying but very courageous, very outspoken.  You know, and I love that about Spike's work.  But the, the really interesting people, young black directors, to me are Kasi Lemmons, who did 'Eve's Bayou,' very artistic, very interesting, deep sister.
Speaker 1: And '[The] Caveman's Valentine' she did, too, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  I think [Antoine] Fuqua is a very gifted director.  I haven't seen his 'King Arthur' yet, but I'm, I'm dying to see it because from a directorial standpoint, he's got lots of chops, and F. Gary Gray, really good.
Story_ID: 283262
Speaker 1: Robert Townsend has a lot of social consciousness.  And I thought, you know, that his 'Hollywood Shuffle,' you know, that really told the story of, of what it's like trying to get your movie made in Hollywood and, and very insightful.  And his '[The] Five Heartbeats,' a lot of people really loved that movie, you know, including me.  And I, I just like Robert's energy.  I think his, his connection to community is great, and, and, and his wit and writing is great.  And, and I look for more great things from him.  [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke, I think, is really one of our fine directors who, who's very choosy about what he wants to do and unfortunately is not working as much as I think he should be.  The, the Wayan[s] brothers have made tons of money, you know, (laughter) more money than, than any of us have made, and I applaud them for that.  I love, I love their TV show ['In Living Color'].
Story_ID: 283263
Speaker 1: I thought it ['In Living Color'] was brilliant comedy.  It had a great cast and all of that, you know.  And the spoof stuff that they [Wayans brothers] are doing in the movies is obviously audience pleasing.  There's some of their stuff that bothers me though (laughter) tremendously.  Unfortunately, we've had a whole spate of movies that I think have set us back to the pre-Stepin Fetchit days, you know, that, that have really continued to propagate the images of, of us that, that go around the world, you know, and, and they're there forever.
Speaker 2: Now, now Spike Lee's movie 'Bamboozled,' you know, that was at that, but I don't know it's just me, but I, I think it could have had a better ending, you know.  But, but it, it was a stunning, I mean it was just kind of stunned--did, did, did you see that one?
Speaker 1: I did, yeah, yeah.  And you know, it's, the whole minstrel mentality is still with us, you know.  So, as long as we're singing and dance, we're okay, you know, telling jokes, and then we're okay, you know.  But don't, don't let us be Toussaint L'Ouverture, you know (laughter) or Paul Robeson even.  You know, it's like it's too threatening.  And you know, I've had a lot of cynical writers who happened to be black who write stuff that is geared to the white executives' mentality, 'cause they, they know they'll love this, you know.  I'll get made.  I'll make some money, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes when you, you kind of wonder if it's the, if it's, it's not the most talented black writers who are getting to direct--producers.  It, it seems as though it's the most aggressive ones sometimes and not the most talented ones that are really getting that work produced.
Speaker 1: Well, that's the story of this business.  You know, it's like persistence and, and boldness sometimes pay off more than talent.  There are a lot of talented people who aren't working 'cause they, they can't push ahead, you know.
Story_ID: 283264
Speaker 1: When you look back at, at your career and what you've done, and it's a, a lot of work--and we didn't we didn't even talk about all the television--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --everything from 'Felicity' to '[The] Rockford Files.'  We talked about that. A lot of--
Speaker 2: 'Picket Fences'--
Speaker 1: 'Picket'--yeah, lot of--
Speaker 2: --all that David--
Speaker 1: --television.
Speaker 2: --Kelley [David E. Kelley] stuff, 'The Practice.'
Speaker 1: Right.  When, when you look back at all that you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy I guess in this business [film industry]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think my legacy probably won't surface until after I'm not here because a lot of people view me as, as the pop, the pop movie guy, you know, the 'Car Wash' guy.  And they don't see, you know, they don't see the classic, the films that have stayed, had the staying power through these last thirty years, you know.  But I, I think my legacy will be, you know, a filmmaker who entertained people, and also uplifted them, and educated them, you know, made them feel, changed their lives in a, in a way.  A lot of young people, black people in this business and Asian people have said to me personally, you know, it's like, "Seeing your movie," X movie, you know, "really changed my life and made me want to be in this business."  And so that, that's a good feeling.
Story_ID: 283265
Speaker 1: Now did your, your, your mother [Katherine Leslie]--oh, what, what, what did she think of your success?  Did she get a chance to see you become successful as a director?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  She, she passed away about five years ago, so she saw a lot of the success in the theater and, and in, in film.  And like all mothers, she was very proud and, and, and happy, you know.  I, I think she saw the fruit of a lot of her hard work come to bear.  And you know, we always, as a family, wanted to add value in whatever we did, so hers was in, you know, trying to be involved in nursing and science.  And, and mine wound up being in, in theater and film.
Story_ID: 283266
Speaker 1: Are your children involved in the arts?
Speaker 2: I have three sons.  The oldest is a musician.  And he and his half-brother have a studio in Atlanta [Georgia], and they produce for some of the local groups there.  And he's very talented but in a world that's totally, I don't know anything about.  And my youngest son [Brandon Schultz] runs the animation company.  We have an animation company called ImajiMation Studios, and they're doing great, great things.  We, we have a comic book line called 'Blokhedz.'  We're doing toys, vinyl collectible toys based on the characters.  'Blokhedz' is B-L-O-K-H-E-D-Z.  It's a hip hop-driven musical dramatic comic book, if you can believe that (laughter).  But it's getting a lot of play.  We're doing business with Japan, Japanese clothing with Adidas.  It's, we started about two years ago, and it's starting a groundswell now.  They've been on CNN and in a lot of the major magazines as the hot thing to watch.  And they just did a three-minute animated piece for the new 'Blade: Trinity' movie that's coming out in November.  They did a three-minute animation that's going to go along with the soundtrack as an added value item.  And so we're coming to the attention of, of the community, Hollywood community at-large.  So I, my intent is to get the movie made of 'Blokhedz,' at least to get it started before the end of this year.  So we're close to putting a deal together.
Story_ID: 283267
Speaker 1: What's the immediate future look like beyond 'Blokhedz'?  And, and I know you just finished 'Woman Thou Art Loosed,' but what, what other major projects are you working on?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I produce and direct an episodic television show called 'Everwood' for The WB [Television Network].  And I do four, five, or seven of those shows a year.  We shoot those in Salt Lake [City, Utah].  And I continue to do episodic while developing the next story.  I'm spending a lot of time on the 'Blokhedz' project because that's major.  There, there hasn't been a black animated adult movie done ever, you know.  So we're, we're on the cutting edge of that.  And we blended it with music.
Speaker 1: Now that, that raises a question, 'cause we've--I've been in--I don't have any forums where the definition of what is a black movie is raised, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so what, what--how, how would you define a black movie?  Is it one with black people in it or, or just a, or does it have to have a black producer, or--
Speaker 2: You know, it, it--
Speaker 1: --how would you define it?
Speaker 2: -depends, it depends on who's defining what a black movie is, because as soon as a movie makes more than $50 million, it's no longer considered a black movie, you know, no matter how many black people it has in it (laughter).  If it has one, and it's Eddie Murphy, you know, and it makes a jillion dollars it's not a black movie.  I think a, a, a black movie is just like the old segregationist definition of a black person (laughter).  If you got of drop of black blood in you, you're black (laughter).  So, so if there's one black person in it, and I don't care (laughter) where they are, it's a black movie, you know.  It's so funny because 'Car Wash,' when we were doing that, now 'Car Wash' has as many white people in it as it has black people in it, maybe even more white people. But when the studio saw it, they said, "This is a black movie," (laughter).  And, and we said, "What, what, what do you mean?  What do--how are you calling this a black movie?  It, it's as, as white as it is black."  So I guess they were in that--segregationist mode of thinking, too, you know, so.
Speaker 1: One drop (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so I don't want them to keep changing the definition, you know.  If it (laughter), so if it's got some black people in it, it's a black movie.  Is, if it's got a black director in it, directing it, or a black writer writing it, it's a black movie (laughter).  I have directed more white material than any black director in existence.  And people don't consider the stuff that, that I do, 'cause they don't know who I am, you know, as, as black.  But I consider it black 'cause it's got soul.
Story_ID: 283268
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't covered that you want to comment on before we ask the last question?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know, I'd just like to say that--that one of the hardest things to do in, in life is to have a career that is meaningful, impactful, and helps people, that adds value and also have a family life.  And I just happen to be married to a spectacular, wonderful woman [Gloria Schultz (Lauren Jones)] who has not only kept me on my Ps and Qs, but like the [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis team, we're just like that, only she's more invisible and behind the scenes on this end and very visible in our spiritual life.
Story_ID: 283269
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I--I would like to be remembered as, as a, a person who made a difference, who added value, who entertained people, made them laugh, made them cry, made them think about their relationship to each other, their relationship to God, and to society.
