Story_ID: 371967
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Scott Stearns.  The location of this interview is the department of criminal justice at, at Prince George's Community College, Largo, Maryland, and the date is November 9th, 2006.  Captain, Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me.
Speaker 2: Certainly.  My name is Samuel F. Saxton [HistoryMaker Captain Samuel Saxton], and that is spelled, S-A-X-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And the first part.
Speaker 2: And the first part is Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L.
Speaker 1: Middle name.
Speaker 2: Farlee, it's after my [paternal] granddaddy [Hugh F. Saxton], F-A-R-L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're a military man, any nicknames that they've given you?
Speaker 2: My wife [Sylvia Truslow Saxton] calls me Sax, and I won't use some of the other names that I have been referred to.
Speaker 1: Okay, Captain Saxton, would you give me your birth date, birth year and where you were born.
Speaker 2: I was born in Asheville, North Carolina in 1929, and my birthday is August the 5th, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay, how would you describe, characterize your profession, your occupation?  What have you done?  What are you now?  What has been your career focus, briefly?
Speaker 2: I was a career military man for a number of years, I retired 1975.  I then became, in corrections.  I've been in corrections, or law enforcement, about forty years.  I did corrections and law enforcement in the [U.S.] military and I retired, I was recruited and continued that profession.  Currently, I am a professor here at the Prince George's junior college.  I've been teaching here now about ten years.
Speaker 1: Now what courses do you teach?
Speaker 2: I teach criminal justice for the most part, but specifically, juvenile delinquents.  The history of that is that I know the adult system like the back of my hand but I did not know the juvenile justice system as well as I should have, so I decided to teach it and I followed the action that you learn a heck of a lot more than you teach.  So that's where I am right now.
Story_ID: 371968
Speaker 1: Before we get into the more formal part of the interview, we have a few, what we call, warm-up questions for these interviews, People magazine type questions that give the viewers of your interview, over time, another slant on your personality.  And so my first question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  I think it's seafood.  I really have a thing for seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, your favorite time of year, season?
Speaker 2: I think it's spring.
Speaker 1: Any particular reason why spring is--
Speaker 2: Well, you just come out of the winter, you labored through autumn, and things are awful fresh in the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'd call it my favorite, but my wife [Sylvia Truslow Saxton] and I like to go on cruises, so, I would say that that's probably as close as it's gonna get.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and last question, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  Something philosophical that you like to use from time to time with friends or relatives?
Speaker 2: Well, having been a marine most of my life, I think, semper fidelis, is part of it, and the other one is semper paratus.  Semper fidelis means always faithful, the other means always ready.
Speaker 1: Always faithful, always ready.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, good, thank you.
Story_ID: 371969
Speaker 1: As I may have said earlier, we start these interviews by talking about your roots, about your family background, about your birth and early years, so that those who study and use your interview over time will understand how you came to be the person you are today and how you came to the field of corrections and criminal justice.  So, we're going to start with your family, and we're going to start with your mother, and would you give me your mother's full name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's full name--
Speaker 1: --and when, when and where she was born.
Speaker 2: Okay, mother was born in Clinton, South Carolina.  Mother was, her name was Mary Lou, and Mary Lou Patterson--
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for me?  Would you spell Lou for me.
Speaker 2: L-O-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I think mother was the strength of our family.  I come from a situation that you see a lot today.  My father [Otis Saxton] knew how to make a lot of babies but he didn't know how to support 'em very well.  So that fell upon mother to keep the family together and she also inputted into us some pretty strong morals, you know.  We used to try to feel sorry for ourselves and mother never allowed that.  We used to complain, we had this or didn't have this.  Well, mother would get crepe paper and make roses and then push us out to be the salespersons for doing it, and that's how we survived in the early '40s [1940s].  That's what kind of drove me into the [U.S.] military, frankly.
Speaker 1: She was born in Clinton, South Carolina--
Speaker 2: Clinton, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what year?  Did you give me the year, approximately?
Speaker 2: Well, mother died at eighty-three so she would have been somewhere in the--
Speaker 1: About 1901.
Speaker 2: --nineteen, yeah, somewhere in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: About 1901, okay, all right.  Did your mother share with you stories about her growing up years in Clinton?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What, what do you remember her telling you about her early childhood?
Speaker 2: This was a pretty rocky period of time back then because remember now that racism was rampant in that part of the world.  My grandfather, or great-grandfather, was a barber, started out as a shoeshine boy, and he used to keep all of his money in a little cigar box, and the customers began to want him to be the barber in this kind of white barbershop.  So the guy got angry and said that he was going to sell the barbershop, and when he made the statement, granddad said, "How much do you want for it?"  The guy was surprised that he had that kind of money because he had been planning to do a barbershop himself anyway.  Well, the long and short of the story was, that the guy allowed granddaddy to buy the barbershop and then two weeks later he sicced the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] to come in and take it from him--
Speaker 1: This is your mother's father now?
Speaker 2: This is mother's father, he found out that they were doing that, and so he migrated from South Carolina and ended up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So an awful lot of my family tree moved from South Carolina to Philadelphia in pursuit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?  Your, your--
Speaker 2: Sam Patterson, I'm named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Other stories that your mother told you about her memories as a child?
Speaker 2: Yes, we come from a long line of Indians [Native Americans] in family tree.  There were Cherokee, and we've been able to trace some of our relatives all the way back to Wounded Knee [Massacre at Wounded Knee], all the way back to fighting George Armstrong Custer.  So, we were warriors way back then.
Story_ID: 371970
Speaker 1: Do you know the origin of your name, Saxton?
Speaker 2: I know a little bit of it.  I think it comes from a Union general by the name of Saxton who also had some slaves.  I think that we inherited that name from him and he was operating in and around Salisbury [North Carolina], Charlotte [North Carolina], that area in North Carolina and that's as close as I've been able to get to it.
Speaker 1: You said that some members of your family, oh no you said, we have been able to trace our ancestry back to the Native American Cherokee.  Who did that research?  Did you do it or somebody else?
Speaker 2: I didn't do it.  I was pretty busy during that period of time but the persons that did that are the folks who have been dealing with our family reunion.  They have a big display that takes all of the families and put them in their little sequential setup and then they went back and kept tracing.  That's how I think it occurred.
Story_ID: 371971
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's [Mary Lou Patterson] schooling, her early schooling?  Did--
Speaker 2: Mom was a teacher.  I can't remember the name of the school.  How I remembered so well that mom was teaching junior high and high school and one of my fondest moments is I got a chance to play football against mother's old school.  I don't know a lot more than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in Asheville [North Carolina], now, though, this is in Asheville.
Speaker 2: This was right outside of Asheville.  I believe it was in Rocky Mount [North Carolina] where, because we used to play Charlotte [North Carolina], you know, because I played for Stephens-Lee High [Stephens-Lee High School, Asheville, North Carolina] at the time.
Speaker 1: How did your mother and father [Otis Saxton] meet?  Do you know?  Did they meet in--
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: --'cause, I see.  He was born, well, he was born in Asheville?
Speaker 2: He was born in Asheville.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, and she was in Clinton [South Carolina].  How did she prepare to be a teacher?  What was her preparation?
Speaker 2: She went to a two year college, and I don't remember the name of it.  It's been so long ago.
Speaker 1: And then you said she was a middle and a high school teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What subjects did she teach?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: English for the most part.  Mother was a brilliant lady.  Not only did she teach English, she taught morals and discipline and all of that.  You know, I'm a product of mom, I suspect.
Speaker 1: Who influenced her growing up years in your family?
Speaker 2: Sam Patterson and her mother, Amanda Patterson.  All of them were extremely disciplined people.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother as a person?  What was her personality like?
Speaker 2: I refer to mother as my first DI [drill instructor].  As we grew up, with all of the trauma and other things that were there 'cause daddy is one of the gentlemen that spent a lot of time away from home.  I can't remember daddy ever taking me anywhere and all of that time, instead of us feeling sorry for ourselves, mother kept us focused.  You know, I would come home after having been in school, you know, the story goes something like this.  We lived, not in something called the ghetto, but we lived between two opposing forces.  There was a gang called the Southside gang and then there was another group called the Stumptown gang, and here, me and my brothers, lived right in the middle of it, on Clingman Avenue, and this group used to delight in fighting us every single day and mother had taught me not to fight until one day I came home and I was pretty scarred up and mother changed her philosophy and told me I had better start to fight, and from that moment on, I started to take on those gangs, but I did it with just a little bit of foresight.  For example, the toughest of the tough, I decided if I could take his measure, then the others would leave me alone, or leave my brothers alone.  So I put a geography book in my chest and I went over my, I gave this guy a pretty good one and, of course, I always knew that he was going to hit me in the stomach first and when he did, he sounded like a wounded wolf, okay.  From that moment on, they were a little bit more careful in dealing with me and my brothers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a pretty sore hand, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 371972
Speaker 1: Staying with your father for just a minute, your father's name?
Speaker 2: Otis Odell [Otis Saxton].
Speaker 1: You said he was away a lot.  He was born in Asheville [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he, or do you know anything about his growing up years in Asheville?
Speaker 2: Very little because I really didn't get to know daddy very well because he was always gone.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about his parents [Eva Saxton and Hugh F. Saxton]?  Did you know your paternal--
Speaker 2: I knew his parents pretty well.  Daddy came from, I would say, a well-to-do in the true sense of the word.  My granddaddy was a whiskey runner.  He and the local constabulary and the local politicians were in cahoots together.  They had the steel, daddy made the booze and it was sophisticated.  They would put it in logs, hollowed out logs, and they made distribution all the way up to Canada and, of course, they were sharing the profits and granddaddy didn't have a lot of time for us because he was so busy with his enterprises.
Speaker 1: What was he like as a person?  How do you remember his personality?
Speaker 2: Tough as nails.  I recall, one day, because mom [Mary Lou Patterson] tried to get him to help us.  So we would go over trying to get funds from him and I recall one time going to, talk to granddaddy on mother's behalf.  A young man came in that worked for granddaddy, and obviously granddaddy was a little angry with him.  So I recall him taking a pistol and shooting at this guy as he was running out the door and then picking up the phone and calling Sanford Brown, who was the sheriff, and saying, I just shot at--I won't use the rest of the language, and I'm standing right there while this is going on.
Speaker 1: How old were you then, roughly?
Speaker 2: Eight or nine.
Story_ID: 371973
Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers.  You had three brothers, is that correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Would you give me their names, when they were born, and if they're still living, and if they are, what they're doing?  Who's your oldest brother?
Speaker 2: It's going to be kind of difficult for me to remember all of their ages.  There's two years apart for all of us.  I had three brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, the brother next to me was Steve [Stephen Saxton].  Steve was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  Now he passed after having received a wound in combat.  He was bayonetted in Korea and lost both legs and he passed.  Kenneth [Kenneth Saxton] was a baseball player.  He never really made the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] but he fought--he played minor leagues for a long, long time.  My baby brother is still living.  He lives down in North Carolina.  He was a chief in the [U.S.] Navy and my sister--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Pickins.
Speaker 1: No, his first name?
Speaker 2: Pickins Charles Saxton [Pickins Saxton] is his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said--
Speaker 2: And my sister is Mary Lillie Saxton [Mary Saxton].
Speaker 1: What's her first name again?
Speaker 2: Mary Lillie.
Speaker 1: Mary Lillie.
Speaker 2: She spent a lot of time in the Peace Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, well then let me ask, maybe these, I'm not clear, these, Jeffrey [Jeffrey Saxton], Wayne [Wayne Saxton] and Samuel [Samuel Saxton, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Those are my kids.
Speaker 1: That's, okay, okay, and you put them up top.  I understand, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I did something wrong (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, let me stay with your brothers and sisters now.  Three brothers and a sister and roughly two years apart, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were born 1929.  Who was the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: All right, you're the--and then--
Speaker 2: And then Steve is second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ken and, so it was four brothers.  Pickins is the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right, we'll come back, back to your children, your marriage, a little later, okay.  What kind of things did you and your brothers and sister do as you were growing up?  As children, what did you do together?  What was your--
Speaker 2: Well, with daddy [Otis Saxton] gone, I ended up being pretty much the surrogate father, and we were dirt poor.  There's no question about that.  So we had to scuffle just to survive.  I recall taking a pick mattock and digging up a half an acre so that, by hand, so that we could plant corn and other things and survive with that, supplementing mother [Mary Lou Patterson] and her flowers and things along that line.  We were poor but we were very proud.  Mother was one of those folks that just exudes motivation, and I remember going to school with cardboard shoes, and when people would laugh, mother wouldn't let me feel sorry for myself.
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up with your brothers and sisters, early childhood years into early teen years, was she teaching during this time?
Speaker 2: After a while, mother had to stop.  She just couldn't continue to do that with all the other things.  She ended up doing domestic work.
Story_ID: 371974
Speaker 1: Tell me about the street that you lived on in Asheville [North Carolina], where you were born and about your neighborhood outside of your home.  What was that like?  Who were your neighbors?  What was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: I was born on Short Street in Asheville, that was where my [paternal] grandfather [Hugh F. Saxton], and that's where they were, right over there.  We lived on Clingman Avenue in, Asheville is a very hilly kind of a place, you know, the school is up on a big plateau.  All of that whole area is just one big mountain.  I guess that's where I first learned how to climb hills.  In my early years, and most of my other brothers were not working at all, so I ended up being a grocery delivery boy.  You may or may not have seen these old bicycles that have the big basket in the front and the small wheel just under it?  Okay.  Well as a delivery boy, I used to deliver all over Asheville, up and down those hills, with that, and that's where I got the stamina in my legs, but we really weren't making much money and that was what made me come into the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Who were your neighbors?  Who were your playmates, in addition to your siblings?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a lot of time for play.  You know, I spent most of my early years scuffling along with mom [Mary Lou Patterson].  Every so often, you know, we would get together with some kids.  The Chambers [ph.] lived, we lived across Nasty Branch and there was a big, little, wooden walkway between us and the Chambers so we had to come down their steps to cross over and to get into where we lived in this two-bedroom, you know, kitchen, and all of us kind of slept in the same bedroom.  Yeah, it was kind of rough.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were the occupations and the businesses and the ways that people earned money, your other neighbors?  What were they doing, the parents of--
Speaker 2: I think most of them were laborers, you know, truck delivery people, that kind of thing, and an awful lot of them raised their own chickens, that's what we did.  So they raised a lot of their own food.  You're talking in the early '40s [1940s]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so you can remember, with it.  Things were kind of different during them days.
Speaker 1: Tell me about family traditions that you remember being involved in with your mother and your siblings?  Any special holidays or things that you did as a family, traditionally, that you always remember fondly?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Christmas was a favorite time.  Even though we didn't have very much money, we would make the decorations, and we were looking for Santa Claus just like everybody else, you know.  And then, of course, we had a vivid imagination.  I remember my first horse was a broomstick, you know, and I was able on Christmas to get my cap guns and there was a big forest not too far, so me and the Lone Ranger used to put down criminals all over that hill.
Speaker 1: What about church life as you were growing up?  Your mother and, did you attend a church and if so, which one?
Speaker 2: We were Presbyterians, and mother came, comes from a large family of preachers.  You know, I guess there were at least five of 'em, brothers or cousins or nephews or someone that were, indeed, ministers.  I won't tell you that we went every Sunday, but we were pretty loyal to that Presbyterian church.
Speaker 1: In addition to, I guess, Sunday morning service, what other church activities did you participate in?
Speaker 2: Not very many because I was working pretty much all the time.  We were very fortunate, there was a owner of the store where I was, was a Jewish fellow and he knew our plight, so while he wasn't paying me very much, but he allowed mom to run up an enormous food bill, and that was his way of just kind of helping out.
Speaker 1: I see.  How much did he pay you?
Speaker 2: I think I was getting a dollar a week.
Speaker 1: A dollar a week.  For how many hours, roughly?
Speaker 2: As I look back, twelve, thirteen, whatever it took.  When the deliveries were done, I was done and that, of course, could have taken as, twelve, fifteen hours.
Story_ID: 371975
Speaker 1: How far back can you remember, in your life, what's your earliest childhood memories if you think back, pre-kindergarten, pre-first grade?  What are your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Mom [Mary Lou Patterson] left dad [Otis Saxton] for a while and she went back and lived with some of her kin in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and one of my earliest recollections is that the way that my aunt got mother to come back was to work on my sentiments.  I loved trains, you know.  I always wanted to have my own little train, and she offered me a ride in the train to come back to Asheville [North Carolina] from Philadelphia and, of course, I kept yelling until I could do that and I ended up coming back to Asheville, living with the Chambers [ph.], I think it is, for a short time, is a different group of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she took you to Philly with, you went to Philly with her?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Philly with mom--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and mom let me come back and I can recall staying with the Chambers until my aunt brought me over there.  And my aunt was one of the, she was a teacher--
Speaker 1: This is your mother's sister?
Speaker 2: My father's sister.
Speaker 1: Your father's sister.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Felicia [Felicia Saxton].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even today I am very careful with my spelling because my aunt left me back for the sole purpose of making sure I could spell, and I resented that to the far end and, of course, I took a real pounding from the kids as being a dummy.  So the recollection is that Asheville was not a friendly place for me for a while.  One of the things that my aunt tried to do is to keep me from being a roughhouse guy.  Well my nature is, I'm an athletic type, so she had put a ribbon on my head because I used to have long hair and sent me out to play with the kids.  Now you know what the boys did?  So I ended up fighting half the neighborhood because they were calling me sissy.
Speaker 1: How much time did you spend in Philadelphia?  How long were you there?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: A very short time, I would say probably no more than three or four months.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I was somewhere around eight or nine.
Story_ID: 371976
Speaker 1: Any other memories of your early childhood years?  We're going to get into your schooling in a minute, and elementary and high school, but any other memories of childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember listening to President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] about Pearl Harbor.  We were sitting, remember you used to have the old, big radios, I don't remember what they were called, the oval kind of a thing of, like this--
Speaker 1: Stand up, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well we were sitting and listening to him talk about the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] and I guess I was, what, that's 1941, so I would have been about ten years old.  I remember that very vividly and I can remember all of the hubbub that came about, let's get ready to, for war [World War II, WWII], and this kind of a thing.  Yeah, I can recall that very much.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what thoughts you had about war at that young age?  Did you, or did you have any special feelings about it at that young age, as you recall?
Speaker 2: I was pretty much inert with that, at the time.  I was pretty much focused on trying to find a better job because the Jewish fellow that was there, as nice as he was, the other Jews turned on him because he married a gentile, and from that moment on, nothing really worked well with him.  I worked at a store right across from where we were living, and that didn't go well because they accused me of stealing some money, which I had not, and the more I tried to defend myself, the less success I was having.  So I decided to try to find something else other than that area.
Speaker 1: What was that business, this--
Speaker 2: It was just a grocery store.
Speaker 1: Now what was your job there?
Speaker 2: Delivery boy.  You see, the, what happened is someone said that they had given me money to pay for the groceries and I hadn't turned it in.  That wasn't true but they weren't listening to me at the time.
Speaker 1: Were there many Jewish people in Asheville [North Carolina]?  Was there a large Jewish population there?
Speaker 2: I don't know really how to answer that.  I think that there was a sizable group because there were, I think, a number of stores that were associated with each other and almost all these guys were Jewish folk, and they're pretty nice people.
Speaker 1: You said that Asheville was very hilly, there were mountains and so on.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I assume that would be the reason that people who perhaps had tuberculosis or other such ailments--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --would come to that area for health reasons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a high, mountainous area, the air is very clear in there, it's a beautiful place.  Biltmore Forest [North Carolina] is a place a lot of folks go because that was, you know, the Biltmore family owned that.  I think after the railroads broke up, people decided to find something else that would allow them to survive and that's where all this health business came in.
Story_ID: 371977
Speaker 1: Getting back to Asheville [North Carolina], what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your growing up years in Asheville?
Speaker 2: Oh, what a question.  Sight, it's a beautiful place.  The hills are just decorated with some of the nicest vegetation that you could ever think about.  There are waters that have flowed through all those mountains.  I know that there are habitats there for the brown bears that run up and down, and, of course, deer.  Sounds, I can't think of any sound other than just the normal street sounds that are there but the air is so clear that you just know that you're dealing with a different kind of a place other than the city.  There are no smoke sounds or, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, have you had occasion to go back to Asheville in recent years for any particular reason?
Speaker 2: No, I'm almost a stranger in Asheville, any more.  All of my high school friends, most are gone.  There are more people from Asheville in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I don't know all of them.  I'm kind of a stranger.  I've gone back after mom [Mary Lou Patterson] passed and she was buried.  I haven't been back.  As I walk down the streets, some guy said, "Where you from, soldier?"  And all I had to do was smile.
Story_ID: 371978
Speaker 1: When did you start your formal schooling?  What elementary school did you first attend and how do you remember that entry?
Speaker 2: I started at Hill Street elementary [Hill Street School, Asheville, North Carolina].  I went to Livingstone [Livingstone Street School, Asheville, North Carolina] for a short time, that's when my aunt left me back when she was teaching there, and then I went to Stephens-Lee [Stephens-Lee High School, Asheville, North Carolina] but then I dropped out of school at the ninth grade.  When I came in the [U.S.] military, I couldn't hardly tell time.  Again, like I said, I was driven to having to do something.
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the Hill School.  How many grades were you there, early elementary?
Speaker 2: I went through one through, I think, sixth, there.  Then junior year was seven, eight, and then I dropped out in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: But your aunt was teaching at the junior high?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What kind of a student were you at the elementary school?  Did you like school at that point?
Speaker 2: I've always been a studious person.  If you visit my home, you'd find that I've got about a five thousand volume library right in my house.  I read in, oh, what would, I'm trying to say?  If I get interested in a subject, I'll explore that until it, I can't get any further.
Speaker 1: So did you like to read as a child?
Speaker 2: I liked to, I started out as a child reading and I've always been that way.
Speaker 1: As a child, Hill elementary school, what kind of things did you like to read at a young age?
Speaker 2: History.  I've been a history buff for years.  I like to follow ideas and that's been one of my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there any particular kind of history that you liked as a child?  Was it biography?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Biography, military history, I've always been a person that looked at military history.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers at the elementary school, the Hill School, that you kind of remember in a fond kind of way that may have influenced you at that young age?
Speaker 2: That's probably the thing that kept me from getting into difficulty, because I had two or three teachers that took a special interest.  A.J. Farrar was a guy that I remember very well.  He was, pulled me aside and would just talk with me.  I would say that Farrar was a mentor.  I've had that all through my life, in both the grade school and the other.
Speaker 1: Was the Hill School co-ed or was it boys or--
Speaker 2: It was co-ed.
Speaker 1: It was co-ed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had a man, male teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Farrar was a tremendous influence on my life.  Dusenberry [Paul Dusenberry] was another guy that spent some time with me.
Speaker 1: Another teacher at the same school?
Speaker 2: Another teacher.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  D-U-S-I-N-B-E-R-R-Y [sic.], I think, generically speaking.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for approximately six years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you start kindergarten there or grade one?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Grade one.
Speaker 1: Grade one.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Any other thoughts or memories about those first six years of elementary?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I remember that we had some pretty bad storms during that period of time, and, of course, being so poor, we didn't have the money to go buy coal so one of the things that, you know, mother [Mary Lou Patterson] taught me to be innovative.  So, since we couldn't buy coal, I would take my little wagon and I'd go out to the railroad yard because it was right close and all these trains, as they'd go by, they dropped coal.  So I would pick up the coal and bring it back, you know, and then go cut down trees to augment, and get some heat in the house.  So, I didn't realize how poor we are.  We were just, you know, that was the thing to do and I did it.
Speaker 1: Now your brothers and your sister [Mary Lillie Saxton], of course, came after you, you were the oldest.  Were they in the Hill elementary grades below you as you moved?  Were you all in the same school at one point?
Speaker 2: Yes, my younger brothers, younger brother, Steve [Stephen Saxton], and then Kenneth [Kenneth Saxton], followed a little bit behind me, but they continued on in school.  They ended up going to Catholic school and how mother pulled that, I don't know because by that time I was already gone from Asheville because after the ninth grade, I didn't stay there very long.
Speaker 1: She wasn't satisfied with the elementary or--
Speaker 2: I think that was what was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had two more years beyond grade six, seventh and eighth, that was at a different building?  Different school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that name again that--
Speaker 2: Livingstone.
Speaker 1: Livingstone junior high, middle?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What were those years like?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a whole lot about Livingstone because I never felt like I was identifying when I got left back.  I kind of got turned off at that point.
Speaker 1: And your aunt was your teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  She was your sole teacher?  She taught everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there were others that were there because we rotated but she was my homeroom teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did we give her name, your aunt's name, just for the record?
Speaker 2: Felicia [Felicia Saxton] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right--
Speaker 2: Saxton.
Speaker 1: --her last name?  Saxton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 371979
Speaker 1: So you left the school at grade nine?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were already in grade nine?
Speaker 2: Headed into nine, not quite yet (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, okay.  And how old were you?
Speaker 2: At that time, I was fourteen, going on fourteen.
Speaker 1: And why did you decide to leave school?
Speaker 2: Well, it was becoming obvious that mother [Mary Lou Patterson] was having so many medical problems.  Mother has had almost thirty operations and, of course, we didn't have money to pay for it, so I knew that I had to go do something because of my kid brothers were all there, and so I think I told you that I tend to be a very innovator kind of person.  If I've got a problem, I'm going to solve it and, you know, I'm going to find a way to solve it that makes sense.  So at that particular juncture, when I decided to go into the [U.S.] military, I went up to the draft board and told them that I was eighteen and I had been eighteen for three months and, of course, they were infuriated by that because here I am a draft dodger.  They made me 1-A almost within two weeks.  On the third week, I was already going down to Fort Bragg, North Carolina as a draft dodger.
Speaker 1: How old did you really look?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --did you look older?
Speaker 2: I was, looked older and, except for some of the aging, I was pretty tall, you know, about the same size I am now.
Speaker 1: Had you been playing sports at the middle school [Hill Street School, Asheville, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I'd been playing sports, and I think the thing that made me get older was when I got on that bus to go to Fort Bragg, there were all kind of guys on there trying to figure out how to beat the draft.  You know, some were eating soap, thinking that'll run their blood pressure up.  You had others that had other ways of trying to influence, you know, and I tell the story that when we got down to Fort Bragg, they had two doctors down there, one looked through your mouth, the other looked somewhere else and if they didn't see each other, you passed.  It was just that simple.
Speaker 1: So, there were only a few days separating your going to the draft board and your being shipped out to Fort Bragg?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What did your mother say at this point?  What was she thinking as for you--
Speaker 2: Mother didn't want me to go.  She just felt that I would be killed or something and of course I fought against that but I think she came to the realization that I really had to find a way to solve some of the problems there because what I did when I came in, I made my allotments out to mom.  Mother was getting almost every penny that I was making.  I would get five dollars one pay day and ten dollars the next, and then I took in laundry and ironing with the troops just so that I would have my own--
Speaker 1: So the five and ten was through the military?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was in the military at the time--
Speaker 1: And you were getting five and ten dollars (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five and ten, and all the rest was going to my contribution to the allotment, was going, and that went on for many, many years.
Speaker 1: So how much more were you earning as you first entered the military service and you would have made if you had a job back in Asheville [North Carolina]?  I mean, what is--was the military pay that more considerable?
Speaker 2: Well, you remember, we were talking in the 1940s it was fifty or sixty dollars, and twenty-five or thirty of that had to go to part of my allotment requirement and so mother was getting about ninety to a hundred dollars plus, and that's what they lived on pretty much from the '40s [1940s] on up through the time that I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, the military people, when you went to the draft board and you declared that you had just turned eighteen, they didn't have records or they didn't check records in those days?  They just accepted what you said?
Speaker 2: They just accepted it.  They did not care.  They were looking for manpower, you know, and I had calculated that that was where it was going to go.
Speaker 1: Now why was it the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] versus the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: I started out Navy first and then went into the Marine Corps.  I spent two years in Navy.  All of World War II [WWII], I pretty much was Navy.  Korea [Korean War] and Vietnam [Vietnam War], I was Marines.
Story_ID: 371980
Speaker 1: Tell me now, you're on the bus, you're going to Fort Bragg [North Carolina], tell me about that initial boot camp, as they call it, I guess, and what was that experience like for you, we're still in segregation now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well, the first thing that I found out, they decided that I was going to be a steward.  Now look, I'm not a steward and never will be but during those segregated years, the [U.S.] Marine Corps had twenty-two all-black units and all of them were stevedores.  They called them ammo companies [ammunition companies] and depot companies.  The [U.S.] Navy, everybody that was a steward went to Bainbridge, Maryland [United States Naval Training Center, Bainbridge, Port Deposit, Maryland] for boot camp, that's where I went, okay.  If you were going to be C, what do they call it, line duty, you would go to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  So, when I went through boot camp, they were teaching me how to be a servant, how to be a cook, how to be a steward, that kind of a thing, and I hated it, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The steward was in, in the food end of it, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, okay.  I hated every bit of it.  There were some good guys there so I'd never knock that group.  Let's say, they are good and they've been in the Navy for years but after I got out, I came out one January and when I went overseas, the first place I went was Guam.  You know, you're talking 1944 now, Guam had already been secured and we got out there just enough time to become involved in the Leyte landing [Battle of Leyte].  So--
Speaker 1: Which landing?
Speaker 2: The Leyte.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that.
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I can't remember exactly how--
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: --but it's in, it's in the Philippines, right outside of Manila [Philippines].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is when, I was part of that outfit that went in with MacArthur [Douglas MacArthur], you know, and he said, "I shall return," okay, I was in that flotilla, I was stationed on a Landing Ship Medium [LSM].  You have an LST [Landing Ship Tank] and that's how you send in tanks.  Well, you also can do the same thing on an LSM and there's something called LCI [Landing Craft Infantry] which is infantry.  So I was on an LSM and this was March of 1944 when we landed with, let's see which group was it?  I can't, most of them was [U.S.] Army at the, on, in the Philippines, okay.  That would have been in March of '44 [1944].  Several months later, into nineteen--into 1945, I landed on Green Beach at Iwo Jima [Japan].  If you know anything about Iwo Jima, Green Beach is just under the gun of Suribachi [Mount Suribachi].  I went in with the 28th Marines [28th Marine Regiment].  We stayed there and went in on the 19th of February, and the island was secured in March, about the 26th or 27th of March.  Less than thirty days later, we were already in the invasion of Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan].  So I was out there during the time that the kamikazes were coming in.  All of this time, people had forgotten that I was a steward, I became assistant gunner and a gunner on the 20 millimeter, you know, and I'm proud to say that I think I took down one Japanese plane by myself.
Speaker 1: How you, how were you able to get into that part of it, into the gunnery?  You, you were trained as a steward and that's what they--how did you make that jump?
Speaker 2: I think that there's ways to do whatever you really want to do.  I just kept pushing it and pushing and pushing it.  You know, when I got out of the Navy, I was a steward Marine for a little while and one of the things that I decided is that I could find several ways to break that hold, one of them, I became a boxer.  I was the fleet champion in the cruiserweight.  I knocked out a guy by the name of Harry Ganiss [ph.] to become the champion there.
Speaker 1: The football player, Harry Agganis?
Speaker 2: No, a different guy.
Speaker 1: Oh, it must be another--different guy.
Speaker 2: Harry Ganiss is, I know the guy, I played ball against him with, I used to play for Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina] which is a big base, Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], and Hawaii.  So the bottom line was, is that I became a boxer and a football player and because of that I got to be well-known and supported, so when I started to try to get out of the steward branch, I had a whole lot of backing.  I was All-Marine in football and I played for several of the major teams.
Story_ID: 371981
Speaker 1: The other thing was, is that I did a lot of self-study.  I hadn't finished high school so I educated myself because I just did not like the idea of not being able to function like everybody else.  So, I took the GED [General Educational Development], passed that and then started to go to college just wherever I could.  I guess I've been to five different colleges just trying to get a good--
Speaker 2: So you took the GED, took the GED, what at the end of the wartime or before '45 [1945]?
Speaker 1: Before, during, after, I've always been that kind of a studious person.
Speaker 2: During the first three or four years of [U.S.] military service, were you in communication with your mother [Mary Lou Patterson] and family?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Did you, in what ways?  How did you communicate, by letter or--
Speaker 1: By letter, pretty much, yeah.
Speaker 2: And she would write to you and vice versa?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was worried to death, you know, because you're talking about that period in 1945 when there was an enormous amount of fighting going on out in the Pacific, and I was right in the middle of all of that.
Speaker 2: On V Day [V-J Day], Victory Day, 1945, where were you at that very moment?
Speaker 1: In 1945 when the Japanese surrendered, oh, I was sitting on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], I was still overseas.  You couldn't get back to the states until you had a certain amount of points and I had acquired just about the right amount in 1946 to be able to rotate, and by that time I was determined that I was not going to stay in the military so I got out and went back to Stephens-Lee [Stephens-Lee High School, Asheville, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Back to where?
Speaker 1: Stephens-Lee High.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did, oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, stayed there for, oh, one semester and things were not working right for me and I didn't understand it.  I think what had happened was this.
Speaker 2: But you had the GED though, no?
Speaker 1: I had the GED already--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you still, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah but I went back.  Stephens-Lee had integrated a program there called core system, and I wasn't really satisfied with that, and what had happened is that I had changed so much.  I wasn't the same guy that left Asheville [North Carolina], I was a new person, and I didn't realize it until one day I came out of a tobacco shop, I looked down the street, I saw Vance's [Zebulon Baird Vance] statue.  Vance is a famous person up there in Asheville and this big statue was being dive-bombed by all the birds and as I looked at that, it dawned on me what was bothering me, is that I was no longer thinking like the locals.  My ideas, thoughts were far different, so I ended up going right back into the military.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were out of the military then for about a year or roughly?
Speaker 1: A little less than a year.
Speaker 2: A little less than that, yeah.  Getting back to Stephens, what was this program that you said--
Speaker 1: They called it the core system.
Speaker 2: And what was it supposed to do?
Speaker 1: Instead of teaching math and English, they, the home, the church and the school and they taught you all these things that we could function well within those domains which meant that a lot of folks came out of there did not really have proficiency in math and the kinds of things that you needed in order to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or somewhere.
Story_ID: 371982
Speaker 1: When you came back from your first tour of duty, left Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], came back to the high school [Stephens-Lee High School, Asheville, North Carolina], how was your mother [Mary Lou Patterson] doing at that point?
Speaker 2: Mother was very sickly at the time and I think that's one of the reasons why I went back into the [U.S.] military, is that the need was still there, and I didn't have time to go for me.  I had to think of them, again, so that's what I did.  I just went back in, made my allotments back out and all of that.  By this time, I was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps and I was able to excel pretty quick in the corps.
Speaker 1: Now why did you select the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: I think that I have always had that inclination to, I didn't like the [U.S.] Navy, you know, so I had been in what was called, the amphibious Navy.  I was in the 3rd Amphibious Corps [III Marine Expeditionary Force] which spent a lot of time with Marines and I guess I got the idea since I've always been with them, you know, why don't I.  So I ended up with the Marine Corps, within a short time I was already a squad leader.
Speaker 1: Where did you start that service and training?  Where, what base, what camp?
Speaker 2: I started that in Okinawa.  They, we were so short of troops that if you were already combat trained, you could switch over from the Navy to the Marine Corps, and I jumped at the opportunity because that meant no longer was I a steward, I could go over to the other, even though I was carrying the designation, I sure as hell wasn't fighting like a steward out there, you know, in Okinawa.
Speaker 1: The pay was a lot better?
Speaker 2: It wasn't the pay so much with me, it's that I got my pride back.
Story_ID: 371983
Speaker 1: Tell me now more about that Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] experience.  How long did you stay in the Marines and what was your progression in terms of moving up and--
Speaker 2: It took me a little while, actually, I became a squad leader.  My retirement was as a captain.  I had been selected for major but I was in a car accident and really couldn't accept it at the time.  I was a first sergeant when I was given a temporary commission.  I became a sergeant major during that period.  If I had been commissioned earlier, I would have probably retired as a colonel because during those times, there were very few higher ranking blacks, and the Marine Corps had a little funny thing.  If you were black, you probably were on the West Coast if you had any rank.  You sure the heck wasn't down in the South, in South Carolina or North Car- at one time, there were black gunnery sergeants in the whole 2nd Marine Division.  I was one, there's another guy over in the 1st Marines [1st Marine Division], but nothing really changed until Korea.
Speaker 1: Well, let me stay with the Marines if I can because you went back in there what, '46 [1946], roughly?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, segregation, segregation, okay.  Now, Marines, blacks, had been trained for Marine service beginning what, in forty--
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty--
Speaker 1: --two [1942]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you tell us about, let's go back to the training of African Americans for the Marine Corps and, of course, in the meantime, you are already in the [U.S.] Navy, but I want to go back now to those brothers that you joined, or joined you in '46 [1946].  Tell me about those early Marine years that, and the history of blacks coming into the Marines in '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: The earliest known groups go back in history a little ways, but there was only a sparse number.  The real numbers of blacks in the Marine Corps came in around 1941, '42 [1942], they were trained in a segregated boot camp down in Tidewater, North Carolina, this is at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina].  Roughly twenty thousand guys were trained there, and I was trained in that area as well.  What happens with that group is that the Marine Corps decided after Truman [President Harry S. Truman] and Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] issued executive orders, that they can no longer skirt the issue they had to go do something, and in that case, they started to bring in large numbers, and we went into what was an old plantation right outside of Camp Lejeune called Montford Point [Camp Gilbert H. Johnson, Jacksonville, North Carolina], okay.  The Mumfords owned that plantation.  It was a nightmare because what was being tried was to make this thing so difficult that this group of guys would quit, okay.  They used some blacks as acting jacks.  Acting jacks is another name for black drill instructor.  This group was ten times tougher on us than the white drill instructors were.  Their statement was this, "If you think them MFs are bad, you try to leave and you're going to meet us," and I can't think of anybody that walked away from that.  We were determined to make it.
Story_ID: 371984
Speaker 1: Montford Point [Camp Gilbert H. Johnson, Jacksonville, North Carolina], was the rather exclusive training base for blacks in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so you had to go there as you reentered service.  So how long did you stay at Montford?
Speaker 2: As I reentered, it was only about six weeks because I had already had basic military.  So what they were doing, teaching me the Marine way.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the Marine way?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's kind of exclusive from--
Speaker 1: Okay, so once you left Montford Point, you were headed where?
Speaker 2: Where did I go from there?  Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina], I think, that's--
Speaker 1: Well, that was close by, though, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time at Camp Lejeune.  I went into the 6th Marines there.
Speaker 1: The 6th Marines [6th Marine Regiment]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in Bravo Company, 1/6, 1st Battalion, 6th Marines.  I spent a heck of a long time in that battalion.
Speaker 1: How long were you there at Camp Lejeune?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  I guess I was in 1/6 for five years at best, better.
Speaker 1: Now, President Truman [President Harry S. Truman], former President Truman, desegregated the [U.S.] military, that included the Marines at that point?
Speaker 2: That included the Marines--
Speaker 1: So you were at Camp Lejeune at that point or had you--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure exactly where I was when Truman did that.
Speaker 1: When did you first experience the desegregation of the--
Speaker 2: After 1950, things started to go off, it changed because Executive Order 8802 [sic. Executive Order 9981] integrated the whole thing, and this was about the time that, so it would have been around 1950.  For example, the [U.S.] Army was sending black officers in the white units just so they knew there were black officers.  The Marine Corps broke up the steward branch pretty much.  There still were some stewards, but they started to have some white stewards as well, and that broke up, and we were so short of troops in that 1950 era that if you were trained at all, several of my very close friends, one of the guys that I've recommended to you, was part of the 7th Marines [7th Marine Regiment], and we were all headed toward Korea.  I was at Lejeune but headed toward Korea within those periods of time.
Story_ID: 371985
Speaker 1: So when did you land in Korea?
Speaker 2: Korea would have been 1952, '53 [1953], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your Korean War service, and what your roles were during that conflict.
Speaker 2: When I went into Korea, I was part of a group called MACS-2 [Marine Air Control Squadron 2] which was a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] air group, I was the security chief.  We were in the area around Daegu [South Korea], Yeongcheon [South Korea], and a couple of other, where is the other one, any rate, there was a tremendous number of North Koreans masquerading as South Koreans that were attacking airbases and areas like that, and my job was to take 'em on whenever they showed up.  So we spent a lot of time fighting insurgents, as they would call it today, that were trying to infiltrate the Marine bases and others.  The [U.S.] Army was having the same problem.  It was K-3, K-4, K this, K that, these were all enclaves or for the military.  So a lot of my Korean time was with that.  It was an extremely cold, nasty kind of a job.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about that job.
Speaker 2: We were reacting, a react force, trained infantry people that were designed to defend these airbases until regular military groups could respond.  We had ninety people, which is the equivalent of a company and then we had NCOs [non-commissioned officers] like myself in charge of squads and platoons.  I had a platoon there.
Speaker 1: So you served throughout the Korean conflict--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the Marines?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have other roles beyond the one you just described or was that the major (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was pretty much what I did--
Speaker 1: --your assignment?
Speaker 2: --and that was an all-day kind of thing too.
Speaker 1: Do you consider that role as kind of your entry into what we call security and things 'cause you eventually moved into criminal justice and corrections and security kinds of structures.  Was that the beginning of that?
Speaker 2: I really didn't, not during that period of time, it was later.  The Marine Corps had decided that any Marine could be a security guy so they did away with law enforcement as a MOS [military occupational specialty].  It's called a 5800 MOS, but they found out that in this new era, you had to have military police, and those of us had had some inkling of that before were automatically pushed into that vein.  You know, so in the sense that my experience in Korea headed me toward the security thing, that's how it really occurred.
Story_ID: 371986
Speaker 1: When we got ready to go into Vietnam, particularly this is an urban environment, so they put together the first, I guess, the first time that we had military police battalions.  They created the 1st Military Police [1st Military Police Battalion], that was a battalion and the 3rd Military Police [3rd Military Police Battalion].  When I went into Vietnam, I went in with the 1st Military Police Battalion.  We trained at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California] to take over the confinement facilities, the policing of Da Nang [Vietnam], the security for American nationals, all of that in Vietnam.  I went in as a platoon commander with the 3rd.  When I got to Vietnam, they had disbanded one of our companies, Alpha Company.  My company was disbanded, and I was sent over, back to my old battalion, 2/9 [2nd Battalion, 9th Marine Regiment].  When I got there, I became the CO [commanding officer] of that outfit because of the time that I landed with them, got on the helicopter, we were going down in a place called Happy Valley [Vietnam], this was on the, one of those sweeps, my CO got killed, my XO [executive officer] got it, and I was the next senior officer only because of my date of rank, and all the other guys that were there, most of them were ex-enlisted and had trained under me at NCO [non-commissioned officer] school and whatever.  So I was pretty satisfied with this because I had been the gunnery sergeant of Hotel 2/9 before.  So here is when I ended up being the boss of my old company, but it didn't last long because the commanding general's name was Cushman [Robert E. Cushman, Jr.], his aide was my former CO, and he had recommended that I be transferred back to the MPs [military police] and ultimately to go into the jail system because there were two confinement facilities in Nam.  The [U.S.] Army had one down in, where was that, Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] area, and the other one was up in I Corps, 3rd (Unclear) Brig.  So I got transferred from 2/9 back to the MPs, went into that facility as the XO, within two weeks, they transferred the CO and I became the CO of Alpha Company, 3rd MPs.  I was not only the CO of that company, I was also the tactical commander for that part of the perimeter closest to us as well as I had responsibilities 'cause some of my people were the cops down in Da Nang.  So, as a first lieutenant, I was shouldering all of those kind of responsibilities.
Story_ID: 371987
Speaker 1: When did the Korean War end, and where were you at the end of the Korean War?  That was about '52 [1952], was it, or?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], fifty--yeah, '52 [1952].  I came back to Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina] from Korea--
Speaker 1: From Korea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, about '52 [1952], roughly?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we ended up in the 6th Marines [6th Marine Regiment], but I started out, once I got back, I was an instructor for ITR [Infantry Training Regiment].  I taught tactics and weapons, all of that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: What is ITR?
Speaker 2: The Infantry Training Regiment.  The way that worked, is that kids would go through boot camp at Parris Island [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina] and then for their infantry training and everything else, they'd go to specialty schools.  If you were going to be infantry, then you'd go to ITR and there we would teach all the fundamentals of combat.  For example, I taught combat in towns, I became an expert in that area.  I also taught attacking a fortified position.  You had to deal with that.  I taught jungle fighting.  I taught dealing with flame throwers and stuff along that line, and then toward the end, I was the major instructor for the combined fire demonstrations.  We had congressmen in, if you had any kind of rank, you were going to go through that combined fire, and I was the instructor that dealt with that.
Speaker 1: So how many years had you spent as an instructor at--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a difficult question because I've been an instructor for, God knows how long.  I taught--
Speaker 1: Well, I'm talking about the time now between the end of the Korean War, your instructorships and then Vietnam [Vietnam War], so I'm trying to just fill in that period between the two wars.
Speaker 2: Oh, about three or four years there.  We, well I stayed there until things started to get hot in Lebanon, and we had some people trapped in Africa.  So they transferred us into the 2nd Marine Division, headed for that.  I spent some time with 1/6 [1st Battalion, 6th Marine Regiment], and 1/6 was called a floating battalion.  This group, and even today, you're going to find a Marine, a reinforced battalion along with another group close to a regiment that's floating in the Mediterranean Sea.  This was, even with Iraq, you still have some of that going on.  That's pretty much what happened--
Story_ID: 371988
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to get back to Asheville [North Carolina] during any of this time?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I did not get back to Asheville until I retired pretty much.
Speaker 1: I'm looking for, oh here it is.  June 6th, we'll take a little detour from the [U.S.] military experience, June 6th, 1956, was a special moment in your life.  What happened on that date?
Speaker 2: I think that's the day I got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: I married Sylvia Hazel Truslow [Sylvia Truslow Saxton].
Speaker 1: And you were married in Fredericksburg [Virginia], but how did you get to meet her?  How did, 'cause you're in the military all this time now, how did you meet her?  And where?
Speaker 2: Her brother-in-law, Hazekiah Williams, married her sister [Fannie Truslow Williams].  They were stationed in Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, Jacksonville, North Carolina] and so was I.  She came down to visit with them and she also knew another fellow that, I can't remember his name.  When she came down, she said she'd like to meet some nice guys, and I ended up being the nice guy that she met.  Now I'm not paraphrasing nice, but I was the guy, and then we just kind of hit it off right off the bat.
Speaker 1: Okay, so after your marriage, where were you living?  Where were you now, you're still at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California]?
Speaker 2: I was still at, this was Camp Lejeune.
Speaker 1: Lejeune, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay, we lived on the base for a while, and I guess toward the end of the '50s [1950s], we ended up going to California.  I spent a lot of time, my kids were all born in North Carolina, okay, then went to Camp Pendleton as part of the 5th Marines [5th Marine Regiment], which got re-designated to the 3/1 [3rd Battalion, 1st Marine Regiment], third wings.  When I went out there, I thought that I was going to immediately deploy, but it turned out that I was going to be there for a long training cycle so I went back and brought Syl out to California, and we bought a home.  I put her in that home and then I went overseas with, 2/9 [2nd Battalion, 9th Marine Regiment], and we spent a lot of time out there.  I guess we were in California sixteen years.
Speaker 1: Sixteen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  She was always in California but I was somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 371989
Speaker 1: Now, the Vietnam War, when did you become involved in the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: The Vietnam War really started to heat up in the mid-'60s [1960s], okay.  When Vietnam started up, I had just been promoted to first sergeant.  I was the first sergeant of Service Company at MCRD [Marine Corps Recruit Depot], the recruit depot in San Diego [California].  When this thing really got hot, the commandant determined that he was so short of officers that he sent out a directive saying that all staff and COs [commanding officers] would apply for commissions, and as the first sergeant it was my job to compose all these recommendations.  So I made recommendations for all the people that were under me and to take them into the captain to sign but I never sent one in for me.  You know, I was happy as a lark to be a first sergeant.  Colonel Carl Sitter [Carl L. Sitter] was a Congressional Medal of Honor winner, was our battalion commander.  I got a personal call from Carl Sitter and he said, "Sam [HistoryMaker Captain Samuel Saxton]," you know, he never called me that before, "where is your recommendation?"  And I said, you know, I really am not interested.  He says, "Are you defying the commandant's orders, Sam?"  No sir.  So I sent my thing in.  Lo and behold, when the decision was made, I was one of the first persons on that list to be commissioned.  I'd like to talk about it some time.  I became a white man and a officer and a gentleman all by act of [U.S.] Congress because the first time it came out, I was white on my direct--at any rate, as soon as I was commissioned, I went from Service Company to regimental headquarters, that's where they, all the recruits were trained and became the acting CO of regimental headquarters company.  The CO there was sick, they had nobody else and here I am a brand spanking new second lieutenant as the CO of this outfit.  The first sergeant of the company ended up taking my place over the service company, and it's ironic but he was killed in 'Nam.  Some young trooper put a grenade under his pillow and blew his head off, and I'm now running the brig [brigade] where this guy is.  At any rate, I commanded that outfit for a short time and then someone sent me orders, and I went to Vietnamese language school.  They were preparing me to be an advisor for a Vietnamese infantry regiment.  So I went to Vietnamese language school and I became pretty proficient in Vietnamese.  I'm not good at it now because I haven't practiced with it--
Speaker 1: Haven't used it.
Speaker 2: --for many, many moons.  When I got to the Third MPs [3rd Military Police Battalion], got into country, and like I told you I ended up in 2/9 [2nd Battalion, 9th Marine Regiment], and then came back, they were having a nightmare with the 3rd (Unclear) Brig.  The division MPs were running it, it was widespread maltreatment going on in the place, the kids that were running the joint were not well trained, and here we come into country along with this whole new company of MPs, and I had to train them at the same time as we were fighting during nighttime and working as cops during the daytime.  I spent a lot of time of patrolling the area because unbeknownst to us, the North Vietnamese had recruited an awesome amount of Chinese, and these were regulars so these were not conscripts, these were well trained troops.  They were all part of something called the Third Kuomintang, which were the Chinese troops that were poised outside of Qui Nhon [Vietnam] and My Tho [Vietnam].  They had fought the Japanese.  They were polished professionals, just like we were and they were not fighting us the way this guy with the black suit on and so I spent a lot of time patrolling the area and in combat with this new group and it's very interesting that I never heard of any reports that report who we were really fighting, sitting in there.
Story_ID: 371990
Speaker 1: The reason this was so important, where the brig [brigade] was located in Da Nang [Vietnam], was right out a place called Dog Patch, and it sat right next to a big mountain.  On top of the mountain we had artillery air things, okay, the ARVN [Army of the Republic of Vietnam] boot camp was sitting over here from us, okay, we had Amtracs, another group right here, there was a road that came up here and then we sat there which was one of the major egresses into Da Nang.  I don't know why we never put combat troops in there, but it was the main avenue and I knew that that was, having been trained infantry, I knew that that's where they were going to come.  So I spent a lot of time dissuading them from using that route.  The artillery people and the ammo dump was right behind me so I took 155 shells, buried them in the ground, in that whole area where I knew they were coming, put barbed wire around those rounds, put a fuse in them, and hooked them back to a hellbox so anybody's trying to come through there, I didn't have to see them, all I need to do is hear 'em.  I think that the enemy there knew that that's what I had done 'cause they were watching me.  There was an observation post just about, I say, a thousand yards, and I could see them with their glasses, watching every move we made.  This went on the whole time I was over there.  My friend, when I left, the guy that replaced me decided that he wasn't going to do that and Charlie [ph.] came right up that route and blew hell out of Da Nang and killed a whole bunch of people.  Yeah, and it was all because the fellow that came behind me didn't think it was important.
Speaker 2: How did you deal with all the stress?
Speaker 1: Oh, I think I have trained myself to be able to be intense in a number of things and put it down and pick it back up right where I left it.  I've always kind of been that way.  Responsibility isn't something new.  I think part of that was having to be responsible when I was a young person.  I don't take myself too serious, but if I decided I'm going to do something, I'm very intense at it.  I don't run very easy on anything.
Speaker 2: We'll talk more about that when we look at how you were attacked by certain people here in this county with regards to your directorship of the new jail.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's another example, I think, so we'll talk about that later.  Your Vietnam term ended when?
Speaker 1: Say again.
Speaker 2: Your Vietnam tour ended when?  When did you come back to Sylvia [Sylvia Truslow Saxton] and California and--
Speaker 1: I can't remember the exact date.
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: I was extended out in 'Nam because they were trying to find a replacement for me, and they were having a very difficult time doing that.  You know, it's not that many guys who really understand how to run these places, and it's not just any officer you can put in there.  So they finally got the replacement and, of course, the guy I just told you about him, but I was out there three months longer than the average person was.  You know, I'm, when I got back, I think that that's when I began to get that shake, you know, I don't, when I'm under pressure, I don't shake very much, I get cold and calculating, it is after, that's when I start crying.  I won't let somebody see me doing it but I have my moments.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 371991
Speaker 1: So tell me about coming back to your wife [Sylvia Truslow Saxton] and family at this point, came back to California.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what came next?
Speaker 2: Well, I was out in Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], that's where I was sent, and because of my experience in 'Nam [Vietnam], this was an era when military law enforcement was under the gun.  I'm telling you, it was something to behold.  The commandant cut orders, and I became part of an investigation of the Camp Pendleton correction facility [Marine Corps Base Brig, Camp Pendleton], and they were having escapes, the place was filthy, bad training, terrible buildings, and Esquire magazine and almost every newspaper was talking about the, how bad Camp Pendleton was.  I probably was the only trained law enforcement type that was on that investigation.  There were all kinds, I was the junior officer there.  I was captain at the time, all the rest were lieutenant colonels and colonels, and the, the head of that investigation was a provost marshal and a guy that I had known for a long time.  So, I stayed on that investigation about six months, and then I was ordered along with Bob Finney [ph.] to take the place over.  Bob was a major, I was a captain, so I became the operations officer at Camp Pendleton, and Bob took over as CO [commanding officer].  I can't tell you how stressful that was.  I was doing eighteen, twenty hours a day.  I had to leave my ID card so my wife knew what the heck I looked like.  We had riots, the whole thing, and it took me a little while, along with Bob, before we got hold of that and the way that occurred was something like this.  Bob had to go off on an emergency leave.  I ended up being the officer in charge of the place.  Company, we had five companies, these were all inmate companies, and C company was where all the riots always occurred, and they always start somewhere late Friday and they have their dance all the way to early Monday morning and it was, it was almost a ritual.  I broke that mess up by using this kind of a strategy, okay.  I know that people don't want to look that good when they go to court, so I got cameras and got me some qualified witnesses, surrounded company C, I already knew who the bad guys were in there and who the good guys, got me a react force and parked them off on the side somewhere, and then started to order these guys out one at a time and I specifically went after the weak-kneed guys first.  I got them out and as they walked out and then took the bad guys out last with the leader being the last guy and made him walk.
Story_ID: 371992
Speaker 1: During this period, I made all of the real problem young men come out one by one and made them walk about three hundred yards all by themselves.  I stripped them all of their facade.  They were walking in front of witnesses, they're walking in front of the camera and the ammunition that I told them, if you're going to call anybody MF, now say it loud enough so we can get it on camera.  If you're going to start a fight, just remember now, you're going to look good in front of the judge when all of this happens.  If you want to behave yourself, you just follow orders.  That broke up that whole crowd.  Didn't have any more trouble.  I learned a long time ago how to strip people that are playing games of their ability to win the fight, and I've used that a lot of other places, even later here in Prince George's County [Maryland].  It worked so well that the guy that was creating this tension there at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], ended up changing his whole life.  That guy ended up as a police sergeant in Los Angeles [California], you know, and I'm proud to say that we found a way to let him come back to his own reality.
Speaker 2: His name.
Speaker 1: Charles Johnson [ph.].  He became one of the best cops that Los Angeles had.
Speaker 2: Tell me more about this, your continuing work in this area.  How long did you stay in California?
Speaker 1: I was in, as the CO [commanding officer] and XO [executive officer] and ops officer for Camp Pendleton for about four years when I was sent to, overseas again.
Story_ID: 371993
Speaker 1: I went to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] and became the CO [commanding officer] of Motor Transport Maintenance Company.  Look, I don't know a doggone thing about that kind of work, but what was happening, Okinawa was, during that time, that there was a lot of racial tension in the [U.S.] military.  It started at Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], carried over into Okinawa, and for some reason the military never really understood what to do to break them, stop that kind of nonsense.  So I ended up in charge of Motor Transport Maintenance and later headquarters company, and we found that there were gangs over there that had actual ranks that they had set up.  Look, I had a three-star general that was part of the Okinawa Red Devils [Okinawa "Red Devils" Squadron] and we had the, some of the Hell's Angels.  They're people, you know how cliquish we can be.  So you had bars where only blacks could go, Koza [Okinawa, Japan], then you had places where only whites could go, and then you had the same thing right on the base itself.  So I ended up with another friend of mine, we did a study, and it was a misunderstood study at first because they thought that we were trying to do was to make a name for ourselves, but I spent a lot of time with the command there teaching them how to deal with this kind of activity.  They hadn't even recognized that they had this group that was doing that both on the base, they were tearing up the enlisted clubs, and I had one of the worst companies.  So what I did is that I got all the so-called leaders together and brought 'em into my office and I had a nice heart-to-heart talk with them.  I first told them that I know who you are, I know what you're doing, if you stop, then you'll be able to go home.  If you don't stop, then I guarantee you, you're going to go to Portsmouth [Portsmouth Naval Prison, Kittery, Maine] and you're looking at the guy that's going to lock your butt up, okay.  They thought that they were operating and nobody knew who they were, okay.  So we started to track 'em and the command really got serious about this, and I think that that was one of the catalysts that broke that mess up.  The same thing that's happening at Camp Pendleton as well.  You may recall that we had guys doing the so-called dap.  You had people who were fighting over hair 'cause this was during the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] era.  All of that was occurring in the military, and that was one of the other reasons of when I came back to the states, I ended up going right back to Camp Pendleton again.
Story_ID: 371994
Speaker 1: Coming back, again, to Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], how long did you stay there and what did you do at that point?
Speaker 2: I stayed in Camp Pendleton up through the early part of '75 [1975] when I was in an automobile accident.  I was living in San Diego [California], that's where my home was, driving back and forth, early one morning I was trying to get to work early because the way things go, somewhere around four o'clock, that's when all hell breaks loose and you can't get home 'til ten o'clock and all of that, or you get all the phone calls.  I wanted to get in to get my days work so I can get home early.  A young soldier was stationed at Fort Ord [California], high on grass, hit me in the back, into my car, threw me over into the divider, and when they carried me to the hospital, they told me I'd never walk again.  So I called mom [Mary Lou Patterson] and I said, "I can't walk."  Mom said, "You know what, you get off your ass and go do it.  You, that's just not the way we do things."  They almost court marshalled me for falling all over Balboa Hospital [Naval Medical Center San Diego, San Diego, California], but I was determined, I walked in and I'm going to walk out, and I did.  When I got out, I stayed in San Diego [California] for a while, looked around to see what I could do, as work, and I found that I had a skill.  I went down to Texas with the American Corrections Association [sic. American Correctional Association] and I floated a whole bunch of resumes.  I had twenty-one job offers in less than a month after I was there.  I took the one in Rockville, Maryland because of Larry Sanders.  Larry and I, you know, he was the [U.S.] Air Force guy, and Larry was quite a person.  He was a typical fighter pilot.  The way fighter--the psychology of fighter pilots is something like this.  They take off and go raise hell, when they come home, they want peace and quiet, and they have lots of confidence in whoever their ground crew is.  I became Larry Sanders' ground crew and went into Montgomery County [Maryland], and I, you know, the story there.  It wasn't until a little bit later, Prince George [Prince George's County, Maryland] was having a nightmare (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hold on, let's stay with--tell me more about the Montgomery County position now.
Speaker 2: Montgomery County--
Speaker 1: Well, that was your first corrections position here, here?
Speaker 2: That was my first civilian correction thing.
Speaker 1: That was your first, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I came through the door, the inmates there knew that I was the first black of any consequence in the place.  They heard that I was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, and they were trying to figure out how that they can handle me.  So they came up with this notion that they were starting a local newsletter and they wanted to inform all the inmates who I was.  What they really were trying to do was trying to figure out how to continue where they were going.  The place was filthy, dirty, so I told this collection of inmate leaders, as long as you make me look good, keep the place clean and all of that, I don't care who you mess with and how you do this or do that.  Within two weeks, that place was sparkling again, okay, and once it got really clean, I transferred every single leader in there to the state.  I had clean, the officers were back in charge, and as the last of those guys walked out, they said, "You're a slick S.O.B., aren't you?"
Speaker 1: You transferred them to a state facility?
Speaker 2: The state facility.
Speaker 1: Out of the county?
Speaker 2: Out of the county.  What had happened is that they had intimidated that command so much that they were staying local when they really ought to have been in the state long ago.  So I sent every one of them rascals on up to the state and then we got Montgomery County so that it really was a cleaned up place.  The officers loved it because now they were back in charge.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the facility again?
Speaker 2: The Montgomery County Detention Center [Rockville, Maryland].  I ran that for about eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years.
Story_ID: 371995
Speaker 1: What was your next move?  You left there--
Speaker 2: After I left Montgomery County [Montgomery County Detention Center, Rockville, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Why did you leave Montgomery County, let me ask you that way?
Speaker 2: Judge Skip McKee [Graydon S. McKee III], who is on the bench here in this county, visited with me over in Montgomery 'cause they were having a nightmare.  This place was referred to as the back end of the donkey.  It was just that bad.  Every kind of bad thing you could think of was going on in Prince George's County [Maryland].  It had made the papers.  It was under lawsuits stacked on top of lawsuits.  When Skip McKee came over, he saw some of the programs that I was running in Montgomery County, so he had recommended to the county exec that I be hired as the director.  They had two other blacks that had been here, I can't remember one of them but the other was Arnett Gaston.  Gaston really never had control of this place, neither did the other guy.  You had people getting beat in this county like terrible stuff.  Well, I met with John Wesley White who was the CEO of the county, and the county exec, it was Glendening [Parris N. Glendening].
Speaker 1: Glendening.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they asked me, "Who would you recommend to take over the place?"  I gave them four or five names of people that I knew were good and they said, "Well, what would it take to get you to come over?"  I said, "Well, support, and I want control of the personnel and I want you to get, keep the politicians off my back."  They said, "Well, what else do you," I thought they were going to tell me no.  So when I came over, I prayed on it, it was pretty well dictated to me as I talked to the almighty that there was a problem, and somebody made the statement that it can't be done and that's a heck of a thing to tell me because as soon as you tell me that, I'll go do it.  So I came over to Prince George's County, and my Lord, what a problem this place really was.  They had women locked up in a room about this size with all of the beds stacked around the walls, and you'd have thirty women in this place locked up with a key lock on the door.  It, a fire, there was no way that any of them could have gotten out of that.  You had rapes going on in there and the people that were in charge was the sheriff, and he could care less.  Any time there was something that went down wrong in Prince George's County, they'd bring out the fire hoses, and they didn't care who they kicked, and here we go, and I walked through the door (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many, how many people in the facility [Prince George's County Detention Center, Upper Marlboro, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: About nine hundred.
Speaker 1: Nine hundred.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Oh, they, the place smelled of pee.  There was graffiti everywhere.  The floors were just littered with even human stuff.  It was a mess.  So, when I first came in, I called the staff together, now remember now, this is a group where the sheriff had just broke off from the department and became the sheriff, and then you've got a department of corrections.  The sheriff had wanted to be the new director but he didn't have a degree in college and that's why he was not considered.  So what this gentleman did, when he got ready to break away from here, he hid the keys to the jail, locked all the inmates in their cells and walked away from the place.  The inmates tore Prince George's up.  The staff walked off in protest and the new guy that came in before me, fired all of them, but never followed the procedures.  So that's the situation that I walked into here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you faced.
Speaker 2: I have learned how to take an organization that has problems and turn it around.  The first thing that you've got to do is make them rethink what their priorities are and how they see themselves in all of that, and the way you do that is you make them step up to higher ground a little bit.  I made this group polish and clean 'til it came out of their ears, okay.  All of the floors got cleaned up.  All of the graffiti was taken out.  Got rid of all of that odor that was in and then started to work on the fatsos that were on the staff.  They had to clean their act up.
Story_ID: 371996
Speaker 1: Didn't you eventually close this facility [Prince George's County Detention Center, Upper Marlboro, Maryland] and build a new one?
Speaker 2: Yes.  While cleaning up one, we had to build toward the other, okay, and the way that occurred is that I had to go before public forums and convince them that they really needed to do something different.  It was a hard sell.  They knew my reputation, they knew where I was trying to go.  Well, the big thing is, is that I learned the secret of how to deal with people who are public figures.  Don't necessarily talk to them, I went to the ladies' garden clubs, and wherever they had large numbers of ladies that were associated with the decision makers, and tried to persuade them on what the needs were, and it worked because so many of the so-called politicians were finding it very difficult to stay at home without supporting where we were trying to go, and that was one of the strategies that I used.  The bottom line was this, the county exec knew that this place was a political ambush for him, he wanted it changed.  A lot of other folks knew that it needed to be changed and in order to convince them to accept the new generation jail, I took my worst critics, and I challenged them to go with me to California.  I carried them out to California, it was six of them, and I made sure that I was sitting with the worst of the worst.  Kept 'em up near the window and I talked that rascal all the way out to California.  When we got out to California, we went to a new generation jail and let them walk through.  When they came back, they said, "There will only be one built in Prince George's [Prince George's County, Maryland]," you know, in Montgomery County [Maryland], and they let me build that place.  It was a new generation jail in every sense of the word.
Speaker 1: When was that completed?
Speaker 2: Oh, when was that?
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] roughly?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '87 [1987] roughly.  It was not old wine, new bottle.  It was a new process, you know.  There has not been a riot in that place, there's been nobody raped, it's the way we designed the place.  We designed it so it enhances management, okay.  It's not only that but it's easy to clean, it's, it's as clean as a hospital, it's even today.  We did a lot of things to enhance the thing for the staff themselves, and when the new guys, or new inmates come in, there are two orientations that go on in Prince George's, even today, the one that we give 'em and the one that the inmates give and the one that the inmates gives is far more sophisticated than ours because here's what it basically says, that whatever you did at Lorton [Lorton Reformatory, Lorton, Virginia], you can't do it here, that these people are in charge, they know what they're doing, it's a tight ship, and the best thing you can do is to spend time understanding your problems, and they'll help you with it.  I did not try to enforce rehabilitation on anyone, I know better than that, but I do know this.  I can limit your options for those things that you know are wrong, I can make it easier for you to follow the right path, and I can stay steady, and if you want to call that rehabilitation, a whole lot of folks know they're wrong and want to change, so you make it easier for 'em to change.  If you don't want to change, then we'll deal with you another way.  One of the things that people will tell you is don't take what I call the bad news bears and put 'em all in the, in the same bucket, but that's exactly what I did.  If you put 'em all in one housing area and they are the people that prey on others, the people they've got to prey on is each other, and then this other group you can work with 'em.  I did a lot of study on how to classify and handle that kind of a group and it has worked like a charm.  We knocked our recidivism rate down by thirty points in two years.  We not only did that, but that place has never lost a lawsuit of any consequence.  I think the only one that I ever lost cost me two bucks.
Story_ID: 371997
Speaker 1: You did have some critics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s].  Was that around the old jail of a new jail?
Speaker 2: The new jail [Prince George's County Detention Center, Upper Marlboro, Maryland].
Speaker 1: You had some escapes--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and Glendening [Parris N. Glendening] all of a sudden wanted to go the other way and you had some other critics and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --tell us about that little rough period which you got through.
Speaker 2: Here's what really happened.  It's amazing, there was a story, I think you may have read it.  The press has a terrible habit of pitting one group against the other.  The newspapers are terrible about that kind of an attitude.  The escapes that we had, there was a local politician, her name's Sue Mills [Sue V. Mills].  Mills had determined that she was going to get rid of me the same way she had gotten rid of two other guys and to do that she had to attack me in a professional way.  She was afraid to do too much because of my war records, okay.  So what she did is that she salted the institution.  I had some name droppers that were putting every single thing.  Her overall goals was to get me out of there and put one of my deputies in charge.  This guy, when you read the article, it says that I (unclear) talked about the escapes.  I ain't (unclear) done nothing in my life.  What it was is that he saw these escapes and let it happen, and then called and told Ms. Mills, and boy did she ever enjoy that.  The long and the short of it was this, that the, one of the persons that she had used to be a spy, turned out to be the grand cyclops of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], not only was that the case but something else also occurred.  Mills got the union to have a demonstration out in front of the jail, the funny part of it was that the union was raping the county of money, and I knew it and some of the arguments was, what these guys were basically doing is working three days and getting paid for seven.  They would purposely call in sick and then it'd be your turn to get overtime and then they kept doing that, so you had guys that were making $30,000 a year, pulling in $80,000, and this is something that police do even today.  The games people, and because the election was coming up, the county was trying to get endorsed by the union and kept telling me that I had to cut loose.  Now you know, I didn't want to do it, I finally did, and it, you know, it didn't taste good at all.  So what else happened then, after they had the demonstration out in front of the jail against me, some of the local folk had a demonstration in my honor.  Ms. Mills sent me a note and told me I better not show up, and when she did, I put my [U.S.] Marine Corps helmet on and my cartridge belt and said, "This is going to be a damn good fight and I'm dressing the part.  You know, if you want me out of here, you've got to take me out here in a body bag 'cause I'm not running.  I haven't been pushed off a hill in my life.  You know, Japs didn't do it, Chinese didn't do it, and Ms. Mills, you're not going to do it," and that's exactly what happened.
Story_ID: 371998
Speaker 1: After this was all over, the place was accredited, it was inspected by folks all over, and within, what, three months later, I received the E.R. Cass Award [E.R. Cass Correctional Achievement Award], which is one of the highest awards you can get in corrections in this country.
Speaker 2: What was that name again, the--
Speaker 1: The E.R. Cass, it's given by the American Correctional Association and there's nothing bigger in corrections in this country.
Speaker 2: You had also received an award in 1986, the MacCormick Award [Austin MacCormick Award].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Tell me about that one because that--
Speaker 1: The MacCormick Award, I think that's the one for military leadership.
Speaker 2: Military Corrections Committee of America.
Speaker 1: Yes, the military corrections commission.  The facility that we built here in this county has been copied by five other countries.  England has patterned what they call their remand centers after the way we designed Prince George's County [Prince George's County Detention Center, Upper Marlboro, Maryland].  Australia has done it.  We had guests here from Russia, China, Japan, France, they just kept coming and all of it, what, the reason for it is this.  Your design can either make or break your management.  If the design is such that it enhances your ability to observe and control and do those kind of--then it's great.  If you make the old system, the Pennsylvania System, and there's something called the New York System where you can walk around and you never really have control of the place.  We fixed it so that we design each housing area where it accommodates the kind of guys we're going to put in it.  Take the guy that's got a mental problem.  You want a quiet, serene kind of a place and you want to make sure that the officers that are in there are conducive to that kind of a guy you're dealing with.  If you've got a place where everybody wants to be a badass, I did something even unique there.  One of the things that they hate is to have a woman tell 'em what to do.  So I got me, one of my officers was a lady, she was about in her mid-forties, she was a sergeant, I put her in charge of max custody and it blew their minds because she would come up to 'em and say, "Mama don't want you to be a bad boy in here, you do things right.  Won't you do that for me, son?"  And guess what happened?  They loved mom and none of 'em defied mom.  We had no fights and none of that kind of stuff in there.  The other thing that you hear, you know, nobody really thinks that jails can run right.  We don't expect them to be efficient now, and we also suspect that they have to be dirty, have to have all the roaches and all of that.  The other thing that we also think about them, is that everybody can use drugs anytime they want to in the place, okay, and we did something to even curtail that and it's still that way.  Everybody that comes in, I take all their clothes.  They don't take anything they brought with 'em into those cells, okay.  Most people will hide their drugs in their drawers, in the bottom of tennis shoes, all of that, and they have to cry like a baby when they find out we just washed all of that stuff and took their shoes and stored it and gave 'em our shoes.  In addition to that, if you manage to beat the system, we took drug dogs and ran them through that facility every so often, I mean routine.  So if you even got some in, how you going to keep it hid.  And then the other thing that I did is that I stopped selling cigarettes, okay.  Cigarettes are money, okay.  We had some guys, how one time they had smuggled some coke [cocaine] in and couldn't find a match nowhere in the place to smoke it because we didn't sell cigarettes so why you got matches.  So those kinds of things can be done and it, what it does is limits the ability for people to continue to be bad news bears.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 371618
Speaker 1: You have to backfill, if you, if you take away the cigarettes and all those kind of things, you've got to backfill that with some kind of positive program, and one of the things that surprised me is that we put together a parenting program and we gave it to the women.  The biggest complaints I was getting was from the men is that there were no parenting programs to them, and then I got to thinking about it.  You know, we say that raising children is one of the most important things but nowhere do we teach it, and for the men, almost everyone of 'em have two children.  With the women, most of the children are with grandmother.  With the men, they don't know how to be daddies.  So when we put those programs in [at the Prince George's County Detention Center, Upper Marlboro, Maryland], we had a large contingent of folks because they really were not getting along with their sons and they wanted to know something better.  In addition to that, we dealt with finances.  An awesome number of inmates have no idea how to deal with money.  So we put that kind of program, I use all those kind of enhancing programs so even if the guy was trying to be resistant, he looks over and he's got his friends going through these things that are going to make him better, we put a program in that was designed to help the guy that had a mental problem that we would hook him up with someone that can work with him when he went on the outside and, if so, you didn't have much of a problem in that area.  The other thing is that in the max area, we took all them goodies, you have guys bragging about how bad they are, you know, and I've been in max and I this, hey, I took out all the cigarettes, all the TV, there was nothing there.  So if you wanted to brag, you were absolutely naked in there because there was nothing there.  And the other inmates will say, "Man, you're stupid.  You're bragging about being in max, hey, but you got nothing going for you in there."  So you can do the psychological things with an awful lot of this and change the dynamic of it.  The other thing that was interesting, we started aftercare programs.  Now I heard a lot of people talk about aftercare but mine was a little different.  I went into the churches around Prince George's County [Maryland] and if you were a white dude coming out of confinement, I know that you probably live in that area.  So we went over and got the churches to work with us to transition guys that are coming out.  They had the choice on whether or not they would accept the guy and he had to sell himself, but it's amazing how many of the churches bought into this, and so a lot of these guys that used to come back all the time.  Then, of course, we had, what I used to call the winter crop.  This is that group that tries to get in jail just about the end of September or October, do just enough to get through the winter, and they try to get themselves released at or about April or May, and what they do, they come in for the food and the warmth and all of that and been doing it for years.  So I kind of broke that up too.  Hey, I got some folks to give me a whole bunch of Mackinaw jackets and those waterproof trousers and all of that.  Instead of bringing those guys in and letting them become the workers inside the joint, we put the Mackinaw jackets out and everywhere there was filth in this county that I can move, I use that same crowd.  It cut down my winter crop by 25 percent the first time and by the time it was over, we had about 50 percent less of you guys coming in because God knows, they got to go work and they don't want to do that.  And so those are the kinds of things that one can do to change the dynamic.
Story_ID: 371619
Speaker 1: You retired as the director of the Department of Corrections here in Prince George's County [Maryland], 1997, is that about right?
Speaker 2: About right.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the last eight or nine years.  What have you been doing in retirement, and what are you doing today?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I ever will fully retire.  I watched too many guys that come out of the [U.S.] military, because you know, the military takes a toll on your body.  I started to teach here at the community college [Prince George's Community College, Largo, Maryland].  I've been teaching over here for about that time.  I have been working on a couple of books.  I've had a dilemma.  There's a lot of work that needs to be done relative to the military and I'm still closely aligned with that.  I was the chair of the Marine Corps Council [National Marine Corps Council].  This is all of the major [U.S.] Marine Corps units.  I was the chair of that.  I was the president of Montford Point [Montford Point Marine Association, Inc.] probably longer than any other person.  So I've spent a lot of time with that.  I, one of my avocations is to study leadership.  I've been studying leadership now of about twenty years, and I've got a tremendous library dealing with that area, so I teach leadership here and some other places.  In addition to that, I am convinced that the next frontier for civil rights has got to be dealing with law enforcement.  All these other things that people talk about doing won't mean a thing if you don't really start to address that and you can't be addressed as another issue under another, you know, because this is just destroying, not just blacks, the whole country is having that kind of a problem because, for one thing, we don't expect law enforcement to work.  We gripe about it.  We don't expect jails to be effective.  We don't expect the system to work and yet if it doesn't work, the people that are paying the price are the young folk, whether white, black or otherwise, and I am convinced that that is not the way it has to be, it can be changed.  You know, it's got to be changed, and if we don't change it, I'm afraid that this country is in for a hell of a ride.  You know, as I said in that article I gave you, there is nothing that I see out here that says that God said that the United States will last for an eternity and perpetuity.  It's not out there.  So if we don't deal with this thing called criminal justice and deal with it effectively, what's going to happen to the United States?  And I'm very proud of my country but I am absolutely convinced that it needs a heck of a lot of leadership, it's got to have some education, and while I really am dedicated to my comrades I served with in the military, I think I'm going to spend my rest of my days dealing with this idea of criminal justice and what it really means, and I'm not talking about the lockup-itis that I see.  I'm not talking about just being a super duper liberal, I'm not saying that at all.  I am saying that we simply are a nation of strangers, and we better learn how to live together and the only way you do that is that somebody's got to start writing it.  There are no black criminologists that I know of any consequence.  I don't think there's any Chinese that I know, or Jewish.  Almost every one of the guys that write about criminal justice are right-wing conservatives, and their attitude is coming directly out of the classical school that says that the only way to deal with this whole thing is lock the mothers up but they don't mean that for themselves nor do they mean it for their kids.  So that's where I pretty much am on this issue right now.
Story_ID: 371620
Speaker 1: --Let me come back to the Montford (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Montford Point.
Speaker 1: --Point Marine Association [Montford Point Marine Association, Inc.] because, once a Marine, always a Marine--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you've even established a chapter of the association in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] but tell me about your involvement and the work of the Montford Marine Point Association [sic.] today.
Speaker 2: The Montford Point Marine Association has about twenty-six chapters throughout the country.  It works well sometimes and not so well other times.  It's like a lot of other organizations, it depends on the quality of the leadership at the time that it is there.  You have got some real heroes in this organization that have never been recognized.  You have individuals that have done some tremendous work for kids.  There's a guy that built about twenty-six homes for wayward kids that's a member of the organization.  One of the guys, he's dead now, but he was in the Legal Hall of Fame because of his volunteer work.  You have to take it from this perspective.  None of us that came into the [U.S.] Marine Corps early on were expected to be successful, and because of this very strict selection criteria, they got a first class group of people that they thought were going to fail and never did.
Speaker 1: In fact, they were going to deactivate the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --Montford [Camp Gilbert H. Johnson, Jacksonville, North Carolina] trained people at the end of World War II [WWII], is that correct?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it went on to become a premier organization.  It's not known very well and that's pretty much our fault.  I guess what I'm saying is that you'll hear a lot more about Montford Point.  A lot of folks don't realize that we have served in every single combat place that the Marine Corps has been in the last fifty years other than the, was it Guadalcanal?  We weren't there, Peleliu, there's a group called the Black Angels of Peleliu.  The last Battle of Iwo Jima was pretty much black Marines.  Now, we're not hung up on this black Marine thing.  What I'm saying is, a Marine's a Marine, you know, I'm as much a Marine now as I was when I was on active duty, but the thing that we are now beginning to deal with is how to tell our story and how to become even more effective in support of our communities.  We are very strong in that area.  We have seen some fantastic advances in the corps itself.  You've got a whole slew of black generals that you never had before.  None of these guys were there simply because they were black, because we refused to allow that to be our criteria.  You better be good and if you happen to be black all the well.
Speaker 1: Be sure you send us the names and addresses of these individuals--
Speaker 2: I will definitely do it.
Speaker 1: --on the back page of the questionnaire.  I'll give it to you.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Frank Petersen [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.] was the first pilot.  You've got a guy that I've already given you the name, a guy by the name of Brooktoe Robinson, Archie Robinson, is one of the fightingest guys.  You want to talk about Sergeant York [Alvin York], you ought to right next to that talk about Brooktoe Robinson.  Brooktoe was in the 7th Marines [7th Marine Regiment] in Seoul [South Korea].  The South Koreans that were on our flank, bugged out, left that flank wide open.  So they were ordered to pull back and retie the lines in.  When they pulled back, there were some guys that didn't get the word out of his company still in their fighting positions with the enemy coming this way.  Brooktoe Robinson took an automatic rifle, went back up to get his troops out, fought his way through two platoons, and this is one guy now, fought his way through two platoons just to chew butt because these guys didn't carry out his orders, got hit, was carried over to graves registration in a body bag, the kids loved this man so much that they went over and unzipped him just to pay their respect and he breathed on their hand, okay, and they got him out, carried him over to e-med and his first thing that he comes out is, "What took you SOBs so long to get me out of that bag?"  Now that's the kind of a Marine he was.  The same basic kind of thing happened with Iwo Jima where it was, the service troops, they had to take on an advancing group of Japanese because the combat troops had left and, incidentally, they had a written, not published, order that black troops were not to be in active engagement with the Japanese soldiers but yet at the very end, it was this group that kept the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps] from getting totally annihilated out there.  These are the kind of stories that are out there.
Story_ID: 371621
Speaker 1: I think we've come down to our wrap-up questions at this point, and let me ask you, is there anything else that you'd like to add to your HistoryMaker [The HistoryMakers] interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: No, other than I am very pleased that one, I could participate in this, and two, that it is being done.  I think that this nation of strangers will change with programs like the one that you all are generating right now.  What else would I like to see?  I'm troubled by what is going on around us with respect to our country.  I don't like what I see.  I am feeling that we need to do some different things in what we're doing.  I hope that that's what I saw happen in the last election.  You know, I've been in three different wars, I still feel for this country.  I would like to see us working together much closer and I don't like BS regards of what paint job it has.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have led your life?
Speaker 2: I've led a dedicated life and I feel good about it.  I've done some things that were not good and I've done some things that were good.  I've had my detractors and I've had my supporters, but all in all, I've been kind of faithful to God, country and my family and my corps [U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done in the past, as you reflect back, that you might have done differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that the one thing that bothers me sometimes, I've been really dedicated to the [U.S.] military, and you cannot have that kind of dedication without, you know, the bag only holds so much.  I think that one of the areas that I have not done well had to do with my children.  You know, I was gone during the time that they needed me a lot.  I probably could have done it different but I'm resigned to understand that some of the problems that they had were because I was not available.  So I think that's one of them.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's true of a great many of us in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --different ways.  Is there anything that you still want to do during your lifetime that you have not yet done, maybe even outside of the area of corrections reform and teaching, anything else you'd like to do that--
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say that there is something that I hope God will allow to happen.  My wife [Sylvia Truslow Saxton] has been disabled for some time.  You know, one of the reasons why I stopped being the director [of the Department of Corrections, Prince George's County, Maryland] is that I simply had to take care of her.  You know, she had, and a lot of this was driven by my work, she had an aneurysm in her eye, she had a stroke, and this is during the time that Mrs. Mills [Sue V. Mills] was operational.  She has recovered a great deal, and I'm still working with her to be able to, and I want her to be happy.  So that's one of the things that I need to, you know, need to do more.  You know, I can do all the cooking now and a lot of that, is not that I like washing dishes, I hated that long ago, but it's one of the things that I have to do now, so I just do it.
Story_ID: 371622
Speaker 1: What else would I like to do?  I plan to do some writing and I'm going to do that writing and it will be in the area dealing with law enforcement most likely.  You know, I believe that I have a story to tell.  I think I have some insights into the cause of this, and I'm not looking for fame.  You know, I've got enough ribbons to be MacArthur [Douglas MacArthur] and I don't need to worry about it anymore.
Speaker 2: One last question.  How would you like to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 1: I wrote that one time.  I said that if you want me to tell you what should go on my gravestone, that here lies a United States Marine.  He was faithful to his family, to God and his country.  Semper fi [semper fidelis].
