Story_ID: 21788
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: James Priest, P-R-I-E-S-T, Priest, Shoffner, S-H-O-F-F-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: And, sir, is there a story behind your middle name Priest?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was told by my parents that my father's sister gave me that middle name, and I, I never was sure of why, but she did want, she insisted on giving me a middle name.  And they let, they let her, let her have a go (laughter) at it, and that's what she gave me.  She was, I met her, you know, after I came into my own sense of, of awareness.  And she was a very, very fine person, very lively and just, for her, for that time, a very industrious and aggressive lady.  She was a school teacher, taught school at a time when, you know, all you had to do was finish high school or some of 'em hadn't finished high school in some of the places that they taught.  But she was, she was a very industrious and aggressive person for that time, for that period.
Speaker 1: And what was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Floyd, you know, I--she wasn't, she wasn't my father's full sister, native, full-born or they weren't--I don't think they were related.  She was his stepsister.  And her, now, I don't know whether her name, the name that I know was Floyd Talbert.  I don't know whether that was her birth name or whether that was her married name.  But that's, that's the only name I have for her, Floyd, Floyd Talbert.
Speaker 1: Okay, F-O-L--F-L-O-Y-D, Floyd?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, that's an unusual name.  I would ask her the same thing question.
Speaker 2: For a lady.  You know, I'm not sure that that's the way it always spelled.  I also remember seeing F-L-O-Y-E, Floye.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but she was a, for her, for her, for that time and for that period, she was a very, I don't wanna say aggressive.  I would say creative and outgoing person.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 14, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And place of birth, I was, on my birth certificate, which I didn't get until I was seventeen years old, it lists New Madrid, Missouri.  But I didn't come to New Madrid until I was about two years old.  I was actually born on a cotton plantation, a very large cotton farm, probably about 2,000 acres.  And what was called, what was, it was near what, it was near Tiptonville, Tennessee which was right across the river from New Madrid, Missouri or the place was also called New Madrid Bend because it was at the bend of the Mississippi River as it, as it made, as the Mississippi River comes through there on its way down South, of course.  And so there was a, there was a deep bend there, and they, and they called that New Madrid Bend.  But it, the, where the river bent on one side was Tennessee; on the other side was New Madrid.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna get back to New Madrid, I guess, and what the implications of that are, you know, because there are scientific implications to New Madrid.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm a retired research chemist.  The most recent activity I had as a, as an activity was after I retired, and that goes back to 1993, I was, I was an, oh, I went down to the Columbia College, was invited to come down there.  And I spent about, oh, ten years at Columbia College in the Science Institute at Columbia helping out Dr.--you'll have to excuse me right now.  I'm a little tired, I guess, Dr. Zaferlermyer invited me to come down and help her out.  And I did that.  She was, was the, a very distinguished professor of chemistry who developed the Science Institute at Columbia College.  And she knew that I was retired, and we had known each other for about, oh, twelve years.  And so she wanted me to come down and help her out, which I did after I retired from my research career, which I, the last part of which I spent about thirty years at, at Allied Signal Company.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter), April 18, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're downtown Chicago, 19, what, 19-something [1900] South Michigan?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 21789
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) that's a hard one.  I truly love chitterlings, but I can't eat 'em very much 'cause they're too fat, (laughter) fattening, but I, I eat just about anything.  I guess that has to do with growing up the way I did.  You had to eat just about anything to get by (laughter).  So I don't have any real, true thing that I can say is something that I just have to have.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, fall, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always did love the fall, I love the fall weather and sports.  I, I grew up really enjoying sports, although I couldn't, was never much of an athlete in my own right.  I always enjoyed watching or listening to--I grew up listening to sports.  That was a part of what inspired me and kept going, I think, at that time, in my life in growing up.  Growing up was, you know, kind of tough down in, in Missouri at that time, but I enjoyed playing sports and although, there was no TV then, I used to, I used to love listening to the radio, loved to listen to the broadcast of baseball and football.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm gonna ask you about that a little later, but do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A favorite vacation?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Place or what--
Speaker 1: Yes, destination, yes.
Speaker 2: Destination, oh, okay.  I didn't hear that last line.  Not really, never, never did much vacationing per se, as such, that is, formal vacation.  I guess after we got, after I married, my wife and I took what might be considered vacations, but usually that was traveling to see one of our families.  I sometimes attached a, a little bit of time onto a meeting. This was after I had grown up and had a profession, and then, which I, being a research chemist, I, I went to many national meetings to hear, to listen to the papers that were being present or once in a while to present something of my own or to, to lead a session at a national meeting.  Occasionally, I did that once in a while.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite place to go though?
Speaker 2: No, I guess the place that, the places that I enjoyed most were usually the San Diego was a, always a good place, San Diego and San Francisco on the coast.  New York was always a fine place to go and take part in a meeting in New York.  That was all--I always looked forward to that.  And that was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, never thought about it, (laughter) so I don't guess I do (laughter).
Story_ID: 21790
Speaker 1: Okay, well, look, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'm gonna ask about 'em separately so we don't get 'em mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Virginia Thomas.
Speaker 1: And can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: T-H-O-M-A-S, Virginia, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A, last name Thomas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was her unmarried name.
Speaker 1: And her married name was Shoffner?
Speaker 2: Shoffner, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, Shoffner.
Speaker 1: And, okay, so what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know her exact date of birth. She was always rather secretive about that and never told us what date it was. I know it was June 14th.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was older than my father, and I think that had something to do with her keeping that a secret. It didn't make us any difference, of course, but she never, never told us. I never knew her exact year of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you guess?  I mean would you have a guesstimate about--
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Do you have any kind of guess, any kind of idea as to what, when it was you think she--were you born--
Speaker 2: My guess is she was about ten years older than my father and that she was probably born around 1890, 1889, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Eighteen ninety [1890].  Okay, alright.  Now, where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Marvel, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, M-A-R-V-E-L?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-V-E-L, Marvel.  I think that's the way it's spelled.  It might be, there might be two L's in it.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?  Any stories?
Speaker 2: I don't know very much about either side of my family.  I met some, some cousins, my, my mother's nephews who were from Marvel.  But I knew none of her people.  I knew, there was an uncle who was my mother's brother who died when I was about, oh, let's see, he died in '35' [1935].  So that was, I was about seven years old.  My father who was from Obion, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna get to him in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we're trying to get your mother's side.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay, alright, alright, but I, I just don't know much about that.  It's something that I do plan to do some searching to find out more.  I would like to know more about my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story, is Marvel, Arkansas anywhere near New Madrid?
Speaker 2: Marvel is about twenty miles across, you know, it's near Memphis.  It's right across the river from Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went down there about, oh, it must have been about--it was before my brother died.  He took me over there.  It's about twenty five, thirty miles from Memphis [Tennessee], on the, across the Mississippi River from Memphis.  And I, I did go there, but I still had some cousins there who were my, my wife's [mother's] brother's children.  And I have met some of, a couple of them, at least of them I've met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's about the extent of my relationship and knowledge of family on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 21791
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Virginia Thomas] have any stories about growing up? Do you know if she grew up on a farm or in the town?
Speaker 2: No, it was a farm, it was a farm from what I can tell that her, her father and mother did, were farmers.  And she used to talk about working on the farm, about doing really hard work in terms of chopping wood and cultivating crops and, and those kind of things. I think she was the older, I think she was the oldest child in the family. And so she, she was--talked about, talked proudly about the hard work she did growing up, you know. And that was, that was what, that was what children did in those days. I mean they grew up, if you were on a farm, you did farm work, you know. And so she, she talked about that, and talked about her brothers and sisters and her mother and father. But they were all dead, with the exception of her brother.  And he died in 1935.
Speaker 1: Now, did they own their own land there?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I don't know.  She never said whether or not they owned the land that they lived on.  She just talked about how she had to work, work on it and how, how hard she worked growing up and that sort of thing, which was, was common.  That was the way children, children grew up working.  If you were on the farm, you did farm work.
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you this.  Did, is there a story about how she--well, did she--she left Marvel at some point, but is there a story about how she left Marvel or why she left?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't know as to why.  She left with her son who was, you know, he was, was born in 1910, and they left there as people, as this was, this was a part of getting by, of making a living during those days, you know, part of the Great Migration, you know, that we talk about and have read about and has been written about.  She moved up somewhat North at the, right off of--and somehow or another, they wound up near the, near the place where I was born, you know, near the place where she met my father.  And they must have left there, you know, in the early '20's [1920s] some time.  And as I say, that was during the period when there was a lot of movement, and a lot of migration.  And that's where they met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, your mother had a baby in 1910, this is your brother, your older brother, I guess.
Speaker 2: He's my older brother, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you mother have a chance to go to school in Marvel or finish school?
Speaker 2: You know, I, yeah, she must have gone to some, you know, some kind of school because she could read and write very well.  And I, she probably went to the level of school that they had there for, for blacks at that time, which was, you know, sixth, fifth or sixth grade, something like that.  That's about the limit of schooling that existed for black children at that time.
Story_ID: 21792
Speaker 1: Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Andrew Anderson Shoffner.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's August--I'm not sure of the exact date in August.  It's around the 16th or 17th, 1890--I wanna say, let's see, when he died, he died in 1981, and I think he was 82 then.  I don't have that right in my--
Speaker 1: Well, it's 1899, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's about--
Speaker 1: About 1899, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that was it, around '89' [1889], I mean '99' [1899].
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, where was he born?
Speaker 2: Obion, I'm not sure how it's spelled.  It's either O-B-I-N-E or O-B-I-O-N, Obion--it might be Obion, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your dad's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I knew his father, and his father was the only grandparent that I knew.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: James.  I was named for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's James Shoffner.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: Laborer, whatever he could find to do, farm, farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories from this side of the family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather, I think he would have been a wonderful source if I, if he had lived because we were very close, even though I was young when he died.  I was four years old when he died.  And, but I just remember a lot of things that took place between me and him.  And it was a great loss for me when he died because he really, he was very protective of me (laughter).  He didn't, I didn't get much punishment from parents while he was around (laughter) because he would always step in and "leave, yawl leave that boy alone", you know, (laughter), that sort of thing.  So that was a great loss for me when he died, but he was the only, the only grandparent that I knew of.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your--now, your father was born in Obion, Tennessee, is that near where you were born in Tiptonville?
Speaker 2: No, well, I don't know how, what the actual distance is.  It's probably at least a hundred miles away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of the--it's a small--it might not be that far.  You know, I said I'm going, that one of these days, it's, it's, you know, it's still there, still on maps and still listed in the index, you know.  It's one of those small, rural, country towns.
Speaker 1: Now, did your dad grow up there?  Did he grow up in Obion?
Speaker 2: It sounds like he did.  I don't know exactly how old he was when he left, but I think he grew up and went to school around there, you know, until he came of age.  He--now, wait a minute.  What was the question about, my dad or my grandfather?
Speaker 1: Oh, your dad.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, he must have grown up around there and probably, I didn't get a chance to talk to my dad a lot about his upbringing and stuff.  He was beginning to talk as he, after I had gotten, you know, grown up myself.  And as we would meet, we would talk about certain aspects of his background.  I do know that he, during that migrating period when blacks were, you know, leaving he did, he did go to, I believe Pittsburgh--I think he went up into Pennsylvania somewhere, Pittsburgh, and got a job working in the steel mill and worked for a while in the mill until he, something happened.  And he had a little accident, an accident of some sort, and so they let him go.  And he came on back South and I guess he must have wound up then over in, on the Tennessee side in, in, near New Madrid.  And that's where he met my wife--my mother.  And they must have met in the, somewhere in the early '20's [1920s] because they got married, it was, they got married around 1923, 1924, I'm not sure of the exact date 'cause my sister was born in 1925, and I was born about two and a half years later.
Story_ID: 21793
Speaker 1: Now, did your dad [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] get a chance to go to high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He probably, they probably had about the same degree and level of education. My father was a minister. He, I think he became a minister and was ordained after he was married to my mother [Virginia Thomas]. And so he, most of his teach, his learning was not formal. He probably had about, about a grade school education which is what was given at that time around six or seven, seven years of education at the school that they usually attended three or four months out of the year between crops, between cultivation and gathering of crops. And, but he, well, he taught himself a lot because he read a lot. He kept books around the house, other than, you know, in addition to the bible and religious books that he had. And we, we began very early, when I say early, I'm talking about my own life. When I became aware of it myself, to take and to gather books, to take newspapers and magazines of various, various descriptions. Some of them were religious, but others were not. They were just news magazines. And that had a lot to do, of course, with my own education because as soon as I was able, I was able to read these. And I read whatever was there. We didn't have any formal, formal library or no library cards. Blacks were not, although the little town, the town of New Madrid [Missouri] had a library of sorts, we were not allowed to use that. We couldn't go there, and it wasn't much to it anyway. But whatever they had, we could not use. Our, our school did not have a formal library. We had the books that they, that they got, which they handed out. And these were usually were leftovers or hand-me-downs from the, from the white school in the area. But my father was, was very ambitious in seeing to it that, to the best that he could, that books and newspapers and magazines were available for us. That had a lot to do with my growing up and becoming aware of the world that I lived in and the life that I was leading and about to lead, to grow into.
Story_ID: 21794
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions, their habits, their hobbies, their looks even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably, oh, I don't know. You know, I got something from both of them. I'm probably more, more of my father [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] because he was, was more aggressive and outgoing, and made his--and in order to make his way in the world, he had to be that way, and he, he had a lot--his behavior, a lot of that became a part of me, in myself. I also got a lot from my brother. I mentioned him early on. My wife's--my mother's [Virginia Thomas] son who, who was born before she married my father. He had a lot to do with my upbringing. He was about eighteen years older than I. But he took, took it upon himself to carry me around with him. You know, when he was twenty five, I was seven or eight or six or seven. And, but he would let me follow him around, more so than my father would. And so I, I got a lot of who I am from him.
Story_ID: 21795
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest.
Speaker 1: Could you sit back a little bit, please?
Speaker 2: The earliest memories that I have of my childhood are in the cotton field. I grew up picking cotton, and I can remember being in the field and growing up in a cotton field. And when I was very, very young, a lot of the things that stuck in my mind, that stick in my mind, come from the cotton field. Other memories come from church. My father [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] insisted that we attend church, we go to church, and he would take us, of course, to church. And one of the things I remember which stuck with me so much is that every, each year we would have programs for children in the church. And at, they would call, they would call on the children to come up and speak and say their recitations. And someone said, they would call you by name, and I heard James, and I didn't listen for the rest of it. I took off. So I went up and said my speech, but I wasn't supposed to be up there. But then I recognized it, and took off running (laughter) and running back to my mother [Virginia Thomas], when I realized that I wasn't supposed to be up there. But I had already said the speech then (laughter). So, anyway, that's the way I grew up. I grew up in church very much so. I was, we went to Sunday School, and we was Baptist so it was Baptist Training Union. And one thing that I remember which really did stick with me, and it made a, it made a great impression on me, and had a lot to do with who, with the person I became, was the kind of leadership roles that they gave you in the church. And so when I was fifteen years old, I was the Sunday School Superintendent, which was, you know, usually, that's a much, that's an older person's, that's something they'd do. That's something very mature adults do. But at fifteen, I was running the Sunday School, the service for the Sunday School.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What's the name of your church? What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Mount Olive Missionary Baptist Church in--now, this was in New Madrid [Missouri], New Madrid.
Story_ID: 21796
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why don't they say Madrid there?
Speaker 2: No, they don't. New Ma-dred.
Speaker 1: They call it New Ma-dred, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't hear anything about Madrid until after I had grown up (laughter) and then I heard people calling it Madrid. And I would say New Ma-dred, and they wouldn't know what I was talking about (laughter).
Speaker 1: I guess that's like we have a Versailles, Ohio and a Llama instead of a Lama (ph.). So I guess that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Versailles, Versai (ph.), yeah, yes, (laughter).
Speaker 1: So the locals wanna call it Ma-dred, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. They have their, yeah, well, naturally, locals are gonna have their own name (laughter), that they know it by.
Speaker 1: Now, that's--I hate to find fault in where someone lives, but New Madrid's on the fault, right, the big fault?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the, the earthquake fault.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you experience earthquakes growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a geological wonder, the fault there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, shakes, um-hum. Yeah, you, you would feel the earthquakes. I didn't know what they was at first, and the reason because nobody talked about it. And when, I don't know whether they were ashamed of it or afraid of it. And when it was brought up, you know, about twenty five or thirty years ago when it became really, nationally, well known, they denied it then and didn't want, they didn't want to have anything to do with it. Now, they have embraced it, and so the last time I was down there which was about ten years ago, I went down on the levy as I usually do. They have a large levy there to keep the river back, and they have a display at the, on the levy, right at the foot of the downtown area. And the levy rises up, maybe thirty or forty feet, and there's a display of, of stories on signs, brackets, bracketed signs telling about the past history of the town and about the earthquakes. So there's a, they have embraced it now. But they used to, they wouldn't, they never talked about it. We knew that buildings would shake, that our house would shake. But nobody, you know, it wasn't written and nobody said anything about it. But now, they have finally embraced it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So they're telling the story.
Story_ID: 21797
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe where you grow up? Did you grow up in New Madrid [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you grow up in a house or in the country--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --was it in the country or a farm or--
Speaker 2: No, it was in a town, it was in the town, and the town is right in the--it's surrounded, the town was surrounded by cotton fields. And at that time, it was a very, it was very rural and very country. There was very little running water or indoor toilets. Nobody had that except a few well-to-do people, you know, who had, who had very nice homes. Most people had out houses and water pumps, you know, up and down pump where you would go and pump your water. But now, that's no longer true. The, the town now has running water, and it has restrictions on how much livestock you can raise in the town. We used to raise pigs, and my father had cows which we milked, you know, and as did others too, you know. They raised, raised pigs, chickens and stuff and, and in town, but that's, they can't do that now. It's different. Life's different.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how big a house did you live in?
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't a big house. We had, it was a little frame shack, oh, three, about three rooms. It wasn't much of a house, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, was it like in a shotgun mode with a first--
Speaker 2: No, no, it was, it wasn't shotgun. It was a, but it was close. You know, if it had been straightened out (laughter), it would have been. But, no, it wasn't, it wasn't what you would call a shotgun house. We, we, when we came into town, we rented that house from, from a lady. She was black, and it was not unusual. That was the kind of house they had in town for, not only blacks, but white people too. And the overall economic level of the town was not--well, it wasn't what you would call middle class in terms of their, the wages and so forth. It was the middle of the Depression and not, nobody was what you would call well off. There were some, some white people who owned lots of land, big landowners who lived there. But whites, a lot of whites and blacks were not doing well. It was, we moved I into that house and that town in the early 1930s and lived there for a good while, until we bought another house which was also frame, but much better, about, oh, ten, twelve years later, around 1942. We bought a very nice house that was, that had been owned by the principal, the principal of the black high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question. Oh, before I ask that, how many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a brother and two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I am, I was next to the youngest. My sister was, I had a young sister who is still living, myself, an older sister who passed about a year ago, and an older brother. He was my mother's son. That was the one I was telling you about who meant so much to me growing up because he, he was much older and had lots of experiences which he shared with me. And he didn't go, get a chance to go to college himself, but he wanted me to go, us to go, all of his younger sisters and his brother. He made certain that all of us did to a very, I mean he was very important in that respect.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Homer--
Speaker 1: Homer, okay.
Speaker 2: --Turner.
Story_ID: 21798
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my. Sounds, hog killing time, hog-killing time. It, you know, it was cold in the wintertime, and we butchered hogs. You'd hear those screams, and it--sports, basketball games, foot--basketball tournaments. I used to, I didn't play very much basketball myself, but I used to love it, used to love to--it was, one of the real, real joys of going to high school was that schools were separated and segregated. But that's where most of my real joy is associated with going to school. And they weren't the best of places, when you think about it, and how they were segregated, how they only operated for a certain period of time. They, they shut down the black schools for, at a certain time during the year for farm work, you know, cotton-picking time, and, but yet, when you were there, you always felt wanted. You felt that that was a good place to be. And so the sporting events that were associated with that were some of the, some of the really great, great times.
Story_ID: 21799
Speaker 1: Now, any other sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: I don't know. It doesn't come to mind. Those are the ones that come to, immediately, and I guess I have to, have to mention the sounds that I got from, from church 'cause I spent so much time in church growing up, you know, because of my father [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] who was a minister. And, you know, when I look back on it and reflect on it, it wasn't, it was a good place to be. It really meant a lot for my life, and I think it was the church music, the singing. We, we didn't have a choir, and we didn't always have a, have pianist in church. But the A'cappella singing, the hymns, they stick with you, you know. You just, I can still hear it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: No, not really, "Nearer My God to Thee", that comes to me. Nah, I can't pull. It's just, I can't pull a favorite, a tremendous favorite out. But there was so much involved in the sense that school singing was also important. But the choir in school, the music that they had in school, they sang a lot of, a lot of the music from the school choirs was black spirituals that they, that they would sing. So, and in a way, that's a part of, of, one of the benefits, if you wanna call it that, of growing up in a segregated society is that the rich spiritual music that comes out of that, which becomes a part of who you are and means so much to you. Still to this day, you can hear that, you can hear those songs.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, did your father, did he become a reverend while you were growing up or had he already--
Speaker 2: No, he had already become a reverend before I was born. He was a, he was a minister before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother [Virginia Thomas] take an active role in the church as well?
Speaker 2: Not as such, no. She was, my mother was, she wasn't as outgoing or as expressive as he was. She was much more reserved, much quieter and so they were not a team in that regard.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know oftentimes the wife of a pastor has really got to get in that church because (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oftentimes, oftentimes, you do see that, but not with her. She, she would go, you know, attend church occasionally, but she was, that was, that was not her calling.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she very religious at all?
Speaker 2: Not in the sense, she was religious, but in a quiet fashion, quiet way.
Story_ID: 21800
Speaker 1: Did you have any special things that you liked to do as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I spent a lot of time to myself, you know. A lot of the time I--I loved to play, play games, which we did with the ball, with, you know, with boys and girls, all growing up. We, we would--we didn't have much so we had to sort of develop our own, I mean it wasn't no playgrounds or anything around there. We spent a, we spent a lot of time working. And we worked in the fields quite a bit. Just about all of the young people that I grew up with had to work, had to do something to help out with their existence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so a lot of the time was spent working, working in fields.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would you get paid for your work, I mean or was it to help out the family or what?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd get, my father [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] got the money. I mean all the money went to him. He would take it, you know, we'd work as a family, and then they would pay him for it, pay him off, and, you know. And he would, my father wasn't very (laughter), he wasn't very honest, unfortunately. But he would tell us that he was going to give us a certain portion of what we earned. And my sister, both my sister and I were good, hard workers. But oftentimes that never showed up. He would, time would come for, as we approached the holiday or something, and we would ask him for it. And he would just, just brush us off. So we, it did make a difference in how I felt about him, you know, over time. But I, I didn't dwell on it. I went away at seventeen to go to college, and then went in the army soon after that, spent a year and a half in the army.
Story_ID: 21801
Speaker 1: Where did you start elementary school? In that school--
Speaker 2: Where or when?
Speaker 1: Yeah, at O'Bannon School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a grade school and the, grade school and high school were, you know, together. They were one.
Speaker 1: I take it for granted, you were probably a good student, but tell me. Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: About a, yeah, yeah, well, I was, I was what they called bright (laughter), you know. I mean you were smart. I did okay, and during my grade schools years, I was promoted twice, which meant two grades, two grades a year. So, so I passed up some of my colleagues. And actually, that helped me to get, to get out of high school and unfortunately, it--as I look back on it, it caused some, some conflict with my sister. You don't look on it that way then. But I know it did because I finished high school at the same time she did. And she was two and a half years older than I. She, you know, I was, was better at doing school work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was also smarter in getting my, you know, in, I was, I had a higher IQ than she did (laughter), okay, or whatever. I don't, and you know, you don't think about those things then. Parents don't think about 'em either. As a matter of fact, they're part of the problem. They tell the bright kid that he is the brightest one. You're much smarter than she is, (laughter), you know. And they say that right in front of her, right in front of her or him or whatever. They didn't know. They didn't know that they were hurting her at that time. And we got along well, always did, but later in life, you know, it crops up, it comes up.
Story_ID: 21802
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess at different times, you would have, but in grade school, I by and large fell in love with all my teachers, you know, (laughter). They were beautiful, to me, they were beautiful women, and they always treated me very nice. I was always one of their favorites. They, teachers always will lean toward kids who are bright and industrious. And they don't, whether they intend to or not--they usually don't intend to, but they will give them more of their time, more of their attention, more of their love. It's just, they just do it. I mean they have to work hard not to do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you like a teacher's pet in school?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say "teacher's pet".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, no, I don't think any of them ever were like that. I mean they, all the teachers I ever had, I considered to be fair, you know. I never was a pet. But I knew that, I got the benefit of the doubt, you know, if there was anywhere that they wanted to send somebody to represent them or to represent the class, I knew that I was going to be the one that they would send, you know. So, I know that, well, when I was in, I believe it was the sixth, it was the sixth grade, they had a county-wide spelling contest. And, so originally they had chosen another, another person, a young girl. But just the day before we were supposed to have, we were going to have the contest, she picked me out and said, you're going. Well, that, that was the first spelling contest I ever, I ever won. It was a county-wide spelling contest where, must have had about a dozen kids, all black. And so I, I was chosen to represent our, our class and our school and felt pretty good after I, you know, I won the spell down (laughter). Those things mean a lot to you at that time, and you never do forget 'em. You can always go back to them and think about them.
Story_ID: 21803
Speaker 1: Now, did your family have a radio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about that time, about that time, we did. I guess we got our first, first radio about 1936.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--you're a sports fan, right? Did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you listen to the Olympics with Jesse Owens or did you catch the fights of Joe Louis on the radio?
Speaker 2: Joe, fights with Joe Louis, I don't recall that the Olympics, if they were broadcast, I didn't hear 'em. But all of Joe Louis' fights I heard, even before we got a radio because there weren't many folks in town who had radios when, when he first began--at least amongst black people. But when Joe Louis became well known, if he were, whenever he was fighting, people would go to visit whoever had a radio. You might have a whole bunch of, you know, living room full or if it were summertime, it would be outside and sitting on the porch, and it'd just be a whole bunch of folks there listening to, listening to the fight. So that was a, that what, that was the way, way it was done in those days. But we got a radio, I guess in the mid to late '30's [1930s]. We finally got a radio. We didn't have electric power, but we got a battery radio, and there were a lot of battery radios, good sized, good sized radios that were powered by batteries. They weren't the greatest, but as long as you kept, kept a good battery there, you could do pretty good in your pick up.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of battery would you have to use?
Speaker 2: Oh, they called them, they were dry, they were dry cell batteries, you know, typical big, flashlight type batteries, battery packs they would call 'em. They would be rated with reference to power and so forth, A, B and C and so forth. And so our first, the first radio we ever got, I remember it had to have about five batteries (laughter) to power it. And, you know, as a, as they developed the technology, it got, it came to a point where you didn't have to have as many batteries. They could make one battery which could power, and that was, that was very useful for people who didn't have electricity at that time.
Story_ID: 21804
Speaker 1: Now, did you have, do you remember when you first became interested in science and knew you were interested in science?
Speaker 2: Not until--well, I got, I really wasn't interested in science early in my, my life. I didn't know, well, I knew about science, but, you know, you don't--they didn't teach it in school that much. I think I took half a year of science or something like that of--no, let me back up, half, about a half a year of chemistry without being able to practice in a lab. It was just textbook chemistry, adding up formu[las]--adding up molecular formulas to determine the molecular weight, things (unclear) of that sort, you know. So that was my only exposure. I guess I ought to say, I should tell you that I went to high school in New Madrid at O'Bannon High School through grade ten. After that, for my last two years of high school, I went to a Baptist College or high school seminary in Kansas City, Missouri. I went there because I was given a scholarship from my church, and given the fact that the high schools in that part of the country were segregated, and we had, you know, we went to a separate high school which did not have the facilities of the, of the white high school. So when I got the opportunity to go to high school in Kansas City, I took it.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: One of the members of our church, by, through her work in the church--and this was a church school, received a scholarship which she could give to whomever she wanted. And she, she offered it to me. And so I said, well, this is an opportunity to, you know, see something different and to get away from a school which we thought was not adequate. And so I took it. My parents encouraged me to take it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I finished my last two years of high school at Western Baptist Seminary High School.
Speaker 1: Western--
Speaker 2: Western--
Speaker 1: Okay, Baptist--
Speaker 2: --Baptist Seminary High School.
Speaker 1: Now, did they teach undergraduate degree in theology too there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they did. They did give degrees in theology. And they did have a, a--you know, I don't wanna call it a school of theology because I don't think that they, they were not equivalent--they were not equivalent to a formal theology school. But they did give what would, what I would consider certificates that were equivalent of a, it was, it was a junior college really.
Speaker 1: Like an Associate's degree--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say it was an Associates--
Speaker 1: --or, yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was, that's a good term. It was an Associate degree.
Speaker 1: It's similar to a bible college, like you, what you might hear from Moody Bible [Institute] or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, yes, um-hum. That was, that was about where they, the rank. And they also, they gave high school diplomas and they gave junior college diplomas or degrees, junior college. I mean this was apart from, all of this was apart from the seminary and bible training that they gave.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But you could get a degree, a high school diploma, and a, a junior college certificate in formal education.
Speaker 1: So was it hard to make an adjustment being away from home or did you like it?
Speaker 2: No, I, it didn't make it--I, I liked it. I enjoyed it. It was a good, I thought it was a good place to be at that time for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I sort of came of age there, and I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 21805
Speaker 1: Okay, so I wonder like, well, when we've talked to scientists in the past, I've asked them about like where, did they have anyone to talk to about science when they were at home. I mean most scientists think a little different way about--
Speaker 2: Well, I came through science, I came into science because when you're coming up, at that time, black young people, you could either be a teacher, a doctor, lawyer or a pharmacists, you know, something like that, for a professional degree. The thought of being a scientist just didn't, it wasn't there for you. I didn't think about it until I got to college. And even then, I went, I studied chemistry because my advisor, when he got us all together, said, I know you're, you're here, and you say you wanna major in chemistry--no, wait a minute. He started off, he says, "And you say you wanna be a doctor, and you say you wanna go to med school, but I can tell you, most of you are not gonna get in med school". They don't have any space for you, they don't have any place for you. The only two schools you can go to if you wanna be a doctor, that's Howard University in Washington, D.C. and MeHarry [Medical College]. They can only, two of them together can only take about 200 students a year. And it's not gonna be room for you. So he says, if you can't do go to med school, you ought to major in chemistry because you'll have a much better opportunity to get a job as a chemist than you would in any of the other fields that you would study if you wanna be a doctor. In other words, if you study biology, there's nothing for biologists to do but teach, teach high school, he says. So I said, well, I'm gonna major in chemistry. So I started out from chemistry. And I hadn't, hadn't had any chemistry before that except, as I say, the, the formula, the formula course, you know, where you learn what the formula is for certain chemical elements and compounds, sodium hydroxide and lye and that kind of stuff, you know. So I started off studying chemistry. And I wound up getting two graduate degrees in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, you started in high school, right, started studying chemistry in Western Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had a formula course, I would say, but I didn't do any laboratory. It was a semester where you, you know, you learn what the formula is for sodium chloride, salt, table salt, lye, sodium hydroxide, you know. You learn those kind of things, but you don't learn anything about the real formulaic, the real structure of, of chemistry which makes up the universe, you know. You don't learn that in a course like that.
Story_ID: 21806
Speaker 1: Were you a leader in high school? Did you run for student government or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I guess I was, after a fashion. I, we didn't have much student government. It wasn't, you know, it was a very small high school.
Speaker 1: How many students are we talking about?
Speaker 2: There were six people in the class that I graduated in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, in the high school that I first went to, right out of grade school, the freshman class was large for that time or that period, about a hundred students in my freshman class. But only six graduated out of that class and it was only six in my graduating class at Western Seminary, only six of us. So the graduating classes were not that large. There weren't that many people who made it through high school in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get a lot of individual attention in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Un-un, no. You, you were largely on your own, you know. You largely did what you wanted to do. I had some, I had some fine teachers tough, I really did. Both at O'Bannon [High School] in New Madrid, New Madrid and at Western [Baptist Seminary High School], had some fine teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when it came time to graduate, now, had you, had you chosen a college by the time it was time to graduate?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I was pretty much certain that I was going to Lincoln [University].
Speaker 1: Now, that's there in Missouri, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Is that far away from New Madrid?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a good little distance. It's, I'm all the way down in the Southeast corner, right on the Mississippi River. Jefferson City is about 325 miles from where I lived, Northwest of St. Louis. St. Louis is about 175 miles from, from where I am, and Jefferson City is about, probably about, probably about 300 miles from New Madrid to Jefferson City 'cause it's about 125 miles from St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there anything special about graduation from Western Baptist? Did your parents come to see you graduate?
Speaker 2: My sister came.
Speaker 1: Sister, okay. Alright. So--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think my parents saw me graduate after grade school, junior high. We had eighth grade, eighth grade graduation at my, at my church, I mean the ceremony, what they call the bachelorette service at my church when I was in the, finishing up the eighth grade. They had formal ceremonies in those days. They don't have it so much now. They still do, but not as much.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What year did you come out of high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty five [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, 1945. So you started at Lincoln that fall?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go back home for the summer?
Speaker 2: Part of the summer and part of the summer I spent in St. Louis [Missouri] 'cause I wanted to make some money to, so I could get started on my education. And so I went to St. Louis, oh, around the first of July and got a, finally got a job there, worked about--after I had worked at that job, it was, they were, I didn't--I guess I did know it. I guess they did tell me. They were making insect repellent bombs for, you know, to get rid of insect, mosquitoes and stuff. We had a lot of troops in the Pacific at that time in areas where not only mosquitoes, but all kind of insects were, were prevalent. And so they were making aero, these aerosol bombs which had DD--they were still, you were still able to use DDT [dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane]. DDT came out as one of the real, one of the really potent and effective mosquito repellents, insect repellents. And, of course, they found out later, they discovered later on that it, once you sprayed it, it didn't leave very quickly. It stayed there right away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that book "Silent Spring"--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Rachel Carson's book "Silent Spring".
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right, that's right about twenty, about twenty years later, they finally got after it. But at that time, it was very important for, for our troops. And so I worked there for about, about a month. And the War ended, I--and I went back to work the next day and the place was shut down (laughter). They shut it down just like that. And so I, I worked the last couple of weeks in a drugstore in downtown St. Louis and entered, entered Lincoln [College] in early September.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this 1946--
Speaker 2: Forty five [1945].
Speaker 1: --forty five [1945], yeah, '45' [1945]. Now, you're still young, right? You're two years younger than most of the other freshmen, I guess, right? You're about sixteen?
Speaker 2: I'm seventeen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen?
Speaker 2: I'm seventeen at that time, but no, I wasn't that much younger. There were a lot of, lot of young people--well, you know, I would say the average is probably eighteen. But there were a lot of, Veterans were coming back too from the War [World War II]. So I was, I was pretty much your average age for, for our class at that time.
Story_ID: 21807
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now when you were at Lincoln [University], did you know Mervyn Dymally?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, you know, I never knew him that well. But I think he was a freshman that year. I believe he was just coming up. He was older than I was though, but, yeah, I met him.
Speaker 1: He would go on to be a Congressman from--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah, I met him.
Speaker 1: From Compton, yeah, Compton, California. Did you know Phil Curran (ph.)?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--
Speaker 2: Phil was, Phil was a trumpeter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, he was a chemistry major.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe he was. He, yeah, right, yeah, I think he was, yeah. How'd you know him?
Speaker 1: I know him as a musician, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --we interviewed him for the project.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he talked about his interest in science and how he wanted to be a, he wanted to be a scientist first, but, and he was playing the trumpet to try to make enough money to stay in school and ended up taking off with these bands.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I remember Phil. Phil was, I thought he was from Jefferson City too, wasn't he? I think he was from somewhere around there in central Missouri. Yeah, I got to know Phil pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Is he still active and engaged in anything?
Speaker 1: Yes, he's still playing music.
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: He's still playing music, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: He's, he composed the music for the Planetarium, Adler Planetarium Sky Show.
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the music, the celestial music. He plays the harp and--
Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, Phil. Yeah, I remember, Phil, I remember him, knew him, knew him well.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Well, what was he like in college?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I, I--although I remember him and knew him, I don't remember having a lot of association with him. I just remember that he was, that he was a very good musician and I don't remember very much direct association with him.
Speaker 1: Now, I know in those, I believe in those days ahead of you, I know there are a lot of African students that went to Lincoln that became heads of State. I mean some of them I think went on to--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --be heads of State. I think Kwame Nkrumah and some others--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Yeah, yeah, we, yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: Well, were there any there when you were in school that became important figures in Africa?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't. It's been so long ago now. And I don't, I don't recall that any of 'em become, becoming Heads of State at the level that they became nationally and internationally known. No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so you decided to major in chemistry right away?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers?
Speaker 2: One that I remember most and first and foremost was Dr. Monty Taylor. He probably had, at that time, probably had more, he probably had more influence on me than, than any of my other teachers. He was, he had just come back from the University of Chicago [Illinois] getting his, getting his PhD and, as you know, the, the War had just ended. We had just begun the, the bombs had been, two bombs had been dropped which brought about the immediate end to the War to what were called atomic bombs. We think of them now as nuclear bombs, nuclear weapons. And he, just about everybody who was involved who was in the, getting graduate degrees in science at, in physics and chemistry at the University of Chicago at that time had some affiliation with the atomic bomb. And he did do, he did make a contribution to that. And I remember we were getting the black newspapers at that time. They were very prominent, "Pittsburgh Courier" and "Chicago Defender". And I remember seeing his, his picture in there, so I had heard of him before I got to college. And to be, wind up with a class with him as your, as your primary teacher, that was awesome, you know. I really, that was very, very--that thrilled me at that time.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And he was very important in seeing to it that I pursued chemistry.
Story_ID: 21808
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, go ahead now. We're talking about Dr. Monty Taylor.
Speaker 2: Dr. Monty Taylor, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was part of the Manhattan Project [1942-1947]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --along with Samuel Massey--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and there were like sixteen blacks that worked on the Manhattan Project, I think out of a couple hundred people in this country--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that were working on that, the development of this bomb.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: So, and you were talking about what an influence he was on you.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, he would, that, he was a definite, definite influence on me. And he called me in, it was near the end of the first semester. And he talked to me, and he, he really inspired me because he told me that, he told me, he gave me an idea that, about the things that I was capable of, which nobody had, which I had not recognized within myself before. But he told me where I was in the class and where I was, that I--he knew that I was capable, and that--he told me what I could do, even though I wasn't doing it at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, you had just come from a school that didn't even have labs, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, but you dared major in chemistry anyway.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so, were you, did you have a lot of catching up to do?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of catching up to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Yes. But, you know, unfortunately, and this was something that I guess comes with growing up without, without the environment of study, without libraries, without books around the home and stuff like that, without the ability to experience much beyond your immediate environment. And so you don't have the confidence, and I think he recognized that. And he wanted to give me that and to a very real extent, he did. He helped me to get through that first year. And at the end of the year, he told me, he called me in. He wanted me to, he wanted me to stay the summer, and he was gonna give me a job in the laboratory because--why? One reason was that despite--he knew my background. He knew that I had come out of very poor high school background and had gone to, you know, I didn't go to school. Half the time I just didn't go to school. You had to stay out of school. We had to. Working in the fields was a part of what I did, and what we all did. And so I had a very, very narrow background, and he knew that, but he knew also that I had, that there was something within me, that my innate ability would carry me forward. And all I had to do was to establish the discipline to utilize that. And he knew that. He saw that. But I, he called me in as the school year ended and told me that he wanted me to stay during the summer, that he had a job for me that I could do during the summer. But I, I had already signed up to go to the Army, to go in the service as a volunteer, you know, I was gonna, I had volunteered to go to the service. And so I couldn't stay. But he was, he inspired me and was probably as much responsible, probably more responsible than anyone else for me eventually going to school and finishing up, getting my doctorate because at that time, he told me and had confidence in me, that I could do it.
Story_ID: 21809
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, what caused you to sign up for the Army? Was it money that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, GI bill was available at that time. For spending a year and a half in service, I could get enough time to finish my college. And I didn't, I guess I felt a little guilty in a sense about being dependent on my parents 'cause I knew that they couldn't afford to give me much beyond what they were already giving. And I didn't want them to be having to put out the way that they were, and life was still difficult at that time. There was still not all that much in the way of, of jobs that were well paying or that my father [Andrew Anderson Shoffner] could do. My father was getting older. My parents were getting older, you know, and I didn't, I didn't want to be a barrier and a burden on their lives. So it seemed that going into service at that time would be something that I could do. And I did, and stayed, stayed sixteen months in service and came back and I had sufficient GI bill to finish my college.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you, where did you serve in the Army and what did you do in the service?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Fort McClellan, Alabama for basic, and you did formal basic training at that time. And then I went to Camp Stoneman which was near Pittsburg, California, stayed out there about six weeks, and then shipped out to these, the Pacific (unclear) [theater]; went to Hawaii and spent about six weeks, left Hawaii and went to, went to Guam, stayed a little while. That was just a trans-shipment point. Guam is a part of the Mariana Islands. Saipan is not, is a short distance, relatively speaking from Guam. It's a part of the Mariana's, and I went to Saipan and stayed in Saipan for about the next eleven months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And on Saipan, you know, we were just, they were moving, the War hadn't been over that long, and, for that long, and they were moving some of the, the residual equipment and munitions and stuff off of the island. And that's what we were there to do. I was a part of that operation [beeping].
Speaker 1: Now, there were, I know there are stories about the servicemen being in the islands after the war and finding Japanese soldiers still on the island who thought the War was still going on. Did you ever encounter anything like that?
Speaker 2: I never encountered it, but, yes, they were told--we were told that, those stories. And they did, in fact, I believe it was after I was gone, find a soldier who was, who had, you know, who had been there for quite a while, several years after the War had been ended and papers signed and stuff. There were still soldiers over there who were hold up, waiting, waiting it out, waiting for something.
Speaker 1: Now, when you joined the Army, the Army was in the process of desegregating, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, but I don't know that I experienced any of that. I think it, that might have come a little later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in an all-black unit?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is 19--you join in nineteen forty--
Speaker 2: Forty six [1946].
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the formal order for desegregation order for desegregation came a couple of years later. But, I mean I was trained in, I mean my basic training was all-black units and the unit that I was in overseas was all black.
Story_ID: 21810
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well, how were you treated? Do you think you were treated any better than the soldiers during World War II [1939-1945] or was it about the same, you think or what?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. You know, I, I never had any experiences that were extremely negative, unless you consider--once you consider that it was segregated, it's sort of like the school that you were going to, attending. They were still segregated. I was, so--
Speaker 1: Like the town of New Madrid [Missouri], was New Madrid basically segregated like that too?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes, yes. And so life hadn't, hadn't changed all that much, you know, during that time. It was only, I guess, I believe it was around '48' [1948] when Truman [President Harry Truman] signed his order. There had been some attempts at, at integration during the War itself, but this was on a very, very selective basis. They would bring some troops in and put 'em with an all-white unit. So it was a very small amount, and it had worked out fine. There was nothing, nothing that indicated that it couldn't work. But these things always move slowly. And so once I, I went to college, I, you know, the schools were still very segregated as they always had been. So I never noticed anything any different from what I came up with.
Speaker 1: So tell me, what did you do in the Army during the War? What kind of assignment did they give you?
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: I mean during the--it was the aftermath of the War, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, are you speaking of--
Speaker 1: In '46' [1946] when you were there?
Speaker 2: What, the kind of duty that I carried out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, most of what I did was, I was, I was assigned to a firefighting unit. And so, you know, firefighting units everywhere, they spend a lot of time on duty. You know, you aren't doing much physically, but you, you have to be on call. And so I would have a whole, a whole day or so when I could do whatever I wanted, and I would. I'd take off, and it wasn't very many places you could go on the Island, but, but your time was your own. But you, it was still pretty much a twenty-four hours on kind of thing when you were in the fire department. And there would be full, full days when you would just have to be, take to check on your equipment, to wash your place down, that kind of thing, you know. I got my first experience trying to learn how to drive when I was in the fire department, driving, trying to drive a fire truck. I don't think I ever got licensed for it though. But it was a pleasant experience and it, it served me well in that afterwards, I was able to finish up my undergraduate work anyway.
Speaker 1: Now, had you ever been out of Missouri before?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Had you ever gone very far from your hometown before?
Speaker 2: No, no more than the time I did go to college, which was still in Missouri, but, you know, 325 miles away. Well, you know, I grew up not traveling very much. And it's not unusual now for people to take off and, and flying around the world, different places and so forth. But I wasn't, I hadn't been over fifty miles from home until, I think when I went to college. The first time I went to St. Louis, well, I did go to St. Louis, I think I was fourteen years old. But most of the time, I was, stayed within twenty miles of my home all the time. That was, people just didn't go anywhere in those days--
Story_ID: 21811
Speaker 1: So you're coming back to Lincoln now. You're a man who's been to the South Pacific. You've been to the coast, you know, you've been to California--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --so you're coming back with a different kind of attitude. You've got your GI bill to pay for school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you're able to, so you start school with a different kind of attitude, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but basically, I, I still hadn't changed my focus. I was still thinking about going to medical school. And although I was doing science, it was, it was--I still had not thought through what life would be like if I majored in science and focused on science as a profession. I was still looking to be an MD. And that's what I was looking forward to.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So was school easier when you got back, do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, it wasn't that it was easier, but I guess I was more comfortable. For the first time, I knew that I didn't have to worry about finances, you know, that I was going to finish college. I was going to get my degree. There was no doubt about that, you know. So to a certain extent, my mind had been settled. I wasn't dependent on my parents, and to that extent, I was a whole lot better off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only thing, and see, there's one thing that did not, that I didn't--I had not yet settled into being a, thinking of life as a scientist, let's put it that way, because I was still thinking of practicing medicine or studying medicine. So that conflict was still going on in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Dr. [Monty] Taylor still there?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Dr. Taylor.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was, yes, he was. But, but he left after that semester. The first semester I was back, I sat in on his class. I, I used to go in and set in, sit in on his lecture, just to--and he welcomed me back, to, just to bring myself back up to, you know, get myself in, into a groove again. I sat in on his lectures for, for the second year, for the second year chemistry class. But I did not take chemistry that first semester back. I just sat in on his lectures. And, but then I found out that he was leaving. He told me he was leaving, which I was very sad to hear because that meant I wouldn't have any other class, classes under him. And so, and that fall, Fall of '48' [1948], he was gone. So that's the last time I had any direct contact with him as a, in a student-faculty relationship. But I did see him again at Howard, many years later, after I had, after I had gotten my doctorate and we were both attending an American Chemical Society National meeting, and I met him again.
Speaker 1: Now, was he surprised to see you or did he always think you'd be there?
Speaker 2: Well, he was not surprised. He knew that, that I had become active. He knew that I'd gotten a doctorate, you know. We might have corresponded a little bit, but not a lot. But I kept, I sort of kept up with him. I knew where he was, and I don't believe I had seen--I think there must have been a period of about twenty year or so that elapsed between the time that I had last seen him and when I saw him again. But he had always been an inspiration for me. He was one of the people that, who was really responsible for me becoming a scientist and going on and, and actually practicing science for thirty-odd years.
Story_ID: 21812
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, I finished college and at that time, it was hard to find a job, 1951 was, things were kind of economically depressed in general. So I came to, I came to Chicago [Illinois] and was living with my sister. And I really, I just got a job in the Post Office.
Speaker 2: Now, how was, now, were you thinking about how to get into medical school still?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: I, and so I was, I was still planning on going to medical school and applied or sent, sent applications to, I believe, Howard [University], Chicago Medical College and somewhere else, two or three. But I know I got two interviews out of that. One was from Howard and one was from Chicago Medical College. Well, I went to, went to, went over to an interview at Chicago Medical College. And they were very pleasant, but told me that they couldn't take me in right then but if I would wait a year, they would, they would.
Speaker 2: Do you suspect they had a quota or something?
Speaker 1: Yes, probably, undoubtedly. And, but I didn't feel like waiting a year. But in the meantime, the Howard interviewer, the person from Howard was supposed to come in, and I was going to meet them over at, for an interview, at Provident Hospital, I believe. But I called them and turned them down, said I didn't, that I wasn't, was not going to be able to go to medical school. So in the meantime, I began to consider what else was I--what was I gonna do with the rest of my life. And I decided that I would go to graduate school and do some further work in chemistry.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute now. Now, why did you tell Howard that you wouldn't be able to go to medical school? What's was the problem?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I guess I was just probably a little mixed up at the time, as much as anything else.
Speaker 2: Now, were you married at this time or had you--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Were you married or something?
Speaker 1: No, no, no. I was, you know, twenty three, twenty four years old, no responsibilities in terms of family or anything like that. I, it was, it was something that I didn't--I guess my mind never did focus properly on that. I wasn't, there was still a lot of uncertainty as to what I wanted to do with the rest of my life, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Did you see that as being too big or something to do?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know. I don't know. It's one of those things, parts of your life that, when you go back and try to dig through and find out just what was going on with you, I think--one thing I know that had an effect on my life was that, I had been helped along by my brother. And I had a younger sister. I wanted to help her. And I saw myself, I--medical school seemed to take me out of that loop. I would have to get some help from somewhere myself. I'd have to be mainly concerned about myself for at least five years, you know. And I didn't know whether I could do that. So the bottom line is, I didn't go. I didn't, I didn't go for the interview. I called them up and told them, I wrote to them and told them, sorry, I wouldn't be able to make it. That was the end of my medical school adventure or attempts to go to medical school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21813
Speaker 1: And in the meantime, I continued to work in the Post Office, but knew I was going back to school and do something; went to, took a rather circuitous path, went to, took some graduate courses at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] while I was still in the Post Office, left those graduate courses and left the Post Office and started studying at DePaul [University] in the Fall of '53' [1953]. I got a Masters in Chemistry, completed a Masters in Chemistry over at DePaul in '55' [1955] and went to work at a company called Corn Products Refining Company, CPR, Corn Products Refining Company. They, they refined corn into, to get the corn starch from it. And from that corn starch, they were trying to, to see if they could develop a, a chemical base, if they could get chemical products from it. And so I, I worked in that, worked in that field for about six years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: And while I was there, I got married, yeah, a year after I was there, I married my wife. My wife and I, we met while I was in graduate school, and got married in, married to my wife in '56' [1956] in August or July, July '56' [1956].
Speaker 2: Now, were you in Argo--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Were you in Argo, Illinois?
Speaker 1: Argo, yeah, Argo.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a, yeah, we've seen, I think the corn starch box with the Argo Indian--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, Argo starch.
Speaker 2: --and the corn on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 2: So you were living in Argo, Illinois.
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't living there.
Speaker 2: Okay, you just worked--
Speaker 1: I lived on the West side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Alright, okay.
Speaker 1: And, you know, commuted every day to Argo for about six years.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, tell us how did you meet your wife? How did you all meet?
Speaker 1: I was intro--we were introduced. A mutual friend introduced us. She was, she came here in, what '52' [1952] or, 'cause we met, probably '52' [1952]. We met in '53' [1953]. She must have come here in '52' [1952], and she was doing an internship in Foods and Nutrition at Cook County Hospital.
Speaker 2: Okay, so she was a dietician or something.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay. Alright, so you all got married in 1956.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 21814
Speaker 1: Alright, so you lived in Lawndale [Illinois] and had to commute to Argo, Illinois working for the corn starch. What kinds of products were you all trying to form from, I mean from corn starch?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I did a lot of work with dextrose or glucose. We were trying to, they were trying to make glucose into a commercial product beyond, beyond just selling it as Dextrose. You can still, you know, go to the drugstore, and--I guess you can, and buy dextrose, you know. That's just a simple sugar, and it's not as sweet as sucrose which is the table sugar that we, cooking sugar that we use. But dextrose is a product which, which they made and still do I guess, and sell, but they sold it as dextrose. And it, you know, it wasn't that much of a market because it's not sweet enough to be a substitute for, for table sugar. And, of course, there had always, there had been attempts going back a hundred years, 200 years to try to convert glucose to fructose and everybody tries a little bit of that. But they're still doing it with not too much success. It's only going to go so far, and it'll stop, and you'll get a, what's sort of an equilibrium mixture with a whole lot of other stuff in it. So you can't make a saleable product trying to convert glucose to fructose. But everybody tries it at some time or another so I did a little bit of that. And we also did some, some glucose reduction, and not--and that's probably still done and sold as a commercial product. Out of that, you get Sorbitol, that's the main reduction product you get from glucose. And so everybody gets, gets introduced to that.
Speaker 1: Now, what is, I'm sorry. What is Sorbitol used for?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What is Sorbitol used for?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I don't know what the big use is for it now. It's used in some formulations, some--you know, I really don't know what they--I don't recall it. It used to be used in cigarettes to a certain extent, certain tobacco products used to put, used to have a little Sorbitol in them. But it's been a long time since I followed up on, on what the sugars are, or what sugars like sorbitol are used for. But if, if you look on some--I, I don't recall now. It's been too long ago (laughter). But, you know, we did little work on that, on reducing sugars and reducing starches and things like that. And I did some work on caramel products. I worked on caramel for a while.
Speaker 1: Now, this is caramel that you put on popcorn here in Chicago [Illinois] and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The same caramel we put on popcorn?
Speaker 2: It might be. It's slightly different probably. Carmel is a very complex product, and so we were, they were making it at that time and selling it, I suppose. I think they were selling the product that Coca-Cola uses for coloring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's one of the ways in which it's used. So I worked on that for a couple of years and did, did I think, you know, some very fine work on it. They were very sorry to see me leave because I was, I had, I had begun to, to break caramel down to find out exactly what was in it. It's a mass of stuff in it (laughter), but they don't, they don't use much of it. You can take a drop of caramel and cover, and color, you know, a barrel of Coca-Cola with it. So.
Speaker 1: So this is caramel coloring then--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --primarily, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: This is caramel coloring you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right. And they put it in a lot of, a lot of different products. And, and so I did work on that, and find, I found out some of the products that were in there. There's a million in there, but we were just, I wasn't going to discover all of 'em, but I had, for the first time, I think, for the first time laid out what the, what the, what it looked like, what the products looked like in terms of a chromatographic exposure. And we had found out just that it was, it was just a monstrous number of them.
Story_ID: 21815
Speaker 1: But that was when I left and went back to graduate school and stayed at the graduate school over at the University of Illinois in Chicago, and I, and I was in graduate school in the medical center. I had a family by that time, had a son, and my wife was, was, was working as a dietician over in Cook County. So she would come to work with me in the morning. And I would, I would drop her off at the hospital and then go on into the, to the school to do my work.
Speaker 2: Now, I've got a question here that I don't know if anybody's asked you before, but it occurs to mind that your wife's a dietician, and you're working on caramel coloring and other products that go into food, what kind of discussions would you all have about what you're eating, what kind of things are in food?
Speaker 1: Not much. We wouldn't talk about it that much.
Speaker 2: Really, you didn't really discuss it?
Speaker 1: Un-un, no, no. It didn't come up, didn't come up that much. For one thing, it's, one thing when you, one thing about doing science is that when you are doing science, you tend to forget about things like--you tend to forget and ignore, and sort of pass over the practical uses of the materials that you are working on. You do think largely about the science that's involved in creating them, and, if you have to isolate them, the isolation of them, the characterization of them. In other words, the science takes front and center. You are far more interested in the chemistry and, that's involved and the preparation or the identification of those materials than you are in anything else. So, so we didn't talk that much about 'em.
Speaker 2: Okay, and another thing I heard that it made me wonder was, all the ingredients that you discovered in caramel, I just wondered if, should we be concerned about all the monstrous number of ingredients in caramel coloring?
Speaker 1: Maybe if you were eating it as a, as a main dish, but the amount that's in, that's there, in terms of what it's used for, nothing to be concerned about. It's so infinitesimally small, till it won't, (laughter) it won't ever bother you. That'll be the, you know, no, it won't bother you.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright, now--
Speaker 1: You're always going to run into that, you know. There's, there's things in everything that you eat, in everything that you run into that, if they were isolated and on their own, might be harmful. But the infinitesimal amount that you consumed and are exposed to, is so small until it's not going to matter.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright. And, you know, you hear people say today that there's arsenic in apple juice and that sort of thing. Should we be concerned about or not, you know, or, you know, a large dose of, what's that, Equal, you know, will a rat cancer or something, you know. But, take, so you're saying there're doses of things that are so small, they really won't--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah, well (laughter), yeah, I guess it could, but we use, you know, I, now, me, personally, I don't bother myself about that. I don't eat that much anyway. It's, but, of course, that's each person's choice as to whether they wanna do that or not. But it's, that's the way life is. The world is full of stuff (laughter), and you leave, you run off and leave one thing, and you run into something else (laughter), you know. You really can't, what can you say?
Story_ID: 21816
Speaker 1: Okay, well, University of Illinois. Now, you worked on a PhD in Organic Chemistry at the University of Illinois at the Medical Center?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was graduate school, and I was thirty--I was thirty three years old then. I knew I had to get out. So I, I--I was already a fully formed chemist. You know, I mean I had a Master's degree. I had already, I had worked for six years as a, as a professional chemist. But I felt that, that I ought to have a doctorate because that would give me more, more opportunities. And I just felt that a person of my stature needed that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year, what's the year now? This is six years after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you started at Argo, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, is this '62' [1962]?
Speaker 2: Oh, by the way, I didn't start right at Argo when I got out of college, when I got my Masters. I worked in another place. It was called Johnsteen Paint and Varnish Company. I went there, and I worked for about ten weeks. And that's before I went to Argo.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that, John--
Speaker 2: Johnsteen--
Speaker 1: It's S-T-E-
Speaker 2: S-T-E-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Johnsteen Paint and Varnish Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was a job. It was the only job that I, you know, that--well, it wasn't the only one. I think I had one other offer, but I took that. I went out to, to, and worked with them and I knew I wouldn't be there long because it wasn't, it wasn't a very good place for me at that time. It was rather primitive.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think the conditions that you worked under--
Speaker 2: Conditions weren't good. Now, they got better. They did improve, but it wasn't, it wasn't a good place to work at that time. And we were cooking, making paints and varnishes, and we were doing it largely out in the open. And I didn't, I knew that wasn't good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, okay, so these--you thought that these fumes or--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The fumes, I guess would be--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --harmful to your health.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, absolutely, absolutely. So I got a call to, to come out and interview at, at Corn Products.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, you start--so did you start your PhD in '62' [1962]? Is that what--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay.
Story_ID: 21817
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty one [1961]. You're at University of Illinois, and you're, okay, so what did your, what was your focus there in terms of your dissertation or do you do a dissertation when you work on a PhD in Chemistry?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Yeah, I did a dissertation on structure of, of salts, of pyridinium compounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's P-Y-R-
Speaker 2: P-Y-R-I-D-I-N-I-U-M, pyridinium, pyridinium salts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, that involved some synthesis. I had to make those materials and that was, that was okay because, you know, that was one of my specialties, this organic synthesis I had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are pyridinium salts? I mean what are they in laymen's terms?
Speaker 2: You have a pyr--the pyridine is one of the very common molecules in organic chemistry. It's a ring compound, and it has a nitrogen at the, at its, at its center, it has a nitrogen atom. That nitrogen atom can form salts where, if it's exposed to or brought in contact with an acid, a protonic acid of any kind, you can form salts. It can also form salts or complexes with, with certain inorganic compounds, like antimonic, the antimonic chlorides and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so you were synthesizing structures--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, so, so you did this successfully we know because you have a PhD now, but was there any, what was, were there any challenges along the way?
Speaker 2: Well, challenges in terms of since, some of the, some of the specific compounds we had to synthe--we had to carry out our own synthesis and analysis, but largely, the challenge was in the, the large amount of data that had to be accumulated and the analysis which had to be carried out. I did, the product, the basis for most of the work was the infrared analysis. And I carried out, I would prepare the salts and then I would subject them to an infrared structural analysis and break that down and compare it, compare, do a comparison analysis of the spectrum, based on the structures of the different compounds, which I knew. I mean I knew the structure. It wasn't, I wasn't analyzing something that I did not know about, and, and so I would a comparative analysis of the various infrared bands that you would get by modification of the, of the various structures. And some of the compounds, I would have to make from scratch. It was some I could, you know, just go in the laboratory and get and subject them to salt formation and run the, the spectrum of, carry out the spectrum on the salts, and then I would have my, my spectrum which I could compare the various bands that show up in the spectrum. When you run an infrared spectrum, it's stretched, you stretch it out and it gets, you'll see a lot of infrared absorption bands. And these absorption bands are characteristic of the structure. And, and, and it is by comparison of those bands that you do your analysis. So, so I, that's what I did and wound up with a, about a 200-page PhD--
Speaker 1: Dissertation.
Speaker 2: Dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was your advisor?
Speaker 2: Dr. Bower, Bower and Bell. Dr. Bower and Dr. Bell.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did, I mean were there any particular professors there who, you know, you see as mentor or in that situation at DePaul [University], working on your PhD?
Speaker 2: You mean at the University of Illinois [Chicago]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, they were both, were largely mentors. Plus, I would say that another person who was very important to me while I was there was the, was the head of the department. It's Jim Gearien, wonderful man.
Speaker 1: Is that G-E--
Speaker 2: G-E-A-R-I-E-N, Gearien.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now, you got your PhD in '65' [1965], is that true?
Speaker 2: It was formally, formally granted in '65' [1965]. I actually left in, and went to, went to work in '63' [1963].
Story_ID: 21818
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, this is when you go to the Universal Oil Products Company?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, before we take you to Universal Oil, now did you ever, during all this period of time, did you ever meet Dr. Percy Julian?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that, did you--I mean what was that like? I mean how well did you know him?
Speaker 2: I think I met him for the first time right after I got my PhD. And I met him in a meeting here, and, you know, we--there's a Chemical Society, and, of course, I'm a member of that, and I believe that's the first time I met him was at a, at a local meeting. And he walked up to me and introduced himself, says, "I'm Percy Julian" (laughter). And, of course, I'd heard about him, heard about him, I guess, either I was about to go to college or was in college in the late '40's [1940s], mid to late '40's [1940s]. I read about him.  The first time I'd heard about him, there was a story in the paper about him, you know, the first time I'd heard of him. But he was a great inspiration. Did you see the, the bio, the film about him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe you're in it, though I didn't know it at the time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I didn't know you, but that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, do you care if I tell you about how that came about?
Speaker 1: I don't--I want you to.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I was very active in the American Chemical Society. And I was on a committee called the, what's that? It's, I forget. It wasn't Project Seed. It was another committee, a committee of the American Chemical Society. It was devoted to, to supporting, inspiring and promoting minority young people in science. And, you know, African, African Americans, Hispanics and, in science, particularly, chemistry, especially chemistry. And I was on that committee and so I suggested to them that we ought to do something, do, do a program to recognize the fact that, to recognize the hundredth anniversary of Dr. Julian's birth. So they said, well, sure, go ahead. So that's what I did. This wasn't a film now. It was a, what we did was we put together a symposium at a national ACS [American Chemical Society] meeting. So that involved me meeting or getting in touch with a lot of people and so forth. And that's how I met the folks who were eventually going to do the film. But they weren't doing a film at that time. They were just interested in him and in finding out something about him. And so they came to the national meeting at which we presented the symposium, at which this symposium was presented. It was in Anaheim in 1999. We had a symposium with about a half a dozen scientists making presentations. That was followed by a luncheon at which there was a formal address. I forget the name of the person who did it. He was, yeah, he was at that time the U.S. Surgeon General, a black--
Speaker 1: David Thatcher, Dr. David Thatcher.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, yes, that's who it was, Thatcher. He, he was there, and he gave the formal address. Well, at that time, the people, people were there from PBS who were interested in doing a film on Julian [Percy Julian]. So that's how I made contact with them. And to make a long story short, they did include me in the film, and there are several, I have several instances in the film when I help to illuminate or explain something that's going on, you know. And it's been a, it was and still is a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a great thing now. If you hadn't, if you hadn't had the symposium, there probably would not have been a film.
Speaker 2: It would not have happened, no, that's right. You're right. So it all started from that, and it's just, well, it's been a wonderful experience for, for Julian's children. His son died a couple of years ago, but his daughter is still living. And last fall, at around October, I was called from, I got a call from ACS from the, from the, the Minority Affairs office there. And they were, they wanted me to support or give them advice to give them counsel while they put on a program for the children about, oh, 65, about 75 children in the Washington, D.C. area. And they, so they put together a program where they showed some of the film and, and had the children do some exhibits of their own, you know, and so forth and put out and place. And it was just a wonderful program. I, I didn't go myself, but they sent me a magazine, an ACS monthly, not--yeah, I believe it is a monthly, which, where there were some very beautiful pictures that were made and were in the magazine and this wonderful story about it. So I guess I'm telling you that in detail, to say that, you know, the story goes on, and it's benefiting many young people who have seen the film, who have been inspired by this. And I'm just, I'm very pleased at, that I was able to make a contribution to something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, for those who are watching this in the future, and they wanna know why Percy Julian is important, can you kind of tell us, you know, from the, you know, the point of view of an African American chemist, why Percy Julian's important?
Speaker 2: Oh, he's important because he was one of the great, great scientists and human beings of the, of the twentieth century. And, you know, he's, he--people know, know about him, but they don't know how really wonderful and outstanding he was. And I, I wanted to do what I could to try to, not only present him so that he could be an, a continued inspiration to young people, but also that he could be recognized himself for all of the great things he was able to do, despite the obstacles that he had to overcome.
Story_ID: 156833
Speaker 1: Now, what was his [Percy Julian] specific contribution scientific--I mean to chemistry. I mean what is he known for contributing?
Speaker 2: Well, for, for the work he did with cortisone, for one. That's one thing that was very, that was extremely important.
Speaker 1: And what is cortisone used for?
Speaker 2: Well, when you talk about the steroid drugs, cortisone was one of the first and foremost, and, you know, if you saw, if you remember the movie, there's a story about it where it shows how they, they knew that it was good, but they didn't know how to get it because, you know, it's a natural, it was a natural product. But the labor to try to go to and isolate it, was tremendous. And you could, it could not, you could not make it. It would never become a worthwhile and useful drug if you had to isolate it from the natural sources. And some, I forget the exact location or place where it comes from in the, from, in the--that they were isolating it initially. So they had to find a way to synthesize it. And he brought this about, all the way up until the last step, the last step, I believe was done by some kind of microbiological means to close, to close it off. And this made it, this available immediately to people who had been suffering and could not get any relief from it. And that was one of the things. Other things that, that he did had to do with this synthesis that he first carried out. And this, this was something that he did when he was at DePauw [University]. There's a great story in that in the sense that he came to DePauw because he had nowhere else to go, and could not get a job at that time. And so, they took him on at DePauw. And he worked there, not on the faculty, but as a, what you might call an associate or whatever it was. Anyway, he taught a few classes and at the same time, he did, along with an assistant who came with him, he carried out some, some research work. And this research enabled him to do a total synthesis on a compound which, where he established a structure that had been published wrongly by one of the leading chemists in the world at that time. I don't recall his name right now, but he, he didn't set out to, but his synthesis proved that the other synthesis was wrong, that this was the correct structure, that this--that the structure that he synthesized was correct. Now, this was in the early days of, of American scientific accomplishment and achievement. It was the, the first really international recognition of American chemistry. You know, we think about how great it is now and what's going on in the great universities. But at that time, we did not have the stature of the European universities and the European laboratories. And Julian's [Percy Julian] was the first to break through by carrying out a total synthesis which everybody recognized as being really first rate. It was, it was a great achievement. I mean it wasn't well publicized and they didn't, he didn't receive the kind of recognition and credit that he should have at that time. But it was a great achievement.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the illness that cortisone was used to treat the most was rheumatoid arthritis.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people suffering from that had no relief--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --until cortisone. Okay. Alright, so that's a great story there.
Speaker 2: But, okay, so did, now, was he a part of, had there been formed an African American Chemical Society or anything at that point--
Speaker 1: No, no, actually--
Speaker 2: --when you met him in '63' [1963], '65' [1965], something like that, right?
Speaker 1: No, I met him for the first time in sixty--or in the mid-'60's [1960s] right after I had gotten my PhD. It was the first time I had met him. No, it had not been formed. The, the, what's called the, the African American Chemical Society was not formed until the early '70's [1970s]. I don't know the exact date.
Speaker 2: That's NOBCChE [National Organization for Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers].
Speaker 1: NOBCCHE, yeah. That was formed in the early '70's [1970s] when a group of, group of black chemists got together and formed that, which has, which has been a great achievement and has had some very significant effects on the life and the roll of black chemists.
Speaker 2: Okay, now tell us--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I was just gonna say, black chemists and chemical engineers. We tend to forget that it's--its name, by its name, it's National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers. And we tend to forget that, that there is a significant group of blacks who did get their, their training and their degrees in chemical engineering.
Story_ID: 156834
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, tell us about Universal Oil Products.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a, it's a very unique and in many ways, it's been a great place for American chemical science. I had heard about it, but I hadn't thought much of it until, Dr. Lou  Schmerling came out and gave a lecture to us at the University of Illinois as a part of our lecture series. And, you know, he said, he told us when, while he was there that, he invited us, that when we, when we finished our degree to come out and, and have a look at UOP, or Universal Oil Products and it might be a good place for us, and we--to look forward to as somewhere that we could, could do some wonderful research and at the same time, you know, be, create industrial products and create to the industrial process. So I took him, I heard, I heard him say that and so when I, when I was about to finish up my graduate work, I went out. I did just that. I sent them a, sent them a letter and said that I was going to be looking for somewhere to work and mentioned that Dr. Schmerling had told us that we ought to look to UOP. So that's how I wound up out there. And, and we, we got together, and they--I went out for the interview and did get an invitation to join them, and I did. And when I joined, when I came on, I still, I had finished all my work, all my research work. But I still hadn't written my thesis. I was in the process of doing that, but still hadn't done it. But I was diligent, and finished up all my writing and had my exams, my final examination and about a year later, and got my doctorate, had my doctorate confirmed formally in 1965, one of the great days of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were your parents proud of you?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Were your parents proud of you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they, you know, they were both in upper years at that time, but, they were very much, very much proud, yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it, now, you were the first person in your family to go to college, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Well, actually, my sister and I. We both went together at the same time. We were freshmen together (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot you all, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she didn't, she didn't finish with me. She got married after a year. But I, we were always, up until that time, we'd always been together wherever we went, wherever we went to school.
Story_ID: 156835
Speaker 1: Now I remember, there's something in my head about German chemists, you know, American Chemistry in some way. Is that true as far as you know? You say, your bosses are Schmerling and Bloch and people like that. Is there a German connection to American Chemical--
Speaker 2: Ah, there's a German connection to chemistry everywhere. I mean you can't, you can't get around that German--yes, the Germans have taken a lead role in all of science. And they've done some great and wonderful things. And despite the fact that, you know, it, during the Nazi era, it went astray in terms of how it was used sometimes. There's no doubt that there is a significant German contribution and achievement that goes throughout science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us about Project Seed.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Project Seed, you know, it's always been difficult for young black people especially to understand, to get an appreciation for science, and even if they want to go into science, they, they have had trouble seeing a way or getting the encouragement. They're, as a matter of fact, they're discouraged. They, traditionally, they have been discouraged in going along that path. And so, a man named Al Nixon thought that there ought to be a better way. And he saw--this was during the time of the ghetto uprisings--
Speaker 1: In 1968 when they rioted?
Speaker 2: The killings of, of people like Dr. King [Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and others.
Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And, and he looked around and saw that to him, that it could be, it ought to be better, that something ought to be done. And so he got together at one of the meetings of the American Chemical Society and decided to, that they would start this project called Project Seed. And so he got started on that, and I, and, gosh, you know, although I have been affiliated with this project since, almost since its beginning, it's a, I'm trying to think of what the--for the education, I'm trying to think of what Seed (laughter), what the acronym is about, and I can't even remember it (laughter). I've been saying SEED [Special Elementary Education for the Disadvantaged] for so long, and I've, you know, I've been affiliated with it almost for, almost fifty years, forty five years, forty five years since it got started, and I can't right now get the words together which fit with the alphabet part. But, anyway, he wanted to--
Speaker 1: I wish I could help you. They don't have it here.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: They don't have it written down here either, so--
Speaker 2: Well, everybody just says SEED, and they know what you mean, so the initial words which formed the acronym just got sort of waylaid along the way. But I started working with him and helping, helping out with that project. And as I went along, I got more and more involved. I also worked with getting students associated and affiliated with the project and a number of young people have gone on and gotten their degrees, not always in science, but they, but most of the time, they wind up as very real contributors. And we're now in, as I say about the forty fifth year, and we're still doing it. And it's been a great, great program, most for the young people and also for the American Chemical Society because it has been inspirational for the people in the society to see that it had this kind of program going on. And about twenty years ago, we started a program which was similar, and I mentioned it earlier, the program which deals specifically with young people who are disadvantaged from the disadvantaged groups. And it is defined as African Americans, Native Americans and Hispanics. And that, we started that project about twenty years ago, and it, too, has done a wonderful job of bringing young people who are left out and disadvantaged into a place where they can achieve, where they can utilize their talents and abilities, where before that time, they might not have had a chance. And both of those programs have done wonderful things for the society, for young people in general, and for the American society as a whole, for the nation. And I'm proud to have been associated and affiliated with it.
Story_ID: 156836
Speaker 1: In 1972, you had an important, a product, I mean process patented, the manufacture of n-2-arylthiazole [sulfonamides] (laughter), I don't know if I can say it. But can you help me out here. What are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that's when I was doing some work on rubber at that time, rubber accelerators and it's part of the vulcanization process. UOP [Universal Oil Products], although its main business has been the development of oil, of oil products and methods for, for their production, you know, it's always been big in developing catalyst that could make gasoline, for example or some kind of petroleum products. But it's also been active in, in developing materials for other purposes. And so there are a number of areas of organic synthesis and production that UOP has contributed toward. You know, you just can't be focused on doing one thing. If you do, you're liable to find yourself out of business. And so UOP has always been a company, and I'm saying UOP now because that's what I'm most familiar with, and although it's a part of, of a bigger, larger corporation now, particularly, when you take me back to 1972, it's, it's UOP then. It's all UOP. That's what I was, that was the company that I was hired by, and I was working for at that time. And I was doing some, some good synthesis at that time, and good, very good process work at that time. And so, these, these compounds were good accelerators for rubber. Now, as you know, when you make, well, they were accelerators which prevented scorch. It might be called anti-scorch products. And you could, you could vulcanize the rubber if you're making tires or whatever you were doing. You were, you were curing, curing the rubber and you'd have to use various curing agents. And these, these materials, by having what we would call aromatic amines as a part of them, could cure rubber without causing it to undergo what we call scorch, and therefore, you would get tires which would be much more structured--be more structurally sound and would last longer if you would use materials that are anti-scorch agents. And one of the reasons that rubber products undergo what's called starch is that--scorch, is that you usually have to cure them, cure the rubber with protective agents. And so these protective agents are usually amines. And those amines, although you know you need them in there, particularly, the phenylene diamine and aromatic a-mean derivatives that you, that you have in there. You know you need them in there as antioxidants and anti--and, and anti- [?] but you don't want their scorch. You don't want it to scorch. So if you put in an accelerator which slows it down, you can inhibit some of the scorch and therefore, get the kind of structural build up in the tire that you want to have. And that will cause it to last a whole lot longer.
Story_ID: 156837
Speaker 1: In '74' [1974], you became a Councilor for the American Chemical Society. What is that and what does that mean, I mean I know what the American Chemical Society is, but what does it mean to be a Councilor?
Speaker 2: It's, the American Chemical Society has about, oh, has about 190 local sections. And the local sections have, each local section has counselors, a certain number of councilor. The number of councilor that a section has depends on the size of the section. Now, when I became a councilor in Chicago [Illinois], I believe we had sixteen counselors at that time. And I was the only, I was the only black counselor at that time. I believe only the second that they'd had in the entire history. And so that's, I became a counselor, and one year later, I think that same year I ran for, for section president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Section chair, excuse me, chair, chair of the section. And I lost, and then a couple of years later I ran again and won, and was elected, year later, I believe.
Speaker 1: So is this 1975 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1975.
Story_ID: 156838
Speaker 1: In '75' [1975], it also says here that you patented the scorch retardant for Universal Oil Products in '75' [1975].
Speaker 2: Did what?
Speaker 1: You patented a scorch retardant for Universal Oil Products in '75' [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's, that's similar to what I had done before with the first patent, I believe. I think that was my second patent to, along that line.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, you had some other patents around something called Cyanamide, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum. Yeah, didn't much come of that. I mean it was a good, it was a nice, these were nice patents. I still think that there's a great deal that could be made of those compounds. They, it's a new, new series of compounds that nobody seems to have made use of to this day. And I tell you what, a company, a British company saw the patent and wanted to license it from us. But they wanted us to make the compounds for them and send 'em to them to test, to evaluate. And I didn't have anybody working for me at that time. It would have meant I would have had to do twice as much work as I was doing. I didn't have the--well, if I had thought of, I mean looking back, I should have, I should have done it myself, but, hey, I was, I didn't, I had other things to do then. I didn't, that was gonna be a lot of work if I had to make the compounds. And the company was not interested enough in it to make 'em or give 'em to somebody else or let them make 'em. So they didn't. But I still think that they're a very, very interesting series of compounds which if exploited would have a lot of benefit.
Story_ID: 21825
Speaker 1: In the '70's [1970s], you said that NOBCCHE [National Organization for the professional advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] was formed in the '70's [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you in on the ground floor of that formation?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were you on the ground floor of the--
Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't, I, you know, I, I was just getting actively engaged with the American Chemical Society, and so most of my work has been in the American Chemical Society. I haven't directly affiliated with NOBCCHE very much, although I have been to several of their meetings. And I have a good relationship with the folks at, at NOBCCHE. It started off without me. I was, I didn't know about it for a good while. And when groups of people come together, and they form something like that, if, unless somebody tells you about it, you know, you don't know about it. It was, it was largely, for the most part, academics, people who were, who were involved in teaching, in education initially. And later on, it did involve industrial folks. Industrial folks weren't excluded. It's just that they don't--and industrial scientists by and large do not have the freedom to affiliate and associate like that. They don't have the time. Their companies don't give 'em as much time as academics have, you know. So if you're in, if you're in academia, you're, you have much more freedom to affiliate and join up in groups such as that. So it's not unusual that, that it was formed by black academics for the most part.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it, would it be fair to say then that black scientists for the most part have a hard time figuring out who the other black scientists are because of the nature of their work, if they're doing research, intense research?
Speaker 2: Well, not, not as much as they used to have. I would say that was probably, probably a, much more of a problem fifty years ago because there were so few. But they're many more now, although it's, the numbers are small, it's large compared to what it was in the '40's [1940s] and '50's [1950s], you know. And so there's much more and better communication and affiliation amongst black scientific professionals than there used to be.
Speaker 1: Are you or have you ever been, are you ever surprised by the other, about finding out about some of the other scientists that are out here, black scientists working on things?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, I, no, I don't think I've ever been surprised to--for one thing, I've always been out there myself, you know. And so, in some way or another, eventually, if they, if they're out there, I'm going to find out about 'em because I, I have and always have had good relationships and good communication with all of the blacks who are in the field and white scientists too. I mean it's--I've been, and part of that has to do with the fact that I have been actively engaged and involved in and with one of the largest chemical sections, one of the largest groups of chemists in the country. Chicago is a dynamic area, always has been, for a very, very long time. And so I was a leader, I became a leader in one of the largest sections of the American Chemical Society. That gave me the opportunity to make connections, to know people, you know, to be involved with and, of course, I, I got actively involved myself. I mean my affiliation with Project SEED, for example, has given me quite a bit of visibility and contacts all over the country. And so, I have not been shy about getting out there and taking part myself. And so when you, when you do that, other people appreciate the affiliation and so there's this, there's this sharing which goes on. And that has meant a lot to me, and I hope that it's meant a lot to the societies that I've been involved with.
Story_ID: 21826
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were with UOP [Universal Oil Products] for how many years?
Speaker 2: Thirty years.
Speaker 1: Thirty years, okay. So you retired from UOP?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did you retired from UOP?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I retired in 1993.
Speaker 1: Now, what would you consider to be your biggest accomplishment at UOP? One of the most notable thing that you, the things you're proudest of?
Speaker 2: I'd say the, probably the early work I did in rubber chemicals, synthesis of rubber chemicals, chemicals for the protection of tires, things of that sort. And that led, of course, to the--some of the other things that I did were sort of fall-outs from that, which didn't really get exploited or explored because it wasn't, it wasn't primary--it wasn't in the company's primary focus. Now, I never did get--one of the things that I would say was a disappointment to me in a way was--then it wasn't, probably more, as much my failure to want to get involved in that area at that time. But I didn't get involved and engaged in the company's major business, and that is, it's a catalytic company, you know. And I never was involved with that directly. And I, right now, as I look back on it, that would be the only regret that I have, major regret.
Story_ID: 21827
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at some point, you became the science advisor to the governor of Illinois, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I spent some time on the, on a committee which did that, which was, and it wasn't, it didn't amount to a great deal over time. I think it could of been, except that I, I don't think people, at that time anyway, perhaps even now, people at the local and state level don't really appreciate the role of science in society. It's beginning to be more so. I'm sure, right now, I'm still, it's probably still not appreciated at those levels. But you look at the national level, and look at what has gone on in the President's activities and actions that he has. If you follow, follow what [Barack] Obama has done. And one of the first things that he did was he visited the National Academy of Scientists and spoke to the National Academy. His first, he was the first president to have done that in about three or four presidents, you know. And it hadn't been done that much in the last fifty years. Maybe three presidents have done it. But that's one of the first things that he has done. And you look at what, what he inspired, what was inspired by him. A couple of years ago, for example, there were, oh, about six or seven house resolutions involving the recognition and edification of science that were passed. He, himself, established a program which was repeated this year, which brought young people into the Oval Office. And you see him, well, just last, a couple of weeks ago. There he is with this, it's a, the second one of these many conventions that he has where he brings young people into the Oval Office, you know. And he gets there and, and plays with the machinery and with the, the experiments that they have set up. And he's just been a very, very wonderful contributor to the recognition of science for young people. Now, a certain number of presidents do a little bit of that, but this president has gone far beyond what had ever been done. It doesn't seem to be well recognized. It's almost never written up in the paper or anything like that. But he has. And that's very important. It's gonna be important for us in the future, if we continue to do that because that's what we need. You know, we need to have more of our young people going into science and engineering and technology. We're getting our butts kicked all over the world by people who are coming forth and doing this. They recognize it, you know. We, we don't seem to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not since the Kennedy--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I guess the Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] administration was one of the last, and to some extent, Carter, you know, recognized--
Speaker 2: They did a little of it, they did a little of it, they did a little of it. None of, but at that time, it was, it was much harder to do even then, and there were--and we didn't recognize--well, let me put it this way. The U.S. was the leading country in the world coming out of World War II in science and technology. And what we did between the end of the War and up until the Russians put up Sputnik, we road on those laurels. We didn't do very much. I think we established the National Science Foundation, something like that, but we didn't do very much. But then the Russians put Sputnik, and it (laughter) showed us that if we don't, somebody else is. And so we got jarred into, into beginning to do more and a lot of things took place over the next, oh, thirty or forty years. But we've gone down again. We aren't encouraging our young people. We aren't putting anything out there for them to grab a hold of. And they aren't going for it. They aren't going toward it. They see where the money is going. They see that, you know, if, you can do better if you get to Wall Street or one of its, one of the Wall Street sidelines or something like that, you can make more. But there isn't enough room there for that. And if we don't, if we don't pick up, if we don't get ourselves more involved in science and technology, we're gonna continue to get our butts kicked. We're not gonna come out of this stuff that we're in right now unless we do that. And I don't think people understand that, but it's the truth.
Story_ID: 21828
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my hope is that we grow out of where we are right now. We have let ourselves slip back. We're not as, part of its--and part of it's our own fault. Part of it is the, you know, we're always, it's always gonna be a struggle because segregation and discrimination are still there, but they're not as dominant as they were. These factors are not as dominant as they were. But we're letting them be, we're allowing them to determine too much of what we do and who we are. And, you know, I had decided, that's one of the reasons that I, that I'm, I did what I did was that I had decided that I wasn't gonna let any of the stuff determine for me what I was gonna do with my life, you know. I mean I--I knew it was gonna be a struggle. I knew it wasn't gonna be easy, but I knew I was gonna come out of it. But unless you tell yourself that, and stick to it, then the easiest thing in the world to do is to slip down and just wallow around and get pulled down by those forces in society which are there to do just that.
Story_ID: 21829
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you, after retirement you said you, you taught at Columbia, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Columbia College--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in downtown Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Columbia is primarily focused on Art. Was it tough being a scientists at Columbia?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't tough because what you, what they were interested in doing was finding out or illustrating the role of science in the world and what role they could, and what part they could play in it. And a lot of young people did some wonderful things with it. You know, a lot of what has taken place, for example, over the last several years has been in the areas of computer technology. And, you know, computers are, are all, everything that's happened in computers is very much a, a role, shown the role of the application of science and technology. If, we wouldn't have computers if they had not, a long time ago, in Bell, places like Bell Labs, discovered the chips and so forth which are physical, chemical entities, you know. I mean, in order to make chips, you need (laughter), you need tremendous chemistry and physics and technology, you know. And without those, those basic and basic fundamental parts, you can't build a computer, you know. And, and it's still very important, the--if you start looking at the science of, that's involved in computer technology, it's still very important to have a basic understanding of that in order to move them further, to go further with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2002, you won the American Chemical Society Award for encouraging disadvantaged students into careers in the chemical sciences. Now, and this is the, and you also won the Henry Hill Award at one point. Now, the other winners of that same award were Samuel Massey, Henry McBay, Jeanette Brown, Shirley McBay. These are all names that we've heard--we hear around the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So, do you, do you see things, do you see an increased effort on the part I guess, of people in chemistry to bring along young people to, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm sure they're, I'm sure there is. I don't take part as much as I used to. Eventually, you get, you know, you get older and you're not able to travel and get around as to when, in the way that you were earlier. And I got children of my own now, one of which is disabled. And so I don't have the time to get around myself, but I still, still try to do what I can whenever I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm still involved and will be until the day I die as long as I'm able.
Speaker 1: Okay, we talked about earlier that in 1998, you held the symposium on Dr. Percy Julian out in California, and in 2007, there was a nationwide broadcast of the Percy Julian Documentary.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, so, did--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was '99' [1999] when--
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999], okay.
Speaker 2: --when I had the symposium.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, so, were any of the students form Columbia involved in the production an all that you know of?
Speaker 2: They helped me, not in the production, not in making the film. But they helped me a lot while I was there. I still have some of the, some of the plagues that I put together and that I made there. I used to show 'em wherever--I still do, I guess if I ever get around to it or if I'm ever invited somewhere, and it has to do with, with Percy Julian. But for the meeting in, in Anaheim, I put together a poster, poster board plaque show of Dr. Julian's life and accomplishments. And students, people at Columbia put that together, helped me with it. You know, I got the materials and, and had them all made and cut out and stuff, and they posted 'em for me, designed the poster and did the printing on it and everything. And so, they were a great help, and in turn, I tried to help them as much as I could.
Story_ID: 21830
Speaker 1: Sir, could you tell us about the OECD in 2010?
Speaker 2: I don't know, that must have come from the time I gave a talk, a talk about them in my, for the local section.  I've followed, I picked up on the OECD which is the, what is it?  Office of Economic and Chemical Development or, I've forgotten what the OECD means now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Speaker 2: Cooperation and Development, yeah, right.  I picked up on that about ten years ago when I first began to see it.  And so I followed it, and it's a very interesting organization in what it does and tries to do.  And, so I just got interested in it and still do follow them. And when they make predictions about the economy, the economic situation in the world and all of that, which they've done a lot of, I've found it to be very interesting and diagnostic. And it's a great organization. It's, you don't, up until about ten years ago, you didn't hear about it, but it came into being right after the, right after World War II [1939-1945] with a slightly different, I forget what the name was then.  But then about fifty years, oh, about fifty years ago, around 1960 was when it really took its present form.  And so I, I do follow it.  I do have a lot of respect for the work that they have done in that area and for the, the nations that have come together and joined it.  It, they are most, for the most part, what are called the Free World Nations.  Most, very few of the communist countries are, China's not involved, I don't believe, Russia or any of those.  So it is kind of narrowly focused, but I think that the work that it has done has been excellent and outstanding.
Story_ID: 21831
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the kind of, the kind of work that I've done in helping young people through, through Project SEED, through, I mean organizations such as that, the inspiration that I have been able to spread and share through my, my work with, with Dr. Julian, the Percy Julian Project, those kind of things have been very good.  I've, I've done a lot of work in the church.  The church, my church that I grew up in, I think that I, although I was young then, as I said, I was superintendent of the Sunday School even then.  And I've worked in the church where I live right now, and not much in recent years.  I've kind of gone down because the kind of work that I was doing was, it was, it was timely, and it took a lot of time.  I think I inspired a lot of young people, and I'm glad for that and when I went out there, we were the, only one of two black, two black families in my community.  And I was, for a long time, the only black family in the church that we belong to.  And I'm, I was glad--I'm happy, pleased and proud for the work that I did there, and I just, you know, I'm, I hope I can continue.
Speaker 1: Okay. Likewise, when you look back, is there anything that you wish you had done differently?
Speaker 2: No, not (laughter), not really.  I, I don't find that that's for me very productive.  My life is, has been a good life.  I always did the best I could.  I might have made some decisions that didn't turn out the way that I expected, but that doesn't mean it was the wrong decision necessarily.  The other one might not have been any better either, the other path might not have been any better or could have been worse.  No, I just, I'm just thankful for the life that I have had and for the life that I've been able to lead.
Story_ID: 21832
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your family.  You have children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have three children, one, my oldest is mentally disabled, but he's, you know, he's been with us all of his life and goes to a care center and we're right now, trying to think about what we can do that, so that he has a good life and is well taken care after we're no longer here and able to do that.  I have a daughter who, who got her Masters in creative writing, and worked for newspapers for a while and is now--she went ahead and got a legal training as a legal, I forget what the terminology is called, but she's a legal assistant who works for a law firm in downtown Chicago.  And my other son, who's my youngest, is a, works for a social service agency in New York.  His degree is, he has a Master's degree in theater, which he got from the University of California, Davis, and got his undergraduate degree at Miami of Ohio.  And, although he has not made it big in the theater, he has written some plays and had one or two that have been produced.  One came here to Chicago and for a couple of months, I believe.  And right now, he is the, I guess you would call it the financial manager for a social service firm in New York.  So, I'm proud of all my kids, of what they have been able to do, and I just, you know, I'm thankful and grateful for my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you still married?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife's at home.  We've been married for, let's see in a couple months, it'll be fifty six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's rare these days (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, I know, but we've been, been blessed to be able to be together for that, that time as a family, you know, and I'm grateful, thankful.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't think of anything right now that I would, would like to mention. No, I can't think of anything else. I told you my father was a minister, didn't I, preacher?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he wanted me to be, become a minister. I never really gave it any serious thought, but I'm, I consider myself very religious, in my life and in my thinking and in my philosophy. I think it's, I think it's, at root, at its bases, it, my life, I think, has been very much formed by religion.  I know that, not in the same sense as some people might think of, but in my, mine, I think it has done what, as it turned out, I wanted it to do in forming my decisions and shaping my life.  And I'm thankful for that.
Story_ID: 21833
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, as a person who did, did what he could with what he had, did the best he could all the time.
