Story_ID: 127316
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Scott, I'm sorry, Matthew Hickey is the videographer, JeNika Thomas is observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: Frank Ski, S-K-I.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 9th, 1964.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a morning show announcer for CBS Radio, one of many occupations I have, but that is the main one.
Speaker 1: And give us the location of this interview.
Speaker 2: This is in my loft at Atlantic Station in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 26th of February 2008.
Story_ID: 127317
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna begin with what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, all food, no.  My favorite food is I love steak, although I don't eat as much as I like to anymore, but I love a good steak.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I like summery colors and if it's not a summery color, then black suffices, but I like summery colors.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably late spring, before it gets too hot in the summer and while you still have nice cool nights, but desirable days, so late spring.
Story_ID: 127318
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family tree, and I'd like to begin with your mother's side of the family.  Tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please and tell me where she was born and if you know when she was born.
Speaker 2: Sandra Brent, New York City and I don't know the exact date.
Speaker 1: And spell her last name.
Speaker 2: B-R-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother is a very interesting character.  She is a math wizard, and she is one of the persons that I probably get most of my hustle from.  My mom is one of those people who, who probably could outthink most people, and she is, she's a very interesting person.  She is one of those people that if you sat down with her you'd be talking all night long and find the sun coming up behind you by the time you finished talking.
Speaker 1: And what was she like as you were growing up?  What lessons did you learn from her?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived with my mom probably until I was about six before I went to live with my father [John Rodriguez], but I would visit my mom often.  And I think what I learned most from her was like I said just the, the mentality, the street smarts, the, the understanding of the, the hustle of the average everyday person, making ends meet, you know, that's what she put most into me.
Speaker 1: What does she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Many different jobs.  What didn't she do?  I remember one time she was a programmer for Warner Brothers in the early days when computers were big gigantic machines with gigantic reels on it, and as a little kid I would go there and watch her put the tape on the computers at night and run these programs.  She was an accountant, great with numbers, and now she is a chef.
Speaker 1: And how much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: That was it high school, high school.
Story_ID: 127319
Speaker 1: Now what about your grandparents on your mother's [Sandra Brent] side?
Speaker 2: That is, the, the people that I'm closest to on that side and both of my grandfather and grandparents have both passed. But--
Speaker 1: What, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Donald Small and Barbara Small.
Speaker 1: And do you have any stories to share about the time you spent with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know Donald Small was the first entrepreneur I ever knew.  He had a very big maintenance cleaning company in New York City, and they used to do all the big buildings, clean the offices, do the windows, blinds, everything and as a child when I was coming up I worked for my grandfather every summer.  From when I could remember being as young as ten passing out flyers in buildings and apartment buildings to actually at fifteen, actually probably about fourteen driving the only Mercedes that existed in that area of Harlem [New York], and I would drive, I would get up at the crack of dawn and drive my grandfather around to the job sites and he always put me to work.  But, he put the whole family to work, and I often remember a lot of the family not really working, but always coming to get a check.  And I could never understand why I never saw so many family members not working, but always coming to get a check and that's probably the first lesson I learned in the art of taking care of extended family.  My grandmother was the woman that would get up before both of us and cook breakfast every morning, cook dinner every night, iron t-shirts and underwear and make sure the shirts were crisp and clean and she was that, you know, old fashioned grandmother that got the job done.  But my grandmother was fly.  My grandmother had Louis [Vuitton] bags in the '70s [1970s] and fur coats and was already going to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] and my grandmother and grandfather I can remember in the early '70s [1970s] were already going to the Kentucky Derby [Louisville, Kentucky] every year.  Now it's like a young thing.  Now it's like a hip thing to do, but they were already going.  My grandfather would go to all the [Muhammad] Ali fights and they were very well to do, so as a child I remember, you know, enjoying those times.  My grandfather taught me a very early lesson.  His, my grandmother's family was from Washington, D.C. so every year they would have a family reunion in Rock Creek Park in Washington, and my grandfather would drive down from New York and we'd all come down in the car and he would go from Northwest D.C. way into Southeast into the hood to buy all the liquor for the family reunion, and I used to be amazed like why are you passing all of these stores to go to this one store to buy the liquor?  And he said 'cause you gotta support black business, and that was the first lesson I learned.  He said it doesn't matter how far you gotta go, you know, you gotta support each other.  And he would only buy from black business and that's the way my grandfather was, never left the hood, had all the money in the world, could have left any time, never left the hood, but was responsible for building, you know, 139th Street Park on Lenox Avenue [New York City], supporting Rucker Park and different organizations in New York, but you know I learned a lot from those two.
Speaker 1: And, and where did your grand, grandparents live in Harlem?
Speaker 2: In Harlem.
Speaker 1: But where?
Speaker 2: 139th Street in Harlem.
Speaker 1: So, they lived on 139th?
Speaker 2: 139th and Lenox Avenue--
Speaker 1: Lenox.
Speaker 2: --In Delano Village [now Savoy Park], and I often wonder why they never moved, and they stayed in the same place until my grandfather died.
Speaker 1: Now you talk about your grandmother's people in D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Did you know any relatives there?
Speaker 2: I, yeah I know them--back then I knew them by passing.  I know them better now 'cause I actually spent time in D.C., but you know we're, we're all okay as family.  You know I don't spend probably enough time as many of us don't with our extended family.
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother, did you ever see pictures or know the names of your great grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, my great grandparents were Earl and Ella Brent, and my great, great, great grandfather started First Baptist Church in Washington, D.C., he, he founded the church and opened the church, Earl Brent, and then Earl Brent, Jr., took the church over.  And as a child, I spent many, you know young child from as a baby to about six or seven, I spent a lot of time with them too and Ella Brent was the old fashioned, took no mess grandmother and I remember getting hit with a switch plenty of times as a young child.  I, I knew the old switch stories, like go outside and get a switch and get a spanking.  Earl Brent was the preacher that could tell you the books of the Bible backwards and he knew the Bible backwards and forwards, so there's a lineage in my family of great preachers and sometimes I think that's where I get my oratory skills from sometimes is from them.
Story_ID: 127320
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is John Rodriguez.
Speaker 1: And tell me more about your father.  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in New York City, and my father was living on the east side of Harlem [New York] in the Puerto Rican side of Harlem and met my mother [Sandra Brent] in high school.  They met in high school.  My father was the very popular school president guy, and my mother was a musician and so was my father, and they met in music class and that, that's how they met.  My father, when I grew up I remember I, I eventually went to live with my father when I was about six and he had moved down to Miami [Florida] and my grandmother was Puerto Rican and of Indian descent and when I met her she spoke no English and that's how I learned to speak Spanish, with my grandmother who would come in a span of six months out of the year taking care of me.  I was the latchkey kid at six and seven years old, and my father worked in the evenings from about four o'clock on, so I would cook my own dinner or go upstairs to the neighbors' house, and the neighbors would come down and make sure I took a bath and everything and I went to bed on time.
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about your father.  Did he share any stories about his growing up in New York City?
Speaker 2: Not much.  My father always loved music, and I knew that he did that growing up.  He played the trumpet and he eventually left New York when he was about eighteen right after high school and moved down to South Florida.
Speaker 1: And your, what about your grandfather.  Did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandfather on that side, no.
Speaker 1: Any other relatives on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I knew my father had two brothers and, Danny and Louie [ph.], and, and then he had a sister and her name was Ruth and I remember as a child even visiting my grandmother in New York seeing my uncle Louie, who was the consummate ladies man.  I would watch him get dressed before he went out and this is during the disco era, so I can vividly remember his outfits and you know going out to the club at night, but yeah.
Story_ID: 127321
Speaker 1: We know that your, your father's [John Rodriguez] lineage comes from Puerto Rico--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Your mother's [Sandra Brent] family where did they come from?  I know you said that they lived in New York, but where was your family originally from?
Speaker 2: My, my mother's father, which was not my grandmother, not, not my grandmother's husband [Donald Small], my mother's father was from Washington, D.C.  They had been in D.C. for many, many, couple of generations, and then my grandmother was from D.C. before they moved to New York.  My grandfather that I grew up knowing was from South Carolina, and I remember summers, spending summers at his mother's house in South Carolina, very small town, dirt road going out to a single house out in, in on a country road and there being one five and dime store in town and not much else in the town.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what city it was?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't.
Story_ID: 127322
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have siblings on both sides.  So, everybody is a half to me, so on my mother's [Sandra Brent] side I have one, two, three brothers and a sister, and on my father's [John Rodriguez] side I have two brothers and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them in order of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's do that.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side there is Peaches [ph.], who is a sister under me and Ronald [ph.] who is under Peaches.  There is Vincent [ph.] and then there's Michael [ph.].  And on my father's side, there is Eric [ph.] who is under me, Jason [ph.], and Hailey [ph.].
Story_ID: 127323
Speaker 1: Going back to talking about your, your mother [Sandra Brent], did she share any other stories or was there anything that you could tell me that was, something that sticks in your mind about your young years that came from your mother?  Well actually what characteristic did you or do you think that you've gotten from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well like I said, I think I got a lot of my hustle from my mother.  My mother she was raised by my great grandfather and great grandmother, and a lot of time spent with them in Washington, D.C., and I remember that, you know it's interesting even though she had sisters on both sides from my grandfather in New York [City] and my grandfather in D.C., she kind of most relates to me because everybody to her is a half, like everybody to me is a half and you know even though she is the eldest it's, it's an interesting mix in what we share in that, you know, aspect of the family tree.
Speaker 1: Okay, and on your father's [John Rodriguez] side once again have you been to Puerto Rico to trace those roots?
Speaker 2: No, he, he has told me where the town is--Mayaguez-- and now one of the people I endorse AirTran Airways is going to Puerto Rico now, so I plan on making that trip and seeing, you know, where the family is from.
Story_ID: 127324
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would probably be in a one-room apartment in Washington [D.C.], I mean excuse me, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where my mother [Sandra Brent] lived in Philly with her husband at the time, and I was old enough and I remember having a train that I used to play with on the floor that was battery-operated, and I remember that train and playing with that train on the floor.  I must have been three, you know, three years old and that's probably one of my earliest childhood memories.
Story_ID: 127325
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the early years.  The first six years of your life you lived with your mother [Sandra Brent].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about where you lived, what neighborhood you lived in, and tell me about the friends and people in the community.
Speaker 2: That's a, that's a hard question for me.  A lot of what I remembered from those early years is kind of blocked out.  I remember leaving Philly [Phildelphia, Pennsylvania] and being taken to my great-grandparents' [Earl and Ella Brent] house in Washington [D.C.] for a while and then I remember being in a foster care program.  My mother had had some problems, and all of us were placed in a foster care system and my sisters and brothers at the time went to live with her husband's sister in Philadelphia, but I wasn't a child of his, so I wasn't taken and I was put in the foster care system.  And I can remember some very negative times being in foster care, fighting a lot as a young child, getting beatings a lot.  I remember being in a foster home with a room with a bunch of bunk beds and a whole bunch of kids in this one house, sort of like a group home situation.  And then I remember one day being in court and I remember them taking my mother down the hall crying and, and another time I remember being in a waiting room in the courthouse in probably New York [City] and with a bunch of kids playing and a bailiff came in, took me, and took me into a judge's chamber and the judge said, "this is your father [John Rodriguez], would you like to go live with him?"  And I remember saying yes because everything would be better than what I was dealing with and I knew that at a very young age.  So, I think some of the trauma from being in that foster care system caused me to block out a lot of the memories I had of my early childhood and photo-wise I probably have three, maybe four pictures of myself from back then.
Story_ID: 127326
Speaker 1: Before you went to live with your father [John Rodriguez], did you not have a relationship with him?
Speaker 2: No, I had never met him or seen him, didn't even know he existed, and for all I knew my hus--my mother's [Sandra Brent] husband was my father until we all got separated and I wound up alone in some strange place, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what life was like when you went to live with your father?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I remember being young and very independent.  I remember as soon as my father got me from the courts in New York [City] that night we left the courthouse and went to Macy's in New York and bought a whole bunch of clothes, 'cause I had nothing.  I had no clothes, no shoes, I had nothing and I remember being in Macy's and my father just buying a bunch of clothes and a suitcase and then we got on a plane and went to Miami [Florida].  Then, I remember being in Miami, which was strange, because I had known nothing but city and being in an apartment complex, you know, with a canal behind it and a pool and lots of kids and so being a kid myself back then was easy to make friends, but I remember that right away very early my father was married at the time and I later learned that he had married somebody on a temporary basis, so he could go and get custody 'cause I think back then it was very difficult for a single man to get custody of a child.  So, he, you know then I remember a couple of months after I got to Miami [Florida] that the woman that he was married to left and that was the last time I saw her and yeah.
Speaker 1: How, how old were you?
Speaker 2: I remember getting to Miami I was probably about five or six, yep, because I remember starting the first grade in South Florida.
Speaker 1: Tell me what the, the neighborhood looked like.  You said there was a big difference because you were a city kid, so tell me what was the neighborhood like there in Miami?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a typical Miami apartment complex with two stories like each, each apartment building probably had four units up and four units down and there was kind of like a cul-de-sac parking area in the front of the apartments and they would face each other.  And they were like clusters, and so you know there was a, there was a kid who lived over me in a family and I remember them--it's, it's amazing how I can remember the family.  Fred and Irene Abramson and, oh not Abramson, Aronson, and Craig Aronson was, was it Craig or, no it was David, David Harrington [ph.] and that was like my best friend.  He was the same age.  They were a white family that lived, a white Jewish family that lived upstairs.  They had a daughter who was maybe a little bit older and I remember being there probably a year or so before we moved away, moved on.
Speaker 1: For about a year you lived in that, in that neighborhood and so this was a mixed community, middle class--
Speaker 2: Yeah it--
Speaker 1: --What, what type of--
Speaker 2: --Was suburban.  I, I remember I had, I had no black friends until I got to junior high school.  I remember being in elementary school and had one up until the third grade in the elementary school I went to and I remember it was Ludlam, Ludlam Elementary School [Miami, Florida].  I remember there was one black kid that was in my class, and him and I became friends and we know each other to this--I, I run into him when I go down to Miami every now and then.  His name was Jeff McKenton [ph.], and he was a shorter guy, but real fast and we were, we became really good friends, but up until junior high that was the only black friend I had.
Story_ID: 127327
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your elementary school years.  Now you went to that school [Ludlam Elementary School, Miami, Florida] for just a year and a half, then you moved away.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to that school for a minute and I probably went to that school and I remember, I probably went to that school until about the third, second or third grade and then I remember moving over to a, to a house because my father [John Rodriguez] had got married and him and the woman that he got married to, he married a Cuban woman, and my father and the Cuban woman got a house together and, well actually my father got the house, he was renting the house, and then he moved the Cuban woman in, and we lived in this house for a while before they bought a new house.
Speaker 1: Two things, your elementary school, do you remember anything significant about elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember being very young, probably second or third grade and the Miami Herald held a city-wide science fair competition and they came to our school for us to present our projects and I remember working with a kid that was probably, he was Indian or Iranian and spoke very little English and him and I were partners.  I was black, he was Indian, I mean you know not too many minorities back then and him and I worked on a project, we did a project on volcanoes and earthquakes and I remember it 'cause I was really into science and interested in that and art and we built a city and we built this volcano and made the volcano erupt and showed how earthquakes are done and anyway I remember being at this science competition and I thought that him and I had the best project and I remember at the end after they gave all the awards out we hadn't won anything, not first, second, or third place in any of the five categories.  And I remember being feeling so disappointed and low, and then the head guy from the newspaper said we have a special award because this one project actually won first place in every category, so instead of giving them first place in every category we have the best of show award and we won and that was probably one of my fondest elementary school memories.  But, I was always hands on.  I built my own cars.  I remember building when I, when I got a little older and we moved into our second house I had a neighbor who's like my best friend to this day, whose African American, his family was very scholastic, his mom was a teacher and his dad was a principal.  Him and I used to build everything.  We were, we were poor, we didn't, we couldn't get a new bike, we had to build a bike.  We had to build skateboards.  We had to build things and that was it.
Story_ID: 128057
Speaker 1: We were talking about your elementary school years, but before we go back to elementary school, you said to me that your, your father [John Rodriguez] who is Puerto Rican married a Cuban woman.  Tell me because I'm always under the impression that Cubans and Puerto Ricans did not get along.  So, can you talk to that, speak to that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting because I, you know I wasn't really cultured and you know the Puerto Rican family, you know.  I went to live with my father at six and all my father's friends were white.  He, he didn't really have any, you know, any black friends or any Spanish friends, they were all white.  And when he finally married this Cuban woman it was kind of like a culture shock for me because she was very family oriented, lived with her parents still, and did everything as family and I got to learn the Cuban culture a lot.  I--Cubans are very proud people and so are Puerto Ricans, and it's like even though they're related they're kind of not related.  It's funny because I always felt a little bit, I felt loved immediate, in the immediate family by her parents and by her, but I never really felt like I fit in to the rest of that culture or that family.  I knew it, everybody knew me, but I never really felt like I was a part of it and you know it's, it's interesting because you know it doesn't matter whether you're Puerto Rican or you're Cuban because there's black and white Puerto Ricans and there's black and white Cubans and there's segregation in Puerto Rico and there's segregation in Cuba.  And it was interesting being black and her family being white was, you know, imagine it was the same problem if, if she'd been white, it would have been the same thing.  So, it was kind of like a, it was kind of like a cultural division there and I don't, I don't think my grandmother who was alive at the time really cared for that side of the family.  She was Puerto Rican and I could see it more in the older people than the younger.
Story_ID: 128058
Speaker 1: And what about the, the segregation of the cultures in Miami [Florida]?
Speaker 2: It's terrible.
Speaker 1: [Coughing] Excuse me.
Speaker 2: Miami is probably, you know growing up there I can say one of the most racist cities I've ever seen as a child growing up there in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].  It was very divided.  Blacks lived at the bottom, but then under blacks were Haitians, and the Cubans were just coming up, but the interesting thing is that the Cuban community had that, you know, brought them together was that language barrier, like they had to deal with each other.  You know if you were Cuban you had to deal with a Cuban dentist or Cuban doctor or go to a Cuban store and that sense of being united for a cause really caused that community to flourish off of each other and they networked a lot.  Blacks were, I mean you, you had a tough time getting a job, getting an education.  I remember the thing that always got me over was that I could speak Spanish.  That always got me over.  Being Puerto Rican in Miami was better than being, you know, better than saying you were black.  You know I got more job opportunities; more things came out of that.  There was more of a relationship with that Latin culture, and I just think that it's a tough way to go.  It's a, it's a tough way to go.  I've never really--you don't go to Miami and see a well to do upscale black neighborhood in Miami, like you're not gonna see, it's not, it's not Atlanta [Georgia] or Charlotte [North Carolina], or [Washington] D.C. or Maryland, it's, it's just not.  You go there and see every other community have their upscale parts, but you don't really see that in Miami, you know, and it wa--it was tough.
Story_ID: 128059
Speaker 1: Let's go back to elementary school, now tell me was there a teacher in your elementary school that you can remember that might have influenced you or someone that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: There was one teacher, probably sometime--I'm getting older now so the names are harder to remember, but she was the one teacher and she was an African American teacher that in the fourth grade really challenged me.  I was always an average student.  I was one of those kids that I can really relate to the fact that school is not for everybody.  I, I disliked school.  I never, school was not somewhere where I really had fun or really felt like, you know, it was someplace I needed to be.  I wasn't scholastic.  I didn't like doing homework.  I didn't like taking tests, and I did everything just to get by.  I, I never failed, but I never--every now and then I got good grades and I was one of those kids that honestly I could get, if I really wanted to and that's the thing that frustrated my father [John Rodriguez] so much, if I wanted to I could have got straight A's, but I never wanted to, and subsequently I was the middle of the road C student.  But, there was one teacher who in the fourth grade she knew that about me and she called my father and told my father and my father was a very strict disciplinarian and I remember it was her class where I got my first report card with straight A's.  It was the first and last time because it was her that I ever did that; never did it happen again.  And my father has, he says he has all of my report cards, you know, but, you know that, that was it.
Story_ID: 128060
Speaker 1: You say your father [John Rodriguez] was a strict disciplinarian, did you give him much reason to discipline you?
Speaker 2: I wasn't, you know the interesting thing was my father was old school, and I wasn't a bad kid, but I would get in trouble for things I didn't even do, just having the association of being involved in something that somebody I knew I might get in trouble.  I did do some crazy things when I was young, but he was, he was the man that had the long chore list.  I worked around--he, he loved his garden and plants, and he basically had a jungle in my yard and I took care of this jungle.  And to this day, if people come to my house and they're like, "oh your grounds and the landscaping look so good."  I say "yeah it ought to I spent most of my youth doing this kind of stuff."  So, even though I don't have to get out there and dig any holes anymore, I can tell people how to do it.  I can tell people what it looks like and, and my gardeners they, they, I'm tough to deal with 'cause, 'cause I know it so well.  I grew up in Miami [Florida] so, Miami after you go down a half a foot it's all coral, it's all coral rock, so, you know, me and I call him Mr. Pick, we used to go at it.  It used to take me a week to dig a hole to put a plant in, but you know that was my father, you know, so he, that's one thing he put in me so even my, my earliest jobs was landscaping and cutting grass for people.
Speaker 1: Now this, you, you had moved into a house and you were living with your father and his wife.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Vivian.
Story_ID: 128061
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the community.  Tell me, give me a description of say a square block.
Speaker 2: The first one?  The first one or the one I really grew up in?
Speaker 1: We can do the one you, well which ever, you can do both.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the first one it was interesting because I lived there first with my father [John Rodriguez] alone, and when he got married we stayed there for a little while and then moved away.  That neighborhood was directly across the street from a junior high school [Glades Junior High School, Miami, Florida] and even though I was too young to go to that junior high school when I finally moved into the house that I grew up in I wind up going back to that junior high school.  But, that neighborhood was, it wasn't mixed at all.  It was all white and I remember spending a lot of time--my hobby was building rockets and I would go in that junior high school field and on a daily basis and all I would do is shoot up model rockets and it was like a special occasion when my father came home and bought me some rocket engines 'cause you know without the rocket engines it wasn't happenin', so I was building a lot more than I was flying, but, so we stayed there for a hot minute, but the house I'm most, most familiar with that I grew up on was on a cul-de-sac.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the street?
Speaker 2: 79th street, yes, and it was my house and there--when I first moved in there was one, two, about five houses and my best friend, Craig [Aronson], moved in two houses away, so we lived on this cul-de-sac together and then in the corner there was another group of kids and on the outside corner there was another group of kids and it was a very tight knit, like we knew everybody, and that cul-de-sac was the street to play on.  So, all the kids came and played in that cul-de-sac, but what was most interesting that kids don't really have today is that we had a small neighborhood park and we would go up to the park every day and we'd play football or soccer every day.  And even though my father couldn't afford me to play organized sports, like I never played little league baseball 'cause he couldn't afford it, or little league football or anything like that, we always had a park and we'd always have a pickup game where we could get together and play on, so that kind of sufficed in growing up.
Story_ID: 128062
Speaker 1: Were there any other activities that you participated in besides sports?  Were you music, were you involved in music at all?
Speaker 2: No, you know the only thing I did at a very young age is I started when I was in junior high school I realized that the only thing I could play that was free and do that was free is to run, and from junior high [Glades Junior High School, Miami, Florida] all the way through high school [Miami Killian Senior High School, Miami, Florida] I used to run track and cross country and my junior high school didn't have a cross country or a track team.  They had abandoned the program.  They played soccer and baseball, but they didn't, they didn't run, and one of the coaches there used to be who was the, the head coach of the high school, the head physical education person for the junior high school rather pulled me up one day and he said, "You know, there's a city-wide cross country meet I want you to pick five of your friends that you run with and we'll get you some uniforms and you guys can go out and run in this race."  So, we missed a whole cross country season and all we did was get into the final city-wide meet at the end.  We missed a whole season 'cause they didn't have a team, and I remember they gave us some shirts, some cross country shirts that were from like the '60s [1960s].  They were real old.  They were in some boxes in the junior high school and I pulled some guys together and we ran in this race and we did really good.  We did, we did really good, so good that they, you know, brought the program back after we left, but I left the junior high school with my mark on a couple of, of the events, but, you know, that was, that was really good.  I went from there and the same group of guys we stayed together in high school and we started, we ran together in high school and then we had a club that we started and we would run in the Orange Bowl Marathon and we became runners at a very young age and running marathons in junior high school and high school.  I, I remember that.
Story_ID: 128063
Speaker 1: But, before we go forward, any further, I wanna know we were talking about the neighborhood [in Miami, Florida]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And you described the cul-de-sac, what about, what type of neighborhood was this,--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --Who was in, who lived in the neighborhood, and do you have any idea of what the parents of your friends, what their occupations might have been?
Speaker 2: Sure, my, my best friend Craig [Aronson], his mom was a school teacher and his dad was a principal and I remember that I had a couple of other friends that lived across the street and his parents were in the fire department.  And it's funny because both Craig and his kids, his two boys, are now firefighters and paramedics and they still all know each other from this neighborhood.  There were several kids that lived in the neighborhood, but we were the main, we were the main kids.  All the other kids kind of followed our suit.  I remember that that neighborhood in Miami [Florida] being so rural.  You know everybody had to have a bike.  There's no bus.  Like you couldn't catch a bus anywhere.  And there was a McDonald's in the neighborhood, which was like the meeting place for all the kids and it was across the street from this local little park, and we all rode our bikes every day.  And I knew kids from blocks and blocks and blocks, and blocks away 'cause we would all meet on that field and play.  And on a good day it might be fifty kids out there playing from, from all over.  So, we knew all the neighbors for years.  People back then didn't move so much.  They stayed in the same house for a long time.  There was a canal, and all we did was we fished.  I remember I fished, I probably fished every other day from the age of six until I got to high school, I fished.  You know it was interesting that, you know I told you I was very independent as a young child.  I remember getting up on a Saturday at six and seven years old and going to the canal fishing all day, and I wouldn't come home until it got dark and my father [John Rodriguez] never asked me where I was, what I did.  It was very, I'm just, that's the way I am now.  So, it's, but now I would never imagine letting my seven year old go out fishing all day.  I couldn't, I couldn't do it, but.
Speaker 1: So most of the household were two-parent households--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --In the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You said the first neighborhood was all white--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Was that true of the same, this neighborhood as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and the only, like the only other black kid was my best friend Craig.  We were the only black kids in the neighborhood.  And the funny thing about that is Craig and I never felt, like I never felt racism.  I didn't know what racism was until I got to high school.  Like as a young kid I never saw racism.  I remember in high school around probably my fifteenth or sixteenth birthday is when the Miami riots [1980] happened, and Craig and I used to from a very young age, from when I was just starting [Glades] Junior High School [Miami, Florida]--
Story_ID: 128064
Speaker 1: Well, tell me, before we go to that story, tell me the name of your, your high, the junior high school?  Let's go to your jun--
Speaker 2: It was Glades.
Speaker 1: Glades.
Speaker 2: Glades Elementary.  I mean Glades Junior High [School, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Junior high school.  Let's talk about your junior high school years first and then we'll, we'll go on, so we'll stay--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In junior high school, tell me about teachers and activities.  You told me about the running.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you thinking about anything in particular in junior high school?  What were you dreams?
Speaker 2: I was trying to find myself more so in junior high school.  I remember that it, it was difficult because I would spend summers in New York [City].  I would spend spring break in New York, and everybody in New York was black and everything we did was black, everything was soul food, black neighborhoods, and R and B music.  And then I would come to Miami [Florida] and everything was white.  Never ate soul food, never heard black music, never had black friends.  I remember, you know, trying to get into the youth group with the church in junior high school.  Never just felt like I fit in.  Never felt comfortable.  It was, it was, it was a very, junior high was a very weird quirky time for me.  I never had a girlfriend.  There were girls that I like, but I never had a girlfriend.  All the girlfriends I had were in New York when I would go and I'd write letters back and forth.  I never, and I remember that, that was right around the time when the Cuban population was getting a lot bigger, so the junior high school had a big Cuban population and I had, you know, a lot of Cuban friends, but I never really felt like I was really in there.  Remember I played volleyball for the school and that was about it.  There's not, not much I remember.  I remember, I remember, one thing I do remember about junior high and I used to sell candy.  I used to walk to school, so I'd stop at the store and buy a boat load of candy and sell it all day out of a bag and I remember I used to take gambling bets on football games and I had a friend that was Samoan and he was really big and I would give him, you know, 50 percent if he had to collect any money for me.  I remember I was running a little gambling ring in junior high school, but that was, that was really about all I remember about junior high school.
Story_ID: 128065
Speaker 1: Thinking about your, your neighborhood back then in Miami [Florida], if you could think of a sound, a sight, or a smell, what would come to mind?
Speaker 2: Mangoes, lot of mango trees, which became another entrepreneurial venture that I had.  Water, smells from the canal, fishing all the time.  Cut grass, I used to cut grass all the time.  And it was a very quiet, quiet neighborhood, not too many, not too much sound, not too much sound, very quiet.
Speaker 1: And with, with your friends, and, and you were saying that your, your friends were white, what activities--well let, let's say every kid had favorite television shows that they watched with their friends, tell me about some of those times that you spent with your friends.
Speaker 2: You know back then we didn't really get a chance to, there wasn't too much to watch.  Every, everything in the daytime was reruns, so it was old reruns of 'Bewitched' or 'Hogan's Heroes' or something after school.  Most of the time we never wanted to be in.  We never were in the house except on a rainy day, never.  And up until, you know, the time that I met Craig [Aronson], that was the only other, that was when R and B music and that kind of culture started coming back in, you know, but not, not until then.
Speaker 1: So, what did you listen to?  What type of music were you listening to?
Speaker 2: Pop.  I can tell you all the white rock and roll groups from back in the day, from the Eagles to Aerosmith to Kiss.  That, that's all we listened to back then.  You know going to school if I was riding with somebody at school or, you know, at somebody's house they were playing their albums and that's all it was.  It was white groups.  I, I, I didn't know any black groups back then.
Story_ID: 128066
Speaker 1: All right, so you as the, with your gambling operation in, in junior high school, what happens when you leave junior high school [Glades Junior High School, Miami, Florida]?  What high school do you go to?
Speaker 2: Went to Miami Killian Senior High [Miami, Florida] and that was the first time--I remember the first day at school.  I was a very, I was very hip by that time because I had spent my summers in New York [City], so my style was very New York-ish.  I remember the first day of high school when I got to high school I had some white overalls with a red Adidas T-shirt with a white emblem and some white Nikes, Nik, Nike with a red stripe and that's how I was sporting at the high school.  And I remember getting to the high school and for the first time having girls come up and talk to me because the high school was half black, and that was the first time that like the sea opened up and I felt like okay I can make something happen now and I started coming into who I was in high school.
Speaker 1: And so what were some of the activities in high school that you got involved in 'cause now you feel that you kind of fit in now is that right?
Speaker 2: I joined, yeah.  I joined the African club, the black club.  I was, I, I was in part of the arts department.  I did modern dance.  I, I remember the first thing I did though when I got to high school they asked me to be a cheerleader, you know, and they had male cheerleaders and I did that for a minute and then I realized that wasn't really a cool thing to do in my high school.  But, I did the first pep rally when school first started and what not.  And even though I played football every day, I never tried out for the high school football team.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: You know I never really, because I never played youth ball.  Like I never played at the parks and what happened was by the time high school started after the summer the football team had been practicing already for like a month, so I didn't know anything about it.  So, I got to high school and I saw these guys practicing and it was already too late for me to join and that was it.  I, I, I never played organized football.
Speaker 1: Did you still have a love for science?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I always had this love for science.  I always--you know one of the thing that I used to do even growing up from very young in elementary school I would always bring animals that I caught into the house.  So, I had fish tanks in my house with turtles and iguanas.  I never went to a pet store and bought a fish.  I would catch all my fish, and I had the little fish in tanks and raised fish and I used to raise, I used to hatch turtles from eggs and lizards from eggs.  Birds, I would get eggs out of the nest and bring 'em in and hatch 'em myself.  It was, that was, I was really big into all that, yeah.  I was really big in it, and as I got older, it got a little more sophisticated.
Story_ID: 128067
Speaker 1: And I remember one early story with my father [John Rodriguez], my father one of his hobbies was building fish tanks.  I thought it was very artistic with plants and, and textures and he would build these great fish tanks and he had a fish tank, he had a really big fish tank and I one time caught a turtle, a mud snapping turtle and it was a baby.  It was really small, like the size of a quarter and I brought it home and I put it in my father's tank and when he got home I went to look for it to show him and the turtle wasn't there anymore and I never spoke about it and I never told him and finally I heard him complaining about, it had to be a month later, and he was complaining about his fish disappearing in the tank and we never saw like where the fish were going.  He couldn't understand they weren't in the filter, they weren't anywhere.  He just knew that these fish were disappearing and one day he called me in there he took everything out of the tank and when he was taking everything out of the tank to clean it and figure out what was killing all his fish it was a big turtle at the bottom of the tank underneath the gravel that was, that had grown from a quarter to, it was big, it was about that big and it was underneath the gravel and it was eating all his fish.  That was the last time I ever put something in one of my dad's tanks, trust me, but that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 128068
Speaker 1: So, science, yes science I followed.  I followed science.  As, as science got more difficult in high school, I didn't really do as well with--I was never good at math.  Like math was not my subject, so high school science was very mathematic.  That part of it I didn't like, and I got more into history at that point than, than science, but that was it, and again--
Speaker 2: Did your grades improve?
Speaker 1: No, my grades never improved.
Speaker 2: So, you were just doing enough to get by?
Speaker 1: I graduated from high school with a C average.  And it was interesting because I tell people all the time I never took an SAT test.  I never had a counselor ask me what I wanted to do after high school.  I ne-- like high school was just--when I graduated from high school, it was very uneventful.  I remember going to the prom and I remember graduating, and that was it.  And then one day I came home and my father [John Rodriguez] gave me an ultimatum right after I graduated from high school and he said, "You have three choices, you can go to college," which he had no idea how to do 'cause he had never been, "go to the [U.S.] Army," which he had no idea on how to do it 'cause he had never been, "or get a job and pay rent," and those were the three.  So, I had a lot of friends that were going to the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] on football scholarships and I had, that's when the music side of me started coming out in high school and I had a lot of friends that I would DJ parties for up at the University of Miami at a young age and I remember riding my bike to the U of M, to the admissions office, during the summer after high school.  I rode my bike up there, and I walked into the admissions office and the lady said, "Can I help you?"  And I said, "Well I wanna go to college here."  And she, she said, "Well you take the SAT?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Did you apply?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Well you can't go to college here."
Story_ID: 128069
Speaker 1: So, you were telling me about your trip to the admission office at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was a rude awakening for me going in there and she telling me I wasn't going to be able to go to college there.  And then I went to my next choice, which was for going into the military and it's funny because I was very honest with the military about an injury I had sustained while in high school with my knee and they didn't let me in.  They didn't let me into the military, thank God. You know my life would have been completely different.
Speaker 1: What happened with your knee?
Speaker 2: I used to--Craig [Aronson] and I used to dream of racing bikes, not motorcycles, but ten speeds, and one time while we were riding--we used to ride, sometimes we, Craig and I would ride 100 miles a day and I got hit by a car and later on that year I got hit by a car again in the same knee and it basically tore, you know, the cartilage and some of the ligaments in my knee, so I was still running but I realized that after a certain distance instead of being able to run twenty-six miles, after about fifteen or sixteen miles my knee would swell up real bad, so that kind of ended the whole running thing and when the military, the [U.S.] Army doctors doing the physical when I told them about that they didn't let me in and my father [John Rodriguez] was really upset.  He's was like why'd you tell them (laughter).  I was like what was I supposed to do?  I didn't know they weren't gonna let me in because of it.  Then, I went out and got a job and I started working in, in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: 1982.
Story_ID: 128070
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your, about your prom.  You said you went to the prom, so I wanna hear that story.
Speaker 2: Right.  I went to the prom.  I had a, I had a girlfriend in high school that was my girlfriend all the way through high school and we had another friend who, that we all, it, it was a group of us.  It was probably, it was six of us that were really tight, six of us were really tight in high school and we all went to the prom that night.  I couldn't afford a tuxedo, but my father [John Rodriguez] had said that every man needed to have a blue sport coat and a pair of beige slacks.  So, instead of renting the tuxedo he bought me a blue sport coat with beige slacks.  Every event that I ever had I wore the same thing and in high school I borrowed a tie and wore the blue sport coat, beige slacks, and I had a bright red tie on and my date she had on a red dress and that was my high school prom.  I remember going to the prom for a hot minute and then we left and went somewhere and wind up, you know, coming home.
Story_ID: 128071
Speaker 1: Your first job.
Speaker 2: Can I go back on something real quick?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: One of the things I wanted to tell you was that my father [John Rodriguez] was, as a single father, was very good at doing a lot of activities.  He, he loved being outdoors.  My father was an outdoors person, so my father took me--one of the reasons why I was so entrenched in science, I forget to mention to you is that my father took me at a very young age to Cape Canaveral [Florida] and we got a boat and we went out on the bay off Cape Canaveral and at a very young age I saw the Apollo Rocket take off and that changed my life.  That is the one single most thing that got me interested in science, and because of that, my favorite TV show used to be 'Star Trek.'  Even as an adult I went back and bought every episode of 'Star Trek'; so I have, I have 'em all.  That was a thing for me.  That's why I built rockets and everything after that.  My father also was, loved the water and snorkeling and he once for the summer rented a house on an island, one of the out islands of the Bahamas, no electricity, just this house on this island, and there was a generator.  You had to put gas in the generator at night, and we only ran the generator at night, but it was my father, me, and my grandmother and we would go out in the ocean and spear fish and catch fish and so that now I'm an avid scuba diver because of that.  My father every Saturday we would get up at six o'clock in the morning and we'd go fishing out in the Everglades in Miami [Florida], and my father would let me walk off.  I'd walk off and he'd say be back here at this time for lunch, and I'd walk down these canals and I could have been eaten by an alligator or anything.  My father just, he was like, he just, I guess he must have just known I was gonna be all right and never really put a lot of pressure on me like that.  I remember the first lesson my father taught me at a, at a young age was I climbed a tree and I went way up in this tree and I got stuck like kids get stuck in the tree because when I got up there and looked down I couldn't remember how I got up there to retrace my steps to come down.  And my father looked up in the tree and he said, "Oh well you got up there so I guess you gonna get down" and, and it got dark and I remember I was crying and all the other, other kids in the neighborhood were looking and the other parents were feeling sorry for me and I finally got down from that tree by myself and I think that was one of the biggest character building things my father ever did to me.  But, he was the outdoors person that put all that into me.
Speaker 1: Did that make you more aware of your surroundings so that when you did go off were you, you weren't afraid?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were you conscious of your surroundings knowing that if you got stuck that you would have to find your way back?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  You know plus spending summers in New York [City] I learned about, you know, the hustlers and gangs and I knew about, you know people with bad morals and people that could hurt me.  I learned that real early living in New York, so that coming to Miami, was a much slower pace, so really mentally I was way ahead of the kids in Miami.  Mentally I was far passed them.
Speaker 1: But in, but in New York you didn't have alligators--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --And, and the Everglades, which is a different kind of--
Speaker 2: I never worried about that kind of stuff, and that's one of the biggest complaints of my wife [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] now with my kids.  I don't, I don't worry about that.  I have snakes in the backyard, and I tell my kids to go get it, 'cause that's what we had to do.  If there was a snake in the backyard, you had to catch it and move it, so I learned how to do that young.
Story_ID: 128072
Speaker 1: But, that's very interesting.  Describe to me a, a time that you spent in the Everglades and what you, you know, what you would do to go, was it fishing?
Speaker 2: There was one time, just to give you an example there was one time, there was all the pets in the neighborhood, a lot of pets were disappearing.  People had dogs and they'd come out and their dogs would be gone, and we lived off of a canal like I said and Craig [Aronson] and I surmised that there must have been an alligator that had moved into our section of the canal and maybe he was coming out at night killing animals.  So, Craig and I decided that we were going to spend the night on the canal and catch us an alligator and we were very young, and our parents let us.  That's the crazy part about it; they let us.  We pitched a tent, we got a big net, we got some chicken meat and we tied it on a string at the edge of the canal, we found a place where there would be, where the alligator would be able to come up and we were fine until it got dark.  When it got dark, it got dark, and I remember him and I being in this tent and hearing the alligator come out the water and taking the chicken and we don't know how big it was, we never saw it, but I remember we got scared and we left and the next day the animal control, Florida Animal Control came out and caught this huge alligator.  So, I mean, you know God looks after babies and fools and we were, we were both of those at the time, so, so we were never, we were never, we were never scared.  Craig and I were never scared.  We, as adults we finally caught an alligator, but that's another story, but we, that--that's how I grew up.
Story_ID: 128073
Speaker 1: So, now in 1982 you graduate from high school and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --You have these three choices and your last option is what you elect to do, but you're still DJing at the university [University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still DJing parties.  I'm still DJing parties and--but not making any money.  The interesting thing is I started working probably in the seventh or eighth grade.  I started cutting grass.  I cut grass, I washed cars, I sold mangoes, I sold avocados, I tended to gardens; I did it all.  I never had a time when I wasn't working.  I can't remember a time that I wasn't working.  Very young I would go into the woods and dig up tropical plants and put 'em in cups and put 'em on a wagon and go from door to door and sell plants.  I was--
Speaker 1: How did you know what, which plants to dig up, your father [John Rodriguez]?
Speaker 2: My father, yeah.  I knew what plants people were buying, you know, and what plants were not weeds and stuff like that at an early age.  I knew that people that had, you know, acres of mangoes trees.  The mangoes fall off the trees and then they rot and they stink, so it was a chore to pick them up and I would go to people's houses on a weekly basis and pick up mangoes and anything that I could get up in the tree to pull off I'd get down, and they let me for free and I'd take all the mangoes and Craig [Aronson] and I would go in the corner on the intersection by our house and we'd sell mangoes.  I had, at one time I had seventy-five clients that I cut grass for, seventy-five, and I would cut grass for ten dollars a yard.  I wouldn't edge, I wouldn't clean up, I wouldn't rake.  My deal was ten dollars I'll cut your grass you can do the rest or you can get somebody to come for twenty-five dollars and do it all, and on a hot day in Miami [Florida] when the football games are on every man I ever went to let me cut their grass for ten dollars and I was a ten dollar kid cutting grass and that's what I did.  My father didn't buy me a bike.  I had to buy my own bike on layaway, and with those ten dollar yards I bought my clothes, I bought my tennis shoes.  I bought anything I needed.  I, I bought my own stuff.  So, when it was time to go to work for real, for real that, that wasn't nothing to me.
Story_ID: 128074
Speaker 1: What was your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job was McDonald's, and I was a proud McDonald's employee.  I had the fastest register time at the McDonald's where I worked at, and I loved working at McDonald's.  I, I have never had a problem.  McDonald's was like a prideful job to have back in the day.  It was like really cool that you worked at McDonald's 'cause your friends would come in and get free food, but I worked at McDonald's as a first job.
Speaker 1: And how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: I, I worked McDonald's from the end of high school--I probably did McDonald's for about a year and a half, two years before I started getting into more serious jobs.
Story_ID: 128075
Speaker 1: And your music still--
Speaker 2: I was still very small time, just DJing, you know, just DJing parties and playing music and--
Speaker 1: What music are you listening to now?  Now we're--
Speaker 2: R and B.
Speaker 1: --You're in 1980, in early '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982], '83 [1983], yeah so it was R and B and dance music and I knew rap music, like I knew the early, all of the early rap music because I spent time in New York [City], so I knew hip hop because in New York at the time when I graduated from, when I was in high school there was a very famous night club in New York called Harlem World and Harlem World was, there was one or two or three clubs in New York that were the big rap clubs, but Harlem World was the club.
Speaker 1: That's on 116th?
Speaker 2: 116th and Lenox Avenue.
Speaker 1: Lenox Avenue.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My uncle was one of the owners of Harlem World, and my mo--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was, I'll think of it in a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I'll think of it in a minute.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: My uncle being one of the owners of Harlem World I was able to get in as a kid.  My mother's [Sandra Brent] best friend, her name was Leggie [ph.].  Her husband's name was Gene [ph.] and owned the candy store next to Harlem World, Little Gene's Candy Store, and I spent my summers in the candy store and my nights in Harlem World, so, I knew rap music.  I knew the early people in rap music.  I knew like when I was starting I, I was in that time when it first started and it was interesting because there was one summer in '82 [1982] that they had a rap convention, a rap contest and in that rap contest was the first time they ever had a rap battle between Kool Moe Dee and Busy Bee, and I was there.  And then they had an amateur division and I rapped and became rapped against and became very good friends with Doug E. Fresh and him and I are still really close to this day and we remember that and Red Alert was the DJ, and he remembers that night.  And it's amazing how now twenty something years later, twenty-five years later we all remember that night in Harlem World and how we were all there and that kind of started another aspect of my life because at that point then I stopped DJing so much and started thinking I could be a rapper and I was doing all this under the radar 'cause in Miami [Florida] it wasn't popular.  It wasn't, it wasn't like it was in New York, so being in Miami I had a couple of friends that were from New York and we had a little DJ crew together and we would DJ and break dance and we became very popular in Miami with the DJ and break dancing with this group and we would do all the parties.  We would do the reggae parties.  We would do the Cuban parties.  We'd do the black parties.  We'd do the white parties.  We did all the sweet sixteens, and we never really made any money though.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your group?
Speaker 2: IBM.  The IBM Crew and that stood for the Immortal Break Masters, and the DJ was, his, his name was Finesse and he taught me how to mix and taught me how to scratch records back then.  So, in Miami he was the group's DJ.  I was an MC.  His brother was one of the break dancers.  One of my other friends was another one of the break dancers and we would take this show out.  They had the equipment.  We just, I mean, I just went 'cause it was a good way to pick up the girls, but you know we never, again, we, we never made any money.  I didn't make money until I left Miami DJing.
Story_ID: 128076
Speaker 1: While you were in New York [City] you, you said you went there on holidays and, and for the summer--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --So let me ask you who do you think was the first rap group?  I mean, there's always a controversy about who was first.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Grandmaster Flash or K--
Speaker 2: Kool Herc.
Speaker 1: Sorry?
Speaker 2: Kool Herc.
Speaker 1: Kool Herc, okay.
Speaker 2: He was the first.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He was the first.  I, I knew all of the names like, some of the names that you hear now were, were not the names that you heard on the tapes.  You know being in Harlem and having family in the Bronx and what not, so you know you would hear of, later on you would hear of Grandmaster Flash.  You would hear of these people, but before that it was, it was a lot of other groups, you know, you know, the, the Cold Crush Brothers, Eddie Cheeba, you know Grand Wizzard Theodore, you know, you, Crash Crew.  You would hear tapes of these people, and those tapes became gold.  Everybody had somebody's tape of these parties and they would tape these parties and circulate and regenerate these tapes.  Later on is when you started hearing the music come out, and of course the first--it's interesting because the first rap record that ever came out was a guy named King Tim [III] and he had, it was called Roller [Boogie] Baby and was with a group called the Fatback Band.  It was called Charley Says! and the guy who rapped with the Fatback was the brother of my best friend that lived in my building in Delano Village [now Savoy Park] and his name was Tim and he just hit me on MySpace not too long ago.  And, but it's, but it's interesting because I remember and then later on after that the Sugar Hill Gang came out, but they of course got the attention 'cause this Charley Says! record was never a big New York hit.  But--
Speaker 1: And KRS-One, where do they fit in?
Speaker 2: They were later.  KRS-One was, KRS-One was later in the game after like really between '78 [1978], '79 [1979].  You had Kurtis Blow and people like that that came out first, and KRS-One was coming out like 1980, so it was a couple of years later after that, yeah.
Story_ID: 128077
Speaker 1: So, you decide that you, you wanna rap.  And do you think you're pretty good?
Speaker 2: I, I thought I was really good.  My father [John Rodriguez] thought I was crazy.  He never believed in it.  My stepmother at the time thought I was crazy; never believed in it, and I had to get a real job.  So, in Miami [Florida] I started working for a clothing company and I started--it was a very--it was interesting because in this mall, which is one of the top malls in Miami called Dadeland Mall [Kendall, Florida], there was a store there called Surrey's, and it's still there today, and it's a very upscale clothing store for men.  And I went to this store one day, just walked in and I asked to fill out an application for a job and they gave me a job and that was my first job after McDonald's and that was the first job I had after I left, after I got out of high school.  And they put me through a program where they sent me to the warehouse and they wanted me to learn from the warehouse like how clothes come in, how they're sent to the stores, how the distribution, everything from the top to bottom.  And I did that for several months, and then they moved me out of the warehouse into the stores and I started selling and I was really good.  And I spoke Spanish, so I had a lot of clients that were South American and from Argentina and Venezuela, you know Colombia, and they would come in and this was the time that, it's funny but this was when Miami was really big in the drug game and that was like a Latin American thing and they would come in and spend tens of thousands of dollars at a time in this store buying their clothes and that's, that was my first real job, learning that business from the front to the back.  But, I remember it took me two hours to get to work.  I didn't have a car, so I had to walk to a particular bus stop that took me about forty minutes, then take a forty minute bus trip and then walk again and rain, shine, sleet, snow, whatever time it was two or three hours on the bus every day, you know.  That's why I have no tolerance for people who, who don't work.
Speaker 1: And how long did you work at Surrey's?
Speaker 2: I worked at Surrey's probably from the end of my high school, probably about a year, probably about a year.
Speaker 1: Did you think maybe you wanted to move up in, into--was there an opportunity to move up in management go into retail?
Speaker 2: They had, they were, they were moving me into that position.  I realized later that's what they were doing, and they moved me--I, I did, I actually worked in about three different stores and they actually moved me into what later became a black mall and they had one of the stores in the black mall and I saw how I wasn't getting all the new stuff and I was like one of the assistant managers and wasn't getting the new stuff.  Like I saw the new stuff 'cause I used to work in the warehouse, and we would get the stuff that the other stores weren't selling and it would come to the black mall, but I knew it and I was selling it.  But, I remember it wasn't as much money coming through that mall like some of the other malls.
Story_ID: 128078
Speaker 1: And then at that particular time my mother [Sandra Brent]--this was the changing point of my life--my mother hit the New York [City] numbers for a lot of money and this was her exit from New York.  She hit for all this money, and the illegal numbers racket was a big thing in New York.  It was, it preceded the real lottery.  It was like the numbers, we had the number runners and they'd come down the street with their pads and my grandmother would scream out the window and I'd play her numbers and in the summer I'd play my numbers every day and every day they'd come down the street yelling the first number and then the number runners would come down.  I never knew how they knew these, like where they got the numbers from.  I understood the system later, but because I had, I'm not gonna tell you who, but one of my family members worked for the numbers and my mother hit really, really big and she called me and she said I hit really big and I need you to come to New York and get me out of New York.  Because back then, if you hit and you went to pick up your money, nine times out of ten they robbed you and took their money back 'cause it was, you know numbers was a mob thing.  So, I got a friend, she had a girlfriend who was a police officer, and I came to New York and I remember we all had guns and we went from number, number house to number house.  We went to three different ones and we picked up my mother's money.  I remember I walked in, guns drawn, she put her number in the window, got her payment, and we were, we were ride or die out of the, out of the, out of the numbers house and we went and I remember I took the money and I got on a train and went back to [Washington] D.C. with all her money and she met me in D.C. and got her money.
Speaker 2: Where did you get guns from?  Your, your uncle--
Speaker 1: I did yeah, yeah.  We got them, we got them.
Speaker 2: You weren't afraid of anything.
Speaker 1: No, that was, that was, that, that was a very interesting day in New York.
Speaker 2: So you said this was life-changing.  How was it life-changing?
Speaker 1: Because my mother right before then had, my mother right before then had started winning with the numbers game, and she called me one day right before this day and she said you're not doing anything with your life, you need to move from Miami [Florida].  And this was the mother that I didn't really hear from.  I only heard from once a year, I only saw her in the summer.  She called and, "Said you need to get out of Miami, you're not doing anything."  She said, "Pack your stuff you're leaving in a week."  And I went to my father and I said, "I'm moving," and he said, "Good luck" and he looked back down at his paper and a week later--I forgot who it was that drove me to the, the airport.  I had, had--there's a woman that in Miami who was like a godmother to me, and her daughter and I were really close and I think she drove me to the airport and that was the last time--I, I left Miami at that time.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: That was like 19, had to be 1983.
Story_ID: 128079
Speaker 1: Before you tell us about [Washington] D.C., let's talk more about the music in Miami [Florida]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Because we talked about New York [City] and rap, but the popular sound of Miami bass was going on in, in Miami at that time right?
Speaker 2: No, it came out a little bit later, it yeah--
Speaker 1: Later, later than '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah you know the story that people don't know about that was that down in Miami there were all the black DJs had sets like Luke Skywalker [Luther Campbell] had his set, you know with the 2 Live Crew and then you had Tiny Head and the South Miami DJs, and you had the Richmond DJs and you had us and we were IBM [Immortal Break Masters].  You had these different DJ sets in Miami.  The thing that sep, that started separating was the influence in Miami of reggae music and the reggae groups.  The reggae groups had the big sound systems, because you know reggae music is heavy bass, so they had the big sound systems, come out with the heavy bass and they used to have these battles on the beach, in the street, and these sets would come out and there was a, there was a couple big Jamaican sets that we were connected with with IBM 'cause the head DJ, Finesse, was Jamaican and that's how we got into playing the heavy bass music and that was starting as the transition of why bass music came out of Miami 'cause of the Jamaican influence and Luke was Haitian [sic Jamaican and Bahamian], so it was all, it all kind of came in play together.
Story_ID: 127351
Speaker 1: We were talking about Miami bass.  Give me a little more history or a little more meat about how it all came about.
Speaker 2: Right.  You know Miami bass there was a, there was one group in Miami [Florida] that was very music intense and that was, the, the Jamaican community in Miami and you had these groups like Negril Disco [ph.].  That was one of the big names, Negril Disco, and they would do what I saw was the biggest parties in Miami.  They would rent out country clubs and hotels and have two and three thousand people in the ballroom with these DJs and back in Miami with Negril Disco there was a DJ and he was, his name was Waggy T and Waggy T was a young Chinese Jamaican kid and many people don't know, but you know there are Chinese Jamaicans and this group of Chinese Jamaicans had the best sound system.  But, that reggae sound mixed in with the music and the invention of a drum machine called the 808 is what created Miami bass music, 'cause nowhere else in the country were they playing music that had that much bottom end in it and Luke [Skywalker, Luther Campbell], who's the godfather, they call him Uncle Luke, really came with the first bass record and you know Luke is probably credited as to the one to bring Miami bass music into the fold the most.  It was really a local thing at first, but it spread through South Florida, really, really fast.  And South Florida being so big they were selling like, Luke would come out with a record and sell a million copies in South Florida, I mean in Florida alone, so really those independent record labels were making so much money back then that they didn't really care if the rest of the country was listening or not and that was, you know, that was a fun time.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the independent record labels?  Do you, do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, you know really it was just Luke Records was the one that I remembered the most.
Speaker 1: Luke Records okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127352
Speaker 1: And he's [Luke Skywalker (Luther Campbell)] a pretty good friend of yours?
Speaker 2: Luke and I have an interesting story.  We knew each other and when I lived in Baltimore [Maryland] I, I made a record, but Baltimore--it, it's an interesting, it's funny how God puts us in places.  Baltimore was a city that had two types of music.  There was hip hop, which was rap music, and there was club music, which was house music from Chicago [Illinois] and New York [City].  There was a very famous club in Baltimore called Odell's and Odell's was a house music club that all the kids went to.  So, you had kids that listened to hip hop and they called them hoppers and then you had kids that went to house music clubs and a lot of times they were the same ones, but hip hop kids never danced.  House music kids danced all night by themselves, with each other, guys with guys, girls with girls.  It was just, Baltimore was a dancing city and what I did was one day started taking hip hop music and speeding it up really, really fast and that was one of the early entries of Baltimore club music.  Now, Baltimore we would make our own beat tapes and play them at parties and one day there was a particular break, you know a break is a certain eight bars or sixteen or thirty-two bars of a record and you keep running it back and forth and that was how you make your instrumental breaks.  Well, Luke had a song called 'Come on Baby' ['C'Mon Babe' by 2 Live Crew, sic, 'I Wanna Rock'] and in that song there was a break that had some snares and they kept saying "doo doo brown," and that became, that little break became very popular.  So, I took it and made a mix with it and mixed some other stuff with it, like Luke did, made some other stuff with it.  We had drum machines coming out that can loop and you can add other beats to it.  You could sample other music and put it on top of it, and someone stole that out of my locker at the radio station and my attorney at the time, who was my best friend who this is another part of my life I'll tell you about, he, he said why don't you make a record out of it and I said okay.  He said if somebody stole it that means people want it.  And I said yeah 'cause they're asking for it every day on the radio to be played like it's a record, but it's not.  So, I got some friends together, Kim Waters whose a jazz artist who had already made plenty of jazz records, but knew the studio and another friend, and I went out one day and I just bought all of this equipment and put it in my basement and Kim came over and put it together and we looped and we redid this mix that I had done and it was empty.  It still needed something, and years earlier I used to rap, so I said well I might as well put a rap on top of it.  I wasn't a rapper anymore, but I went in and I put a rap on top of this record and the record became a big hit.  But, the thing that that record did was it fused hip hop and house music together and Miami bass because I was from Miami [Florida], so I knew about the big bass sound and putting the low bass tones on the record.  And when I finished the record, the first person I called was Luke, and Luke and I were friends and I went to Miami, I, I got up one morning and I flew to Miami early in the morning, first flight from Baltimore and I went to Luke's office and I waited and I waited three hours and Luke never showed up.  And I left his office and I got back on the plane and came back to Baltimore and I did my show.  I was very disappointed that Luke didn't show up, and I left the CD for him and Luke said I listened to your record and I don't like it, and I said okay.  He said, "But I'm sorry I missed you but thanks for coming whatever."  I said, "Okay, no problem," and I kid you not about two weeks later my little brother in Miami called and he said, "They are about to play your record on the radio up against Luke's record in the battle of the songs" and Luke had been number one for like a month with some record he had out at the time and they played my record, 'Doo Doo Brown' for the first time and it won and that started it all, because it, that record picked up like fire across the country and Luke called me back and he was mad because I sampled his record to make my record, but we made a deal and the deal was that I would produce a song for Luke, which I later did and I started doing music for Luke and I would do a lot of his remixes.  He would come up with concepts and the initial beats of these records and then he would send me the master reels in Baltimore and I would take them in the studio and I would redo it Frank Ski style and send it back, and I probably did a dozen Luke records for him and other groups and, and I just started coming out with songs that were big house records and big Baltimore club records and big Miami bass records and, and then one day I just stopped, for no reason I just, I just stopped.
Story_ID: 127353
Speaker 1: Before we go a little further, let's talk about hip hop per se.  Do you consider hip hop a culture?
Speaker 2: Very much so, 'cause I was there in the beginning and you know before the rappers were really important, the DJ was it, and then the break dancers.  And then before all that, it was, it was the graffiti, and it was just like, it was just what we did as kids, you know, it's just what we did and it all kind of came together.  We're dealing with a time when people were poor, nobody had any money.  You know people made their own parties.  You know we stole electricity from the street lights and went in abandoned buildings and we had block parties with no license.  You put speakers in the street.  We had no clearance from the city.  It was, it was very much a culture and that culture was, I mean it, it ran everything in New York [City].  That culture ran everything in New York.  Every aspect of the New York was built upon that rap culture.
Speaker 1: And do you believe that the newer sounds that are coming out of, or I guess into the culture, I mean, is still a part of that every different aspect is a part of the culture so it can be different types of music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do believe that.  I do, and I do believe that there was, you know each, each, each culture has like a guide.  Some cultures are religious-based, and their guide that guides the cultures and keeps it kind of like unified, our religious principles.  There was never a guide for hip hop.  There was never a guide to say we're supposed to do it this way or here's the code of conduct or here's how we're supposed to act or supposed to be.  There was never a guide, and what happened was it was, it was a way for us to make a living in an economy out of no way and because the music industry gave us an opportunity to make our own money in our own way we all became entrepreneurs.  Everybody was an entrepreneur.  Luke [Skywalker (Luther Campbell)] became a multi-millionaire off of doing what he was doing.  Russell Simmons and different people became millionaires, you know, creating something that nobody else believed in.  You know, when I, when I, when I did "Doo Doo Brown", no record company wanted to pick it up.  Nobody wanted it, not even Luke, but then when it got popular every record company called me and for as long as I could I, I did it myself.  I produced my own records.  I got my own distributor.  I got my own bar codes.  I did my own labels.  I did, I did everything myself.  I got hundreds and hundreds of records, you know, thousands of records sent to my house.  You know, I, I, I did it all from point A to point B.  I could tell you every aspect of the posters, videos, everything, and it was, I mean what other business in the United States can you just create something and all of a sudden go from nobody to somebody, you know.  Tours, tour managers, you know, just every aspect of it.  Dancers, you know, the, the whole life, you know, on the road running into people and doing tours with different groups and I did that and I, I was, I was in it.
Story_ID: 127354
Speaker 1: Well, well let me ask one question, first to follow up, you said there was no way, no manual, no code of ethics, do you think that's what was a part of bringing about the controversy between East Coast, West Coast, southern rap, you know, northern everybody wanted to be the best New York [City], just did not want to let anybody else--well let me ask it in a question.  Was it because New York didn't want anybody else to be the king of hip hop, they just wanted to say that it started here and it should stay here and southern rap is not as good as northern rap or East Coast rap or?
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting because the one thing that rap artists did and still do is talk about their environment.  They talk about where they are and what they see, and what happened was that it wasn't until party music came out that changed and had different music crossing over in different areas because having a party song was unified, so you know New York was so different than Miami [Florida].  New York is so different than Miami.  There is nothing somebody in Miami could rap about that somebody in New York could relate to, and there's nothing that somebody in New York can rap about that somebody in Miami can relate to.  It's so different that there was no real like association, and then what happened was because New York came first they had the megastars and because they had the megastars they had the ones that were selling and because they were selling they were the ones that MTV that was in New York and could relate more to would play their music.  It wasn't like the New York rappers or New York people said we're not gonna play anything else, it was there wasn't anything else that was really coming out that they could relate to.  Now, being in a city like Baltimore [Maryland] and Washington [D.C.] that had no music scene at the time, you know, you could play everything, but I remember moving to Atlanta [Georgia] in 1998 and not knowing who Outkast was.  I had no reason to play Outkast in Baltimore.  Like playing Outkast up North, there was no reason.  I had seen the videos.  I had watched Video Jukebox and seen their videos, but I couldn't relate.  It wasn't until only the first southern group that came out of Atlanta that I understood was Arrested Development because it was a cultural thing.  It was like a, it was like a different type of thing.  Everybody thought that that was real cool.  They, they looked like anybody from anywhere, but it wasn't until southern rappers started selling more records that they demanded attention.  West coast rappers started selling more records and they demanded attention and when they were selling more records that's when other people, other video channels had to make notice.  NWA got popular because of Video Jukebox.  Luke got popular because of Video Jukebox.  That was the way, it wasn't, videos is what let other kids in other cities see what other kids look like, but the interesting thing was when I toured "Doo Doo Brown", which was early 1990s, 1992 it didn't matter if we went to a city in San Francisco [California] or Detroit [Michigan] or Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or New York or Miami or Texas, anywhere we went it didn't matter if the kids were Mexicans, if they were Cubans, if they were black, if they were Asians, if they were white, all the kids looked the same.  All the kids wore the same clothes, the same baseball hats, the same shoes, and why did everybody wear the same thing because of what they saw on the videos.  The videos changed it and brought everything unified.  Before the videos, it was, you know, there was no reason.  The reality is Tupac didn't need New York to sell records.  He sold more records than anybody.  He didn't need New York.  Biggie didn't need L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to buy Biggie records to make it big.  It was selling millions of records without each other, but when they, when those videos came out and then they started getting recognized on award shows and southern people started really liking it, then that music, you know, became more national and now you have other cities like Atlanta that have just blown up.
Story_ID: 127355
Speaker 1: Speaking about award shows, I remember reading something that you said the first award show, was it BET Award Show [sic, BET Awards] they didn't have--
Speaker 2: A female category.
Speaker 1: --A female, right.
Speaker 2: Category.
Speaker 1: Talk about that.
Speaker 2: I thought that was really insulting.  The BET Hip Hop Awards when they came to Atlanta [Georgia] there was no female participation, and it's a shame because females make up so much of what hip hop is and even if there were no female hip hop records that could have been recognized they still could have had a female--you had Eve, you had different people, different female rappers that were, you know from here or wherever they were making records.  They could have had a female category or there are female executives and the bad part about it the head of BET [Black Entertainment Television] was a female.  I don't get it, you know.  The head of BET is a lady, but yet there is no female category in hip hop, you know, and most of the people who are running hip hop now are females.  You know the big decision makers a lot of them are women, you know, and yet there was no female division so I was, I was a little upset about that and I wrote about it on the blog.
Speaker 1: Well, when, when the female rappers first came out I think they were kind of portrayed more like the male rappers.  You know, they, they weren't very feminine looking, you know.  They had the, the same attire as men.  Don't you believe that it's just now that they're allowed to be sexy, be women, and, and also continue to rap?
Speaker 2: You know, I always thought Salt-N-Pepa were sexy, you know.  I, I thought Salt-N-Pepa was always sexy.  Lauryn Hill became a mega star bigger than any of these rappers ever were.  She won--
Speaker 1: But what about Mary J. Blige, when she first came out she didn't really, she kind of looked--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, but again it's culture.  Hip hop is culture, so here, here's my thing.  To have a BET Hip Hop Awards that only give awards to rappers was taking most of what the culture was, it, it's the DJ, it's the rappers, it's the producers--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --It's the graffiti artists, it's the dancers, it's, you know to have a hip hop awards you have to have, it's like you know it would be like having a gospel, you know, awards, you know, and gospel is, gospel for the word gospel is music.  You know like if you had a Christian award show for Christians you'd have to give awards to pastors and everybody else, but you know they have a way to just say gospel which is the music.  But, I think that you know hip hop when you say that word to me, 'cause I was there, it's more than just the rapper.
Story_ID: 127356
Speaker 1: Okay, let's, let's go back to you moved to Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And tell me what happens.  Your mother [Sandra Brent] tells you to pack up and, and you go to Baltimore.
Speaker 2: It was, it, it's interesting because there was a woman who was so much like my mother.  Her name was Ivy Drakley [ph.] and Ms. Drakley was my--going to her house was like my escape.  She was like when I was frustrated because of what was going on in my house or not feeling accepted to certain parts of my family I would go to the Drakleys' house and she was like my mother.  She would cook dinner for me.  Her daughter was a very close friend of mine.  Their family was, was very close to me and when my mother called me and said, you know, leave Miami, I have money, you can come to Washington D.C.  She said, "You can come to Washington and go to college," and that to me was very important to me.  And I went to Ms. Drakley and you know I call her mom and she said, "It's time for you to go.  You're a year behind.  You should have been gone a long time ago."  And with her blessings I then went home and told my father [John Rodriguez] I'm, I'm gone, kissed everybody and they took me to the airport and that was it.  That was the worst experience of my life because my mother entrusted a trust fund of money to an aunt to take care of me and to put me in college.  Like my mother gave her a certain amount of money to put me up, put me in college, and get all that done, and this aunt didn't do that.  She put me in her basement and it was a very uncomfortable situation.  I remember being in the basement sleeping on a couch and waking up to the sounds of a choir, because she would have choir practice in the basement, not in a different room, like next to me sleeping.  I had been sleeping on a couch, and she would have choir practice while I was still in my pajamas, you know, like it was, it was, it was terrible.  It was, it was a very bad situation.
Speaker 1: Where was your mother?
Speaker 2: And my mother was still at this time in New York [City].  'Cause remember I took her out of there.  I took the money out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --No, this was before she got that money.  She got a little bit of money, and she hadn't moved from New York yet and my mother, you know it was during the summer, so school hadn't started yet and I was living with these people that I knew, but I, I didn't know.  That was a very bad situation.  My mother--I went to New York, and she gave me some money and I bought my first turntables and a mixer, and with the turntables and a mixer and buying some records I started becoming my own DJ.  And at that time, I had an aunt that worked in the U.S. Attorney's office in [Washington] D.C., and she said I'll get you a job working for the U.S. Attorney's office as a student and that was my induction into law.  And from the first time I walked into the D.C. courthouse, I wanted to be Johnnie Cochran.  My whole life changed.  My living arrangements was terrible, and I started working as a student, which they only gave me twenty hours a week, so I was saving my little bit of money that I had and one day this aunt met me at the courthouse and she said, she basically threw me out.  She basically said you don't live here anymore.  She said you live in this apartment on this street, now mind you I had gone from the county in Maryland into D.C. to the courthouse.  That's all I knew about D.C., but she told me I lived in this apartment in Northwest D.C. and told me what bus to get on, where to walk to get the bus, what bus to get on, and to get off. And when I walked to this apartment building, there'd be a man sitting at the desk, tell him who I am, and he's gonna give you a key.  I kid you not.
Story_ID: 127357
Speaker 1: The only thing I had to my name was the clothes that I had brought from Miami [Florida] and a box of personal belongings.  I had no furniture.  I had no, I had not a pot, not a bowl, not a fork, no milk.  I had nothing.  And the only thing I had was a couple of dollars I had in my pocket, and I remember walking to this bus stop after work.  I stopped at a dollar store and bought a pot and a knife and a fork and a spoon and a bowl and one glass and one plate and I went to this, and I bought some soap and a tooth, I knew to get that kind of stuff, and I went to this apartment and I slept on the floor for a long time.  I didn't have any furniture.  I didn't have anything to sleep on.  I didn't have any money.  I didn't have anything, and I, I knew that the next day when I went back to work I went to--I had started knowing people in the courthouse and the, the clerk of the [Washington] D.C. court, the court clerk who ran the courthouse was a black guy and I saw him and we spoke every day and I went to him and I said this is my situation.  I need a real job working forty hours a week.  And he said okay, come see me.  And I went and saw him and by the next week I was working for the Clerk's Office in D.C.  So, I had left the U.S. Attorney's Office went to the Clerk's Office.  I knew so many people in that courthouse that I knew Judge Reggie Walton, who became the first drug czar for Ronald Reagan and I used to interpret his court because I was the only person in the D.C. courthouse that could speak Spanish.  And when they had Spanish people coming in court, Judge Walton would call me to the courtroom to interpret for him, and working in the Clerk's Office I met a man who came in one day and he said, he said, after I had been in the Clerk's Office for a minute and lived in this apartment for a minute, I met a guy who was a DJ from New York [City] who lived above me--it's funny how God works.  He was DJ from New York and lived above me, and him and I, I was playing a New York record and he had heard out the window and came down to my apartment and knocked on the door.  His name, his name was Larry G [Lawrence G. Norman] and we became Frank Ski and Larry G, and we got some kids and started break dancing and I called them the IBM [Immortal Break Masters] Crew like I had in Miami.  And we would go around the college and D.C. and at this time I went and my mother [Sandra Brent] said you have to go to college, so I went to the University of D.C. [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], which was like a community college and I got a loan and I enrolled in the college.  And she said--I said I'm gonna go to school, I'm going to the University of D.C., and this man ran the radio station at the University of D.C. and he told me there was a break dance competition in D.C. and if I won he had a job for me on a D.C. radio station and that's how I got into radio.
Story_ID: 128080
Speaker 1: You were just introduced to radio.  You won the contest and you were able to get a job at the radio station.  What year was this?
Speaker 2: 1983.
Speaker 1: And what radio station?
Speaker 2: The University of D.C.'s [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] radio station--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And the interesting thing about it I worked at the radio station before I actually went to college there, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, well talk to me first about, about college.  Well no since you did the radio station first, talk about that first.  What was that experience like, being a DJ at a radio station?
Speaker 2: I, I had never, the only DJ I had ever heard that I ever liked was a DJ named Frankie Crocker in New York [City], and I remember that Frankie Crocker was very creative and used a lot of theater of the mind.  It became very popular.  Frankie Crocker was the, at that time Frankie Crocker was New York [City] radio.  He became, he was it, he was it in New York.  Anything that happened in New York Frankie Crocker was a part of it.
Speaker 1: That was WBLS.
Speaker 2: WBLS.  The first video show that ever came on television Frankie Crocker hosted out of New York, and when he said--the guy came back to the Clerk's Office, he was a lawyer, and he ran the radio station and also was a practicing lawyer.
Speaker 1: Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: Godwin Oyewole.  And Godwin was African with a very strong accent, and to this day people have like called him to interview him about me and I, I've never talked to him to this day.  But, Godwin came--the funny thing is we won the contest that Saturday the break dance contest and Monday I was gonna call him to tell him we won 'cause I thought he was joking and he walks into the Clerk's Office and he said, "You won, you start this Saturday."  He said, "You start at six o'clock on Saturday.  You have one hour."  And he said, "I want you to do a show for break dancers."  That's what he told me.  In [Washington] D.C. at the time, no radio station was playing rap music, and in the country there was a girl, a lady in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and there was Power 99 and then there was Mr. Magic [John Rivas] in New York.  They were the only two people in 1983 playing rap music on the radio, and here I had this opportunity in Washington, D.C. on a college radio station, mind you that had a 100,000 watts, and this radio station could be heard from D.C. to Baltimore [Maryland] into Virginia and on Saturday at six o'clock all he wanted me to do was come in there and play the music that I would play at break dance parties in Washington, D.C.  And I didn't know what to do.  I had no experience.  He didn't train me.  He just showed me how to turn the mic on.  There was an engineer there at first, and there was a woman and she showed me how to turn the mic on and that's all I did was cut the mic on and did shout outs.  We never advertised it.  We never talked about it.  Within one summer, it became the most listened to hour in radio in Washington D.C., and it was called Breaker's Delight.  The unfortunate thing was that my partner, Larry [Lawrence G. Norman], had decided to go to New York [City] to work for his father.  And I said, "Larry, you need to stay because we got this radio job.  This is what we've been dreaming of."  And he left and went to New York, and when he came back at the end of the summer he came into the studio and he came on the air with me and Godwin said, "This is Breaker's Delight with Frank Ski."  I don't know this other guy.  He said, "He can't be on the show with you," and Larry said, "Then you need to quit."  And I said, "You left and went to New York."  And him and I kind of parted ways on that.  We're friends today, I mean, you know I talk to him, I know his number.  He was a graffiti artist, now he's a graphics person in California, but that was, that radio show catapulted me into a different category.
Story_ID: 128081
Speaker 1: Now here's the funny thing, not too long after that someone came into the Clerk's Office and said, you know this Clerk's Office better than anybody, and I said yeah, and lawyers were coming in there and they would have to, if they had to file a pleading in a case they'd have to come see me, they'd have to get the file, and then they had to take the file to the clerk's window and file their pleadings.  Now that process, depending on how long the line was and depending on where they left their file, could take forever.  So, I started giving lawyers my number in the back Clerk's Office and told them, "Before the Clerk's Office opened I could save you time if you call me, tell me the file you're looking for and the number, and I'll have it ready."  Well, one of the lawyers that I did that for came to me and said, "We want you to come work for our law firm [Sachs, Greenebaum & Taylor], and we're gonna make you a paralegal and you'll handle all of our court filings at any of the courthouses and whatever" and I went at nineteen to a major law firm in Washington, D.C.  And they gave me my own office overlooking Connecticut Avenue with a secretary and it was a very good time for me.  I had my own radio show and then I had, I worked at a law firm, and I still lived in that raggedy efficiency with no air-conditioning or anything.  You know, living in that efficiency gave me a certain character because it built something in me because when I first moved in I had no money and no food.  When I would go to school, go to the University of D.C. [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], I would stop at a park called Mount Pleasant Park off of 16th Street in D.C. and I would, I would stand in the food line and the homeless people would stand in this line and the truck would come.  But, what they gave you off the truck was better than what I was eating 'cause they gave you a sandwich and they gave you milk, a juice, and potato chips and sometimes it would be hot meals or whatever and I'd stop every day at that food truck and I would get something to eat and then I would go to school at night 'cause I was working at the law firm during the day and I would go to school at night and then late nights I would DJ parties, and that's how it started.
Story_ID: 128082
Speaker 1: Tell me about the experience of, of going to, to college [at the University of the District of Columbia in Washington, D.C.] at night.  It, it's different from going--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --During the day especially when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --You have to work.
Speaker 2: You know college at night wasn't a bad thing.  What started happening to me was it was, it was easy at first.  My first couple of years wasn't very hard.  It was difficult doing a party until two aor three in the morning and then have to go to the law firm at 8:30 or litigation meetings at 8 or 7:30 in the morning and then that, but when you're young, when you're nineteen and twenty, you can burn the candles at both ends and you don't really notice it; I couldn't do that now.  But, while I was on the radio, I started getting really popular in the streets of [Washington] D.C., and this radio show [Breaker's Delight with Frank Ski] that I did on Saturday became really popular.  And then during my second and third year in college, I started having to take difficult law classes and they were Saturday mornings like seven in the morning, like ungodly hours to take law classes because I wanted to be, I wanted to be Johnnie Cochran.  The DJing thing was just fun to me.  It wasn't serious.  It was fun.  The law thing I was serious about.  I was gonna be that lawyer.  And one of my teachers one time asked me for some concert tickets, and she told me that if I got her the concert tickets she would give me an A and that started happening more times than not, and I couldn't even, I couldn't concentrate going to school anymore.  Like going to school was, was a very difficult thing because people wanted to come to parties, they wanted to get into a party.  They would wait for me after class.  They would try to, it, it was, it was, I was being very unfocused being in school and right around that time when I was contemplating like taking a break from going to school, there was a guy at a law firm that I used to be a law clerk for and at this time I had also, the college show that I had people heard it in Baltimore [Maryland] and I was called up by a Baltimore radio station to come and do a Saturday show.  So, I was doing at this time two radio shows, one in D.C. and one in Baltimore and this lawyer comes in and he says to me, "You know, I have something to show you" and he brought out the city paper from D.C., which is like the free weekly paper and it had the best of Washington, D.C. in it and on the front cover it had a picture of me in the corner and it was like the best D, DJ in D.C., Frank Ski, and he said, "Is this you?"  I was scared.  I thought he was gonna fire me.  I thought, you know, I was like, "Ah, man you know I'm working at this real high saddity law firm in D.C. and you know here I am like a street DJ" and I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Why are you here?"  And I said, "Well you know this is my job."  He said, "But don't you like this?"  I said, "Yeah, I said well I don't make any money doing that."  Like, it cost me more money to DJ 'cause I was so popular I had to get more equipment, I had to, it was a very difficult thing living up to the expectation.  I was always buying new records every weekend.  It was really difficult, and I said, "Yeah that's me, but I'm not making any money" and I said, "Well, I'm working Saturdays at a radio station in Baltimore, I do a free college show," and I said, "I can't make any money" and this man who was my law clerk at this time he said, "Take a week off," and I was like, "Really?"  He said, "Yeah take a week off."  He said, "We're down, take a week off."  I said, "Okay," and I got with my best friend and I got a car and we drove to Miami [Florida] to go fishing and stopped in Atlanta, Georgia, 'cause I had a girlfriend who went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and we stopped in Atlanta and stopped at her house while she was going to Spelman and I called a couple of days later back to the law firm to check in with this guy, Mike Lubin [Michael Anton Lubin], and he told he said, "You no longer work on Saturdays at this radio station in Baltimore.  You now work Monday through Friday."  And I said, "Oh really how did you manage to hook that up?"  And he said, "Don't worry about it."  I said, "Okay."  And he said--now at that time at the law firm in D.C. as a, as a paralegal I was only making in 1983 probably about $19,000 a year, if I was lucky, you know that was a lot of money back then, and he said, he said, "Now you work at this radio station and you make $38,000 for working six to ten, four hours a day, Monday through Friday."  I mean you could have bought me for a do--I said, "What are you kidding me?"  And he said, "No."  He said, "You know," he said, "You know," he said, "Now if you wanna keep your job at the law firm you can, but I don't see why, you know."  He said, "That's what you love to do" and from that day he became my life mentor and has represented me and been my mentor all that time.
Story_ID: 128083
Speaker 1: What was the name of the law firm that you were working for?
Speaker 2: Sachs, Greenebaum, & Taylor.  Sachs, Greenebaum, & Taylor became very famous in Washington, D.C. because two reasons.  There was a lawyer named Fred Abramson, who was black, Fred Abramson was the head of the D.C. Bar Association [sic, District of Columbia Bar].  Fred Abramson came to the radio station, the college radio station and did an interview about being black, being a top lawyer in [Washington] D.C., and I complained to him while I was there that these big law firms weren't hiring black paralegals and that is why they sought me out and brought me over.  Leonard Greenebaum, who was one of the partners in the firm, represented Oliver North for the Iran Contra hearings, so I was a paralegal on that case.  This firm was it in D.C.  It was a very big law firm in D.C., and I knew at that time I said I'm in the right place.  I, I was, you ever, like if you watch Law and Order they have like these litigation meetings I'm nineteen in a room with some of the top lawyers in D.C. discussing major cases.  I could tell you history of litigation from, from asbestos ligation that they did to West, the Westinghouse litigations to, you know, you, you name it the people that we represented at that firm and, and Mike [Michael Lubin] called me one day and I was his, like personal law clerk.  I summarized his depositions.  I prepped him for court.  I did all that stuff.  We shared a secretary, and he came to me and said you make $38,000 now and, and I stayed at the law firm for a couple of weeks and put in my resignation and left.
Speaker 1: So, he negotiated your contract for you without you even knowing?
Speaker 2: I didn't even know.
Speaker 1: What was the, the radio station?
Speaker 2: V103 Baltimore [Maryland], which is a sister station of the radio station that I work for now [WVEE-FM Atlanta].
Speaker 1: Was it, was it V103 when you started working or WEBB.
Speaker 2: EBB was the first station that I worked for, an AM station in Baltimore first and then I switched over to V103.
Story_ID: 128084
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your new job $38,000 a year working four hours a day.
Speaker 2: So, I left [Washington] D.C.  I still had my raggedy apartment, and my best friend at the time lived in the apartment with me and I'd gone through a couple of different roommates 'cause trying to make ends meet and he still lived there, but we still had a lease for another year.  So, I told him that he could stay there and I'd still pay for my portion of the lease every month and in case I came to D.C. and needed a place to lay my head, that lasted once or twice for the year, that was it, and I had another, a little efficiency apartment in Baltimore that didn't have any air and was like the same type of situation, but I had a friend who she told me she said you know you gotta, you gotta step your game up and she took me to the Inner Harbor of Baltimore [Maryland] and I'd never seen, like I didn't know there were like townhouses on the water, and she knew a guy who had bought a townhouse and was looking to rent it and I rented his townhouse and it was the closest thing I had to living in Miami [Florida].  So, I rushed down and I bought a boat and I was like the only black guy, you know my age to have his own boat on the water in Baltimore.  Yeah, I, I was, I was balling on $38,000 a year back then.  That was a lot of money in 1985, making $38,000, being twenty years old in 1985 was a lot of money.  And then Mike [Michael Lubin] taught me how to make money on the street DJing, and that is what catapulted anything.  Mike was the guy that told me to take that 'Doo Doo Brown' mix and make it into a record, you know, Mike has, he told me when to buy my first computer and who to call to get it.  He told me when to get into the stock market and how to do it.
Speaker 1: This is your mentor?
Speaker 2: Mentor yes.  He was like, he was like a father.  He taught me, he taught me everything.  He taught me when to buy my first tuxedo.  He told me that every guy should have his own tuxedo, and you know took me shopping, you know, all, all that, so.
Story_ID: 128085
Speaker 1: So, the radio show [at V103 in Baltimore, Maryland] was a morning show, you said it was from, or was it an evening show?
Speaker 2: No, it was a night show, yeah and I did nights for ten years and I was at that time probably one of the, you know, had one of the most popular nighttime radio shows in the country.  So, I got to meet the early parts of so many groups that are out now, and really understood the art of you know doing radio.  You know I did a lot of the Frankie Crockerisms on my show, and that was a really, it was a really good time and you know being on the radio elevated my club appearances and what I did and one of the biggest things I did that even helped me to this day was I would do all of the historically black colleges [HBCUs] up and down the East Coast and I worked Monday through Friday on V103 and I'd do a local college somewhere I could get to Friday night after I got off the air and then Saturday we'd be in my truck driving to some college, you, you know.  I did all the big white colleges.  I did UVA [University of Virginia in Charlottesville, Virginia] and James Madison [University in Harrisonburg, Virginia] and Penn State [Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania] and Pitt [University of Pittsburgh in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and I did all those colleges and it was a big deal when I went to a college.  So, now living in Atlanta [Georgia], a lot of people that went to those colleges remember when I came to their college to do parties.
Story_ID: 128086
Speaker 1: And, and the sound, the Baltimore [Maryland] club sound what, what is that?
Speaker 2: The Baltimore club sound was the mixture of mixing hip hop and house music together and that, you know, it, it's, you know, that's where I was born from.
Speaker 1: So that you were the pioneer of this type of music.
Speaker 2: I was one of them.
Speaker 1: One of the pioneers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was one of the pioneers.  We were all kind of like, well not all, and the funny thing about it the guys that were doing it all worked with me, so that, that's the funny thing.  It was like, it was like me and three other guys, but, or two other guys, but we worked together, you know we worked together.  One of them was a guy who worked in a record store when I went to get my music from him.  I would buy my music every week from him and then eventually hired him on my team and that's how it was birthed.
Speaker 1: So now doing parties you're getting paid for doing these parties now?
Speaker 2: Well, Mike [Lubin] taught me that working for promoters was not the way to go, that basically I had to do it myself.  And I went out and this is how things work, I went back to my reggae DJs in Miami [Florida] who had now gone from being DJs to opening up a music equipment store and a record company.  They, they--I went down there and I told them what I wanted to do and I asked them to build me a sound system and I paid them and they built the sound system and later on I went back to Miami with a truck a month or so later and picked up all this equipment and drove it back to Baltimore and I hired a crew of guys that were, some guys that I knew that were in my neighborhood and they became my roadies.  I went out and bought my own lights, I hired my own security team.  I had my girlfriends working the door, and I became my own promoter, so I bought my own advertising at the radio station I worked at and threw my own parties, and the only, and I did parties for other people, but it was basically those college parties.
Story_ID: 128087
Speaker 1: Now, you worked at the radio station [V103 in Baltimore, Maryland] for ten years and this is something fairly new for you, I mean, you worked at the, the university [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and then you get this position--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And you're kind of feeling your way--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Talk to me about being a DJ.  What is the responsibility of a DJ?  What happens and how do you decide whose music you're gonna play?
Speaker 2: It wasn't really my choice.  It wasn't really--the only time I got to decide what music I was gonna play was like on Friday nights, you know, or, and then sometimes I would do like a mix at night, you know, during the later years and I would get to pick the music that I wanted to play.  But, really the, the music playlist is there, I got a certain amount of work I gotta do.  I had to do commercials and do all that kind of stuff.  I was really the, the work horse being there at night, so when the office closed at five or six, whatever work was left for production, it was really left to me.  I had a gang of commercials to do, and, and back then we didn't have any help.  It was just me in the studio by myself and, which was good because it really, I had to talk on the mic, answer my own phones, record my own phone calls, edit the tape with a razor blade, put it all together, all of that in a time of one record like four or five minutes, so I had to do all that stuff and, but it was good because I got to create my own image, I got to create who I was.  It gave me, that was the start of my philanthropy side of what I do because I knew how important I was being on the radio and how I had to talk about events and talk about people and talk about things and do these interviews.  And I never really got a chance at that point to really be serious.  You know there were serious things that I dealt with, but it wasn't like doing the morning show, which was a whole different level and that was, that was tough.  I remember being in Baltimore [Maryland] on the radio during the winter and when I got on the air at six if it was snowing chances are the person that came in at ten or eleven might not show up, so I'd have to stay and if then if the morning show didn't show up the next day I'd have to stay even longer, and I've done twenty-four hour shifts plenty of times when there were snow storms and I knew that my first car that I ever bought that was, you know, besides the first hooptie I ever had, the first car that I ever bought had to be a four-wheel drive truck 'cause I could not afford not to make it somewhere.
Speaker 1: Well because you were so popular you talk about you had a lot of commercials, because of your presence, was advertising increased?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot.  Advertising--you know most of the advertising for me really increased when I got to the morning.  I did have clients that I endorsed.  I did a hell of a lot of parties.  I, I'd probably did a party five or six nights a week in Baltimore.  I made a really good living, and even if I was only getting a couple of hundred dollars here or whatever, when you add it all together I made more money on the street, I made man probably at sometimes five, six times more on the street than I did in the salary with the radio station.
Story_ID: 128088
Speaker 1: So, you stayed here for--until 1994?
Speaker 2: I stayed until... 1996... '96 [1996], probably '96 [1996] because I did ten years at night and I did a couple of years in the morning.  I went from doing the night show on V103 to the company coming in and saying we want to move you to the morning.  My ratings were so high at night, but night didn't generate revenue.  Morning show generates revenue.  It's all about the morning show, and at night you know even though I was popular and I had double digit numbers and I was this and I was that, I was actually getting older 'cause I started at twenty and I was thirty and you know still on at night and then they switched me to the morning and that was, that opened up a whole other realm of everything.
Speaker 1: And what was the morning show now that you have a morning show, now this becomes a number one rating, rated show.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the show?
Speaker 2: The Frank and Jean Morning Show and--
Speaker 1: Who is Jean?
Speaker 2: Jean Ross was the news director of the radio station, but she was also the morning show co-host that had worked with the guy who had really done it on that station for years.  Jean had done mornings on that radio station probably twenty years [sic eighteen], and she had gone through different partners and you know eventually when I came to the morning I was that partner for her.
Story_ID: 128089
Speaker 1: And, and Frank, Frank Ski--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I meant to ask you this in the very beginning.  Where does the name Ski come from?
Speaker 2: That, back when hip hop first started in New York [City] there was, people had tags.  First my name was Frankie D, and D was a tag, and then it was like Grandmaster this or Dougie D, or something, something Fresh and then you got to put Ski on your name as a tag if you were really good at what you did and when I was in New York at that rap convention and I won that year I put Ski on the back of my name and became Frank Ski.  And when I first got into radio in college and everybody tried to get me to change the name.  People couldn't understand like Frank Ski, it just wasn't a cool name, but it had gotten me to where I was, so I left it.
Story_ID: 127368
Speaker 1: So, in 1996 you leave that radio station [V103 in Baltimore, Maryland] and tell me where you go next?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't leave, I was fired.  I was fired.  I learned a very big lesson.  I was fired when I was number one at the top of my game, with the highest ratings in Baltimore history.  I had made more money for this radio station than anybody, and I absolutely did nothing wrong.  I was fired because of consolidation.  The FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had opened the gates and allowed radio conglomerates to suck up as many as five radio stations in the market, and the big radio groups were at that time we were owned at one point by Westinghouse and you know Westinghouse was, radio group was bought by Summit, that was bought by CBS, that was bought by, I mean that was bought by Infinity, that was bought by Granum, it was bought by C, and all this happened in one year.  I mean we were getting bought and sold like cattle, I mean it was ridiculous and this one group that came in to buy the radio station was basically buying it to streamline it and to sell it and I was the top money earner.  My salary was not that big, but it was big enough where they let all the full-time people go, but I was the last one to go and systematically they took the night guy out and put another guy night cheaper, the midday girl out, midday cheaper, the afternoon guy, afternoon cheaper.  And I thought I wasn't going anywhere.  I mean I had, I was Mr. Baltimore in my mind, and they called me in one day and they asked me if I wanted to move to the afternoons.  I said no I do mornings, I'm not going backwards, and they said well you know, the next day they called me back in there and they handed me my check and they said thank you very much.  But there's a funny thing about being fired.  You know it's coming.  You get this feeling and you know it's coming, and that weekend, that Saturday, I went to the radio station and cleared my office out.  I took everything out of my office, and when I cleared my office out there was, I remember, there was an envelope in my desk that had what looked like cocaine in it and I took that to them and said I found this in my desk.  I believe that they put that there to set me up, to fire me for cause and not have to give me any severance, but luckily God told me to clean my desk out and I found it and took it to them and I cleaned my desk out.  They never went in my office and found out I had cleaned my office out.  And they called me down and they fired me.  And the interesting thing about this was the person that took it the hardest because a couple of years earlier or a year earlier I married a girl who worked for our sister gospel station in the same, we were in studios right next to each other, so my wife worked at the radio station when they fired me and she had to endure that situation.  But, again thank goodness for Mike Lubin [Michael Anton Lubin], 'cause Mike Lubin had a clause in my contract that if ownership changed my contract was null and void.  I got to decide whether I wanted to stay or go, so the ownership changed, so my contract was voided.  So when they fired me, I had no non-compete.  I had no, you know, my non-compete was over, it was, so you never wanna leave the top dog in a situation where he can go where he wants to and be your competition because now I had a vengeance, now I was mad, now I was a man on a mission and my mission was to bring that radio station down and I got a call a couple of days later from the competition who had just hired a new program director and it was Radio One, [HM] Cathy Hughes' station.  They had just hired a new program director who came to town and all he knew was the top dog in radio was Frank Ski, and he called and brought me over and I made less money than I was making at V103, but it wasn't even about the money to me, it was about proving a point and within six months that radio station went out of business.
Story_ID: 127369
Speaker 1: First tell me what, what is non-compete?
Speaker 2: Non-compete means that if I work for a particular radio station they can tell me that once I stop working for them that for six months, nine months, or a year I can't work for another radio station in that market.  It happens in radio, television, the arts, it happens in a lot of mediums and basically you know they build you up, they pay you, but they build you up and they don't want you to be able to walk across the street and compete against them.  Corporate America is the same way.  You might work for, you know, IBM and they tell you, you know when we let you go you can't work for another computer company for a year or something, but we're gonna pay you this much money to make it worth your while, but you know I had worked for V103 for you know twelve, thirteen, fourteen years, so I had a big severance package, I had a lot of money coming back to me and I said to myself when they let me go I didn't care, I was gonna travel the world.  I said I was gonna go around the world and that day Mike Lubin [Michael Anton Lubin] called me and said, "This other radio station called and they want you to start next week."  I was like, "Next week?"  I said, "I wanna travel the world whatever."  He said, "They'll give you two weeks," and I didn't really go anywhere (laughter).
Story_ID: 127370
Speaker 1: And, and the other thing is when did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-ninety five [1995], yeah.
Speaker 1: And who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Tanya, her name was Tanya Parker [Rodriguez].  She was the first lady of gospel radio in Baltimore [Maryland] and Tanya and I had dated some years before and we stopped dating, always kept in touch.  I watched her career grow in gospel music, she watched my career grow on the radio and it just so happened that she came over when they converted our sister station in the building to a gospel radio station [Heaven-600].  She was one of the first people they brought over, and there she was again and this time it blossomed into us getting married.
Story_ID: 127371
Speaker 1: So now you go to the new radio station, what radio station is, is this?
Speaker 2: It's a new radio station called 92Q, WERQ.
Speaker 1: And is this a morning show, evening--
Speaker 2: Morning show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And tell me how it's different or how do you make it better.
Speaker 2: What they did was--
Speaker 1: How do you impact this radio station?
Speaker 2: This guy who was the program director, his name was Tom Calococci and Tom was a marketing genius.  He taught me how to market a radio show.  He taught me how to create an image on a radio show.  He--what I've become now most of it I learned from Tom Calococci.  He was a teacher, and Tom Calococci had this--here, here's what happened when V103 let me go the funny thing about Baltimore [Maryland] they're a town that doesn't like change.  They like what they like.  People on TV stay on TV for thirty years.  People on radio stay on the radio forever.  It's not, it's a blue collar town.  It's not a town that really changes too much.  When they [V103] fired me, the city went into an uproar.  They picketed the radio station.  They, they sent letters.  They had a writing, letter writing campaign because right before they fired me, Infinity Broadcasting, which head teamed up with CBS had bought the radio station and they didn't as owners didn't want them to let me go, but as owners they have a general manager and a program director and they make decisions.  They don't, you know, micromanage, so they told them if this is a mistake y'all will pay for it, so, I went.  Tom Calococci had this brilliant idea and while he let me off for a week, you know before I came back, he ran a promo on the radio station that said, V103 is, no that said, "All of Baltimore is sad that Frank Ski is no longer on the radio."  We think, and they ran this whole thing, "We think it was very wrong of them to let him go for no reason and we are deeply saddened by it and every professional and person that lives in Baltimore is saddened by it and we don't want to let him go because of all his years of service unceremoniously, so we are having Frank Ski day in Baltimore."  This is the competition radio station.  "We're gonna do Frank Ski day in Baltimore and it's hosted by the mayor [Kurt Schmoke], and the governor [Parris N. Glendening] is coming and the who's who and everybody who is somebody in Baltimore is coming to say thank you to Frank Ski for your many years of service to the Baltimore community," not knowing, nobody not knowing that this man had already hired me.  So, I went out to this Frank Ski day and the whole city came up and everybody that came up, you know while they were interviewing me on the radio was like, "You know you guys should hire Frank and bring Frank back."  Then they went another week of promoting that, "You asked for it Baltimore, we are gonna bring Frank Ski back starting on this day Frank Ski will be back in the morning on 92Q [WERQ]," and in one rating's period V103 was number one, 92Q was number eight, in one rating's period they went from eight to one and V103 went from one to eight, and that was the beginning of the end.
Story_ID: 127372
Speaker 1: Tell me before we go further, further in your career who was the mayor of Baltimore [Maryland] at that time?
Speaker 2: [HM] Mayor Kurt Schmoke.
Speaker 1: And who were some of the other who's who in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: That's the interesting thing about Baltimore at that time there weren't many who's whos.  You know we didn't have a basketball team.  We had a baseball team, which was mostly white players, and at that time we didn't have a football team, so the who's who was the mayor and Frank Ski and the police chief and it was basically some politicians, but then at, on the entertainment side it was you know the people that were in radio and the television newscasters and we were the local celebrities.  But, the interesting thing about Baltimore was the only thing that saddened me about Baltimore was Baltimore went through a renaissance where they rebuilt the Inner Harbor and they rebuilt the convention center.  They put a new baseball stadium.  They got a football team, and they built a football stadium and they never included black business.  So, the local black business of Baltimore, which is, Baltimore is one of the top cities for black-owned businesses, they never included black businesses.  So, I would be on the radio screaming like don't let them do this to you.  This is the beginning of my civil, you know, the civil rights side of Frank Ski coming out and nobody would listen.  They wouldn't picket.  They wouldn't march.  They wouldn't protest.  They were just used to what Baltimore was used to, and that was really sad for me, and I've always felt like I left a void in Baltimore, like I, I left without accomplishing that thing of giving more power to the minorities in Baltimore, because Baltimore is a city of two, it's a tale of two cities.  To black people in Baltimore, Baltimore is 'The Wire,' Baltimore is 'The Corner,' Baltimore is the number one drug market in America, it's the number one market for sexually transmitted diseases among teens, it's the number one dropout rate, it's, the black Baltimore is one thing, the white Baltimore is the Inner Harbor, the Braves [sic Orioles], the Ravens, the Ritz Carlton on the water, the InterContinental, crabs, it's festivals, it's the tale of two different cities and I was always felt like I left a void because if I was there longer maybe I could have changed that.
Story_ID: 127373
Speaker 1: How has your music, how's the music changing over the years?  Where are you as far as what type of music is being played on your morning show?
Speaker 2: You know at that particular time, you know, music was going through its change.  Rap music was getting more popular.  I had stopped producing.  Once I started the morning shows, I stopped making music.  I, I didn't have the time to do it anymore.  The morning show really consumed all of me.  Getting up that early in the morning made it hard for me to stay up late at night.  I couldn't do it as much as I did.  I couldn't get into the younger clubs, do the things I needed to do to make that kind of music anymore and it really became a situation in the morning where I got to be more creative upon my selection of music I wanted to play.  I got a chance to break music.  I got a chance to play new artists.  I was, you know, credited, well people thought that I had a good music taste, so I was introducing, I, I became the person that did all the album premieres.  If an album came out, I did the premiere.  I got the interviews from all the major stars.  You know, they wouldn't come through Baltimore [Maryland] physically, but they had enough respect for our show where they would call me and I would get those interviews.  So, the 92Q [WERQ] thing was a very short stay.  It was only two years and then at the end of the two years after 92Q I realized that I had outgrown Baltimore, and it was time to go.  There was nothing else I could achieve.  There was no other level I could go to.  There was, you know the funny thing about it I had started off on Baltimore radio as a kid, and I did all the kid parties.  I did the parties that the police department hated.  They hated Frank Ski giving a party because I brought out thousands of teenagers and you know when you bring out thousands of teenagers it's a problem, so I was never invited in Baltimore to be part of the 100 Black Men or the Baltimore Urban League or any of these civic organizations.  I, I didn't have, because I had started one way I have always had, even though I matured and got older, they still, those old guard groups, still looked at me as this young guy that was causing all those problems in the city.  It wasn't until I got to Atlanta [Georgia] where all that changed.
Story_ID: 127374
Speaker 1: Now, when you leave [Baltimore, Maryland], this is in 1998?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where do you, where do you move to?
Speaker 2: Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: So, you do move to Atlanta then.  Do you come here with a job?
Speaker 2: Yep, I had came, I, I was offered a job in Atlanta and I didn't--the only thing I'd remembered about Atlanta is when I came in 1992 when I toured 'Doo Doo Brown,' and I thought Atlanta was like this southern country town compared to what I was used to in Baltimore and Washington [D.C.].  And I came down here for a visit for a week and I realized Atlanta was everything but that.  Atlanta was Lenox Mall [sic Lenox Square] where they valet parked black people's cars.  Atlanta was the home of the Civil Rights [Movement].  Atlanta was, you know, parties every night of the week and nobody had fights, nobody was getting shot every day, nobody was, you know, it, it's black people living in houses that I had only dreamed about being able to get and athletes and celebrities and movie stars and everybody lived in Atlanta and after I was here for a week I said this is where I gotta be and, and I decided to take the job.
Story_ID: 127375
Speaker 1: So, who offered you the job [in Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: CBS radio.  At the time, they had, they had been upset that these people had let me go, so when that contract was over at 92Q [WERQ] they tried to get me back and I wasn't really trying to stay in Baltimore [Maryland].  I would have moved to [Washington] D.C. if there was a possibility of a job there.  I had been offered to go to Chicago [Illinois] and New York [City], but again I, I loved the outdoors and Baltimore had the outdoors.  New York didn't have the outdoors for me, neither did Chicago.  L.A. [Los Angeles, California] was too plastic, and Miami [Florida] I vowed never to go back and you know I, I just--so Atlanta presented a great opportunity.  The weather was great all the time.  The people were nice, you know.  The opportunities were endless, and I took the job in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: In what radio station?
Speaker 2: V103, V103 Atlanta.
Speaker 1: So, what was the change in Atlanta?  How was it that you came to be called to be the host of V103 in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: They were, they were really looking for somebody who was gonna come and take the community.  V103 was very community-based, and they wanted somebody who was gonna come and make an impact on the community, and I had been doing that in Baltimore and told them about my stories and they had a morning show that did very well for many years and Mike Roberts who used to host the morning show decided, you know, it was, it was time for him to retire.  He, he, he retired and did the ultimate dream.  He bought his own radio stations.  So, when they searched the country, one of the things that they did was they held a conference, a radio conference and they hosted a panel, and the panel was, how can local radio beat syndicated radio?  How could a local radio DJ beat Tom Joyner?  How could a local radio station beat all these nationally syndicated shows that radio stations were starting to hire because of these conglomerates saving money.  And, I, I believe that my answer was one of the answers that they liked to hear the most and I, you know people were saying well you know if you got a local radio show you have to interview local celebrities and you have to interview the person that owns the rib shack and you gotta know the principal of the school and it was real like, real, real local and I had seen Atlanta as being, you know I thought Atlanta was everything but that.  So, I, I said, "No."  I said, "You gotta beat national radio like national radio is beating you."  I said, "If national radio is gonna interview Janet Jackson, if a syndicated radio show is gonna interview Janet Jackson, it don't matter who you interview on a local radio station you gonna lose."  I said, "You gotta get Janet Jackson, and if you can't get Janet Jackson then you not the one to win."  The funny thing was when I was in Baltimore all those years a lot of the record company people who gave me my records were now the heads of all these record companies.  So, if it was Janet Jackson I just call my buddy at the record company and say, "I know you gonna do Tom Joyner, but you better find time to call me."  "Okay, Frank I got you."  Or if it was somebody like, "Well Janet can't do it," I said, "Well is she gonna do 'Good Morning America'?"  "Yeah."  "Well while she's in the limo have her assistant call me and put her on the phone."  I said, "That's the least y'all could do for me," and I got every interview and that's, that's how it happened.
Story_ID: 127376
Speaker 1: Were there people who were upset that an outsider would come in and host the morning show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my competition (laughing).  Nobody else because everybody from Atlanta [Georgia] wasn't from here.  Sixty percent of the people who lived in Atlanta was from somebody else, was from somewhere else, they didn't care.  Not only that, but the syndicated shows were winning anyway.
Speaker 1: So, you started off in the morning spot?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was just 'Frank Ski'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Now it's 'Frank Ski and Wanda.'  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: That's, that's an interesting story.  You know Wanda [Smith] had hosted the show through some very, through the introduction and some very profitable years and to me it, it, it didn't matter, you know, it didn't matter I was, people still gonna listen 'cause I'm on the air, Wanda's on the air, and it just made it more cohesive to add her name to the show and it was good.
Story_ID: 127377
Speaker 1: You've always had characters on your show.  You know, if, if we think back I think we missed, was that Mr. Tony?
Speaker 2: Miss Tony.
Speaker 1: Miss Tony, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that right quick.
Speaker 2: When I went to 92Q [WERQ], I needed to get a co-host, and Miss Tony was a Baltimore [Maryland] staple.  Miss Tony was a drag queen in Baltimore.  When I hosted the clubs, Tony would come to all of my parties and Tony would scream and hit the floor and vogue from one end of the floor to the other and I did some records with Tony, so I made some very popular Baltimore records with Tony.
Speaker 1: Tell me some of them.
Speaker 2: There was one record called 'Pull Your Guns Out', and that was, it was a dance and that became one of the most popular Baltimore records.  They used it in 'The Corner.'  They played it on 'The Wire.'  It was a Baltimore club classic, and Tony hosted that record, and he did a bunch of other tracks and records and became very popular. But, Tony, the thing about Tony was Tony was the security guard at the, Tony, at, at, at the, Tony was the security guard for the projects, so Tony sat at the front desk of the housing project in a building, so anything that happened in the housing project he made jokes about it all day.  He was a funny guy, and he was ghetto as hell, and they loved Tony and you know he passed not too long ago, but Tony, Tony and me, we, you know, we were friends, so Tony came on and he, he joined the morning show.  A little bit before I left he was saved and he stopped being a drag queen and it was a really exciting time for Baltimore.
Story_ID: 127378
Speaker 1: So now you're morning show [at V103 Atlanta] has another member.
Speaker 2: Another member who dresses in drag, yes.
Speaker 1: And that's Miss Sophia.
Speaker 2: Miss Sophia, yes Miss Sophia.  You know it's always good to have, in, in marketing it's always good to have different people that people relate to and different features that they look forward to, and it's almost like I've always believed growing up in Baltimore [Maryland] and Washington [D.C.] and being around a lot of alternative lifestyle people, nobody can read somebody like some of these gay friends that I have.  Like they can read you from left to right and make it so funny, and that is why Sophia was brought on the show to do that entertainment portion and to really bring the dirt and that's why Sophia came.
Story_ID: 128090
Speaker 1: Talk to me--talk to me about the everyday workings at the radio station [V103 Atlanta].
Speaker 2: It's interesting the radio station--well let me say this when I talk to kids, college kids about getting into radio I ask them all, you know, who wants to be a radio DJ who wants to do what we do on the radio, and a lot of hands go up and then I say how many of y'all know exactly what I do, and not one person in the crowd could answer the question.  They all have answers.  Oh you, you know you play records, you talk, you give information, you do this, you do that, but nobody ever gives the right answer, and the right answer is that I am a salesperson, that's what I do.  I sell radio advertising because that's how the radio station makes money, and I get people to listen through the commercials as they anticipate hearing their favorite song getting ready to come up or hearing something that I'm gonna be talking about.  I sell commercials, that's what I do, and we generate revenue for the radio station, so the biggest part of the radio station is the sales department.  Really what we do as DJs we're the smallest part of it.  The sales department is the biggest part of it, and then billing, collections, that's the part of the radio station.  The other stuff what we do is small time because they have to go out and generate the revenue based upon the ratings that we make for the radio station, yep.
Speaker 1: Now tell me who your program director, who, who, who else is, who is the personnel, I'm sorry that works with the morning show?
Speaker 2: Well, for our morning show, it consists of the co-host who is Wanda, Sophia who is our entertainment reporter, and Nina Brown who is the producer.  Nina Brown produces the Frank and Wanda morning show.
Speaker 1: So, do you have more creative input in the show?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How, how, how did the Inspirational Vitamin come about?
Speaker 2: You know the Inspirational Vitamin came about, the way I came up with the idea to do the Inspirational Vitamin--my wife's mother, Tanya's [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] mother, Ms. Barbara Parker, one day sent me and she had been sending me for years this little book called 'Our Daily Bread' and every day there is a little kind of like spiritual note story about life and whatever and how the Bible talks about that aspect.  Children, job, happiness, sadness, death, everything is in this daily bread every day and one day I just decided to read 'Our Daily Bread', the daily, 'Our Daily Bread' over the air and follow it up with a gospel song as a way to start the morning show and as a way to finish the morning show and the Inspirational Vitamin is the number one feature of the morning show.
Speaker 1: So, is each hour broken up with a different topic of sorts?
Speaker 2: Probably yeah.  We have to know, we have to know when most of the people listen to the radio.  We have to know what things to put in that are gonna have people listen at certain times.  The most listened to hour on the radio is seven to eight, that's when most people are on the highway driving to work.  Most of the listening happens with people in the car, so if most of the people listen while they're in the car, the most important thing they wanna know is how's the traffic?  How's the weather? They want information.  We give them information.  That's what, you know, my show is all about giving information.  I wanna teach people things.  I wanna educate them.  I wanna teach people how to buy a house, how to buy a car, and get out of bad debt.  Teach them how to raise their kids, how to see a doctor, what to look for, you know, I wanna teach them things to look out for, how not to get ripped off with your money and you know I wanna help them with their relationships and how to find a man, how to pick a wife or you know what are the best restaurants in town.  Those are lifestyle things that we put into our show each and every day.
Speaker 1: Do you talk about certain things because there are kids that listen to a certain point then they go to school, so do you talk about different things after a certain hour?
Speaker 2: Yes, we, we, we talk about things that children relate to more so at six to seven and then our music is geared that way until about 7:30 and then after 7:30 it matures out a bit more.  After nine o'clock, it gets really mature and, you know because we know that the kids are normally in school by then.
Story_ID: 128091
Speaker 1: Who are some of the most memorable people that you have interviewed?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I think probably the, the interview that gave me the most goosebumps was interviewing Coretta Scott King, and it's interesting because I did the last interview she did, one of the only ones she did in several years and the last interview she did before she died.  And I wanted to interview her and I didn't wanna know about [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.], her husband, I wanted to know about Coretta and she said you know, she said to me, "Wow, nobody's really ever asked me about me" and I said, "Well that's why I'm here.  I wanna know about you."  And it was a very interesting interview.  Going to the jail and interviewing Atlanta child murderers--Wayne Williams, was a big, a big deal for me.  That interviewing Wayne Williams was both controversial.  It was difficult.  It was, a lot went with that interview.
Speaker 1: Why was it difficult?
Speaker 2: Because a lot of people really felt like Wayne Williams, if he did the murders he didn't do them all, and a lot of people feel like he didn't do any of them, he was set up because of the political climate and things that happened of the day.  And I interviewed a lot of people, and there's a lot of people that were involved in the case that had their opinions and you know I brought a lot of that out.  I got a lot of threats from people like why are you bringing this up, you need to stop, this is very dangerous.  I had death threats and everything from that interview.  That was, that, that was difficult.  I, I, I've interviewed a lot of people at different times and have gotten them to say things that you know they normally wouldn't say or wouldn't admit to.  I'm not a person that interviews somebody so that they feel threatened.  That's not my job.  I've interviewed people in controversy, and I can think to myself you know you're lying, but it ain't my job to get on the air and say you're lying, you now, whatever, all I can do is make you answer the question.
Speaker 1: What was the purpose of interviewing him?  Now missing and murdered children happened in '79 [1979]--
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979], right.
Speaker 1: --Seventy, '78 [1978], '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Right, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: What was the purpose of interviewing him?  What year was this that you interviewed him?
Speaker 2: I interviewed Wayne Williams about three years ago and the purpose was that Wayne Williams listened to my show every morning and he wanted to tell his story and he had never told his story and we had a deal and the deal was I'll come and you tell me the truth and you tell me your story, but the only thing he asked is that I played it, I played the whole thing back, like I didn't edit it or edit his words to make it appear to be that he was saying a certain thing.  I let him have his answers, and I called him to task on a lot of things and he answered them very well.
Speaker 1: Any other interviews?
Speaker 2: You know, there, there have been many that have, that were very exciting, civil rights leaders.  You know being able to interview Maynard Jackson, being a friend of [William] Bill Campbell during his trial, you know, women that have, you know like Coretta Scott King and Juanita Abernathy, sports legends, musicians that, you know may not have ever told their stories, but interviewing Ray Charles and James Brown those were, those were some things you dream about being able to do.
Speaker 1: Were, were there any stories of one that just sticks in your mind, something that happened in an interview?
Speaker 2: No, no you know it, it was some good ones, but you know, there were, there were, there were some I, I liked interviewing, I try to maintain my professionalism, but every now and then you get somebody come in your studio like a Sanaa Lathan who is just a beautiful woman and you get tongue-tied 'cause you're trying to keep, you know, keep the interview professional.  I've had people that I interviewed and they became really fun and we joked a lot and had a lot of fun, and you, you know you bring the best out of people.  I interviewed Jada Pinkett [Smith], and Jada and I used to be really close friends in Baltimore--that was before she got famous and Wanda [Smith] kept saying, "Frank always says you used to know him closer than close; is that true?"  She's like, "I know Frank" and so those are the fun interviews to do because really you come full circle in your career.
Speaker 1: You do.
Speaker 2: You meet people.  I knew Toni Braxton when she was doing talent shows in Baltimore [Maryland], and you know to interview her now, you know, when she's doing what she's doing is, is really exciting for me because I remember way back when, you know.  Those, those are exciting things for me.
Story_ID: 128092
Speaker 1: Was this last year that you became the spokesperson for the International Civil Rights Walk of Fame?
Speaker 2: About three or four years now--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --Yeah that I've been doing that for [HM] Xernona Clayton and that's you know hosting that event is a highlight for me because I really get to see how much history I don't know and it's always exciting to see who she's gonna bring and why.  She is a very dynamic woman herself, and her interview was, you know interviewing her, making her cry, I didn't mean to make her cry, but bringing out such emotion, you know, that was another highlight.
Speaker 1: And this year you hosted The Trumpet Awards.  They gave Tom Joyner--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --An award this year--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --What was that, are you friends, do you know him?
Speaker 2: Very good friends.  You know one thing about me I don't, I don't believe in competition.  I don't think we compete.  I think, I think there are people that are gonna like you, and people that are not.  People gonna like both of you, we're human.  People switch back and forth to TV shows, you know, people, you know Tom has his audience, I have mine, Steve Harvey has his.  You know Steve Harvey lives across the street from me now, and his kid and my kid are great friends and they go to school together and that's what really this world is all about.  We, we're all here to do a job, and our job is to make our community better.  I'm not, I'm not gonna, that would be like two pastors of two churches competing against each other.  I mean, we all have building funds, but I'm not gonna compete against you to steal your members, you know, you know the building fund is just secondary.  You know saving people's lives is primary, and that's what we do.
Speaker 1: And it was very interesting the Civil Rights Walk of Fame you probably need to tell us, well I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Tell us what that is.
Speaker 2: Xernona Clayton has teamed with Turner Broadcasting, and they gave her a long-term grant in order to tell the story of the people who were the foot soldiers of the civil rights era, and to take their shoes as a representation and put their footprints in this cement mold and create a mold that will last forever, for generations to come, and see the shoes in the footprints of people like Andy Young [HM Andrew Young], [HM] Joseph Lowery, you know, Coretta Scott King, people like that.  And every year she inducts about ten people into this walk of fame and you get to meet people like we know who [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was, but who helped him write his speeches?  Who was his lawyer that he talked to before he did something to make sure he was gonna be okay?  Well we know that before he went to do a march or to do, you know, to, to stir up things in a town, we know that it was a three or four month process and they sent people to this town to really get support.  Who organized all that?  You know who was his secretary?  You know Juanita Abernathy wrote, typed "I Have A Dream", you know, you, we don't know that, you know, and, and the thing about it is we look at Dr. King and say this is who he was, but when he was doing it he was me, he was, you know, he was younger than I was.  He was, you know, he was like a Frank Ski, you know basically he was a young minister who, so you know he was the brilliant orator and knew what to say to change people's lives and he was a prophet of God, but who were the disciples.  You know it's interesting Christianity is about Jesus, but who wrote Jesus' story.  Jesus didn't write his own story.  It was kings and disciples who wrote the story of Jesus.  Well, who were Dr. King's disciples, then they're gonna write that story, and unfortunately that hasn't been done and what, what Xernona Clayton is doing is writing that history down by showing you who the players are.  And now when you read their book you can see the relationship to who they were.
Story_ID: 128093
Speaker 1: It's interesting that earlier you spoke about the older organizations like the Urban League and different organizations that you were not a part of, but now here in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --You were just given an award by the Atlanta Urban League--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --For all that you do, and one of the things that you do is that you started the Frank Ski Kids Foundation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that and how, how did that start?
Speaker 2: You know my wife and I have always been people that gave.  You know being in radio we volunteer and we give and youth sports was always a big thing for us and what we gave.  We never did it with any organized effort, and my wife [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] and I always had things that we wanted to accomplish, but never had enough money to do it.  And I noticed the idea from the foundation is interesting.  I used to give money to a sports team in Baltimore [Maryland], years, year after, year after, year after year to a youth football team and one day my niece who lived in the county was on, was cheerleading for a football team that was gonna play the team that I gave all the money to, so I was gonna go to this game and see 'cause I had never seen this team play.  I knew they were successful.  I knew they won games.  I never took the time out to see them play.  And when I went to see them play, their uniforms were raggedy, the shoes were old, the equipment was beat up, and the cheerleaders had T-shirts on with their names written across it like the parents had made the best way they could and my niece's team had new uniforms and sneakers to match, you know, the little balls in her hair and pom-poms and she was a cheerleading and the football looked good.  I said wait a minute I give this team money every year, why do they look raggedy like that.  And I called the coach and I said what's up with that.  He said your money goes to enable those kids to play because in youth sports you gotta pay to play.  Your payment is your acceptance into the program and to the rules and the responsibilities.  Your payment is like the sign the dotted line on the contract, and every kid by law has to pay.  Your money gives the scholarships to the whole team that can't afford to play because we're in a neighborhood where parents don't have any money.  And I thought isn't it a shame that two NFL Super Bowl players played at that park and neither one of them ever gave money back.  And why is it that whether you're Michael Vick or anybody else you start off playing rec football, but when it comes time to give back they give back to their colleges and every now and then to their high school.  They never give back to the rec program.  And I thought if I've got enough influence maybe I can influence these athletes to give the money to me and I'll give money back to the parks, but what we found out was a lot of these athletes don't like to give.  So, we, we established a foundation by giving them an opportunity to give, giving them everything that they would have instead of giving their money to the team they played for and their foundation, they can give it to mine.  It's been--getting money from athletes and celebrities has been slow, but the corporate community has really stepped up, and the corporate community funds most of what we do.
Speaker 1: How much are you able to raise?
Speaker 2: Right now we're have, we're operating on an annual fundraising budget, which has gotten a lot better, we're probably at $350,000 a year, but really our organization operates at about a million dollars a year, but a lot of what we're able to do because of who I am we get it done for free.  So, what it would cost another organization a million dollars a year to do, we do for you know a quarter of a million dollars.
Story_ID: 128094
Speaker 1: Is it only for sports?
Speaker 2: We do, now my side of it, of the [Frank Ski Kids] Foundation 'cause my wife [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] loves the sports side and the art side, but my passion is science and technology, so that's what I do and one of the first things we started on an annual basis was, remember I told you the story my father [John Rodriguez] took me see the Apollo rocket take off, well NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] has a space camp for kids.  It, it's expensive and we send the only team of kids to space camp every year, and we send ten kids every year to go to space camp all-expense paid.
Speaker 1: And, and you said there was another trip, another science project Galapagos Islands.
Speaker 2: The Galapagos Islands.
Speaker 1: Galapagos Islands.
Speaker 2: You know as a kid the favorite thing I used to get is books.  I loved TimeLife nature books, National Geographic books, and as a kid I knew about the Galapagos Islands, but as a kid it was never any tourism that ever went there.  Tourism didn't start there until the '80s [1980s], and really even until late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] could people really get there without taking a ship that took weeks.  And the Galapagos Islands is where Charles Darwin did his theory of evolution and Charles Darwin did his theory of relativity and evolution studies and it's a very special place on our planet.  It's a place where for no other reason these animals are on these different islands and every island is different than the other.  The plants, the animals are different in this archipelago series and off the coast of South America and Ecuador.  It's like going to Jurassic Park, and I went a few years back, my mentor and lawyer [Michael Lubin], you know sent me as a dream and I got my best friend Craig [Aronson] that I grew up with and we went to the Galapagos Islands to live our dream and found out when we got there that no U.S. student group had ever been and I said wow wouldn't it be amazing if we could send a group of kids to follow the footsteps of Charles Darwin.  What would they see and what would they become?  What seed would we plant?  So, we created a contest and we made kids write a presidential speech.  Now, isn't it great that we might have a woman or a black man be the president.  So, I had these kids write a speech.  We picked the top twenty speeches and had them come to the national--the Georgia Aquarium, and deliver their speech in front of a group of scientists.  And the speech was if I was the president what would I do to conserve energy and protect the environment for generations to come, and these kids, thirteen to fifteen, had to deliver this speech like they were the president in front of a pod, podium like they were doing their, you know, Galapagos speech and we took ten and we wound up taking an extra, we took eleven and we went to the Galapagos Islands.  It was a, it was a bit of a trip to get there, but it was life-changing nevertheless.  So, we do science, technology, arts, athletics, and our whole mission statement for the Frank Ski Kids Foundation is exposing kids to their future because I believe and my wife believes that a kid is going to become what they see.  If your parents are lawyers and your parents' friends are lawyers, chances are you're gonna do something related to law.  If your parents are doctors or your family is doctors and you're around medicine, you're gonna be in science and medicine some kind of way.  And a lot of our kids, you know, wanna be rappers and ball players because that all they see, but if we gave them an opportunity to see more they would want to be more.
Story_ID: 128095
Speaker 1: Speaking of kids, tell me about your children.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got, I got a, I got a crew.  I got, I have a seventeen-year-old who is, who is going to be going into college named Jarrett.  I have an eight year old who's eight going on eighteen named Franklin who thinks he is just the superstar athlete. I have seven year old named Harrison who is the neatest kid you ever want to see, but at the same time he loves barbecue ribs and collard greens and he can eat and loves to eat anything.  He eats escargot, clams, oysters, and mussels at the age of seven, and then I have a seven year old named Blake who is, he will tell you that he's gonna be a scientist and he's gonna have a great invention one day and I believe him, I believe him and all four of those kids have a piece of me and a piece of their mother [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] and it's amazing how it goes.  It is amazing, and whenever I travel around the world I take them.  I don't hesitate to take my kids.  They've been to China and Africa, South America, and all over the Caribbean and they travel and they can get on a plane and they can sit for eight to ten hours and they don't complain and they stay busy and they, you know, my son will say you know, "It's, it's my weekend daddy," and I'll say, "Yeah okay where you wanna go?"  "Africa."  I was like, "We got two days we can't make it to Africa." They don't, kids don't have any sense of time like, like we do.  We think about, "ah man eighteen-hour flight," da, da, da, they don't care.  They just wanna get on a plane and go.
Story_ID: 127385
Speaker 1: What's in store next, Frank, are you going to star in any more movies?
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting I, I enjoy doing movies. Whether I, you know, be a great actor or anything it requires a lot of time.  It requires studying, learning the craft and the skill, and there's so much other stuff that I wanna do and accomplish.  I don't know if I have the time to do that.  I'd like to do more television.  You know I think we need, one of the things we don't have in our community we don't have that 'Arsenio Hall Show' back.  I think that means so much to us.  It was something that we had that, you know, really expressed what was really going on in popular culture in our community and although we have Oprah Winfrey who is just the, the top of the charts and she uses her influence in a good way because she's Oprah.  She, she only interviews the A list top of the club, where Arsenio Hall you'd be able to see, you could see President [Bill] Clinton on the show before he became president and Heavy D & the Boyz on the same show.  You could see Public Enemy and you know, you know Arnold Schwarzenegger on the same show and it really showed what was going on in the popu--we need more shows like that.  I, I think that television is our next frontier to get back into the popular culture.  I'd like to do more of that.
Speaker 1: Do it as a producer or as a host?
Speaker 2: As a host. I'd like to do it as a host.  I, I think that it's interesting because I think the person, the one thing that I liked about Arsenio Hall he liked all of his guests, like you really could see Arsenio Hall listening to Public Enemy going down the street and, and that's me.  You know I like everybody from Jay Z or [Young] Jeezy [Jay Wayne Jenkins] to, to Michael Jackson classics, you know, and classical music.  Also, I've been in the entertainment arena for so long and I've done you know clubs around the world and I think it's time for me to use, you know, my celebrity that God has given me to do my own places, to open my own restaurant, to open my own wine bar, to open my own jazz club, you know, I think that's what I could do.  I think that's the natural progression now, and now I've got enough influence to make it happen and enough friends to do it.  One of the things that, that for me that I think a gift that God has given me that I never really knew is to teach, and I saw that when I was in the Galapagos Islands with the kids and the only thing we had to kids to do was to write in their diaries every night and reading the diaries made me cry, because they talked about in the diaries the conversations that I had with them.  We would go down the street and they would, how do cell phones work, and I would explain to them the technology behind the cell phone and they would write in their diary at the end of the night Mr. Frank talked to us and explained how cell phones work.  I don't, as a kid I don't know why I know what I know.  I don't remember studying most of what I know, but I know somebody had to teach me and I think that in some kind of way whether it's writing a book or doing some kind of teaching that's gonna be in the plans.
Story_ID: 127386
Speaker 1: I am--I'm surrounded by some really great people, and I have learned that I need to surround myself around people with my best interest in mind, but that I respect and that respect me that can tell me and get on my case when I' wrong and I'm not gonna take it personal, and I've been able to really do that.  I've got a corps and the interesting thing is they're all women, but I guess we're living in that generation where women are really coming into their own as far as running corporations, and Frank Ski is a corporation.  There are so many entities in what I do.  If it's the [Frank Ski Kids] Foundation, there's a woman running my foundation.  If it's the morning show, there's a woman running the morning show.
Speaker 2: Who is the woman running the foundation?
Speaker 1: Her name is Fashion [ph.], and Fashion used to be an intern, and Fashion has always been there volunteering, been around.  She has done other jobs and whenever I needed her she has always been there and finally it got to the point where I was able to hire her and I brought her on and she's jumped into the foundation and done a wonderful job coordinating and programming the foundation.  Nina [Brown] that runs my morning show was also an intern, and she has just come into her own and learned me so much that I really trust what she does.  And then a woman that I met when I first came to Atlanta who was my navigation system before navigation systems were invented, JeNika Thomas has just been somebody that people love, they love her, they love her spirit.  She's got the right qualities of everything I would need in a business manager and an assistant, and I was able to hire her and she works for me and keeps my life and Tanya's [Tanya Parker-Rodriguez] life straight.  And the better the people around me the better I am and the better they are the more I can do because now I can just tell them an idea and they can run with it.  When I sat them down and said I wanna take a group of kids to the Galapagos Islands, they had never heard of it, but they put it together and we made it happen and that's what important, so I, I, I'd like to have more people working around me and I believe that I, I have a good nose for talent and talented people and I've learned the system now where when I hire somebody I'm not the only person that interviews them.  Everybody that works for me gets a chance to have a say in the interview process because they all gotta work together, and we gotta work as a family.  And even though you can't pick your family, I believe you can pick the people you wanna work with because you spend more time with them than you do your family and that's it.
Story_ID: 127387
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, would there be anything, maybe nothing, but would there be anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: Probably the way things have come out no, but if I can go back and do something that I didn't do I'm very specific about what that was and I know what it is.  I would have loved to finish college, and I would have loved at the end of my college to put a backpack on my back with a pair of jeans and a pair of khakis and a few pairs of socks and I would have loved to travel the world.  Get me a flight pass and a rail card and just see what the world has to offer.  That is the, that, that's the hardest thing for me 'cause working in radio it's not like I could take a month off, you know.  If I worked in a corporate setting, I could take a month off and do a world trip, but working in radio the best I can get is two weeks and sometimes you just can't get it all in two weeks.  You need, you need a few days to get ready for it and a few days to rest up, you know, and a few days to come back, you know and get your life organized to go back to work.  Two weeks just doesn't do it.  But I've always said, if things don't work out at V103 [Atlanta, Georgia] and I get to change radio stations or change my situation again, I will make that trip.  I will make that trip.  I would like to take a summer and take my kids and my family and my crew that works with me and just get, if I had the money, I would get a private jet and a pilot, I'd have a private jet and a yacht and we'd do half of it on the water and half of it in the air.  We'd go around to see the world and we'd come back; that's it.
Story_ID: 127388
Speaker 1: Now I know you have many, many years left, but how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I probably want to be remembered as, as a good man, a good man, somebody who cared about his community, somebody who strived to leave his mark on society, somebody who one day somebody somewhere uses a quote and credits me for a quote of something that I said.  That would be important to me.  To have a generation of kids that can say that was my grandfather or that was my father.  You know to be able to, people to say he was a good father and good husband, you know, cared about the earth and people.
Story_ID: 127389
Speaker 1: And what legacy would you like to leave?
Speaker 2: I would want people to understand that life takes work.  It's not a game, it takes work.  You know it's not easy.  You know we live in the microwave generations, but life is not a microwave, and everything you do is for a reason and not to be ashamed of it.  Everything I've ever done was for a reason, you know.  Who would my father [John Rodriguez] had ever thought because he took me to see an Apollo rocket take off that I would be sending kids to space camp today, thirty years later.  No, he would have never, he would have never thought it.  Would I have thought that me hatching turtles from eggs would encourage me to send some kids to the Galapagos Islands, it would never happened, but it takes life.  It takes a lifetime.  It takes a lifetime.  You meet people and you credit people and like I credit Mike Lubin [Michael Anton Lubin] or Ivy Drakley [ph.], and these special people, Donald Small, my grandfather.  You credit those people for putting things in your life, and I would like my legacy to be that people followed that mantra and put special things in people's lives.
Story_ID: 127390
Speaker 1: You speak about your great-grandchildren maybe saying Frank Ski was my great-grandfather.  Because this interview is gonna be available for years and years to come, your great-great-grandchildren will have an opportunity to see it, what message would you send to them?  What would you say right now so that the future generations, what would you want to say to them?
Speaker 2: The biggest thing I could tell people is nobody saw this for me.  That's funny, like nobody saw this for me.  You know if anybody would have looked at me in high school they wouldn't seen me right here doing this interview.  I was everything furthest in their mind from it, but you have to not only--I hear people say you have to believe in yourself.  It's not just believing in yourself, it's doing what you love.  It's doing--you know I, I tell my crew all the time most people have no clue what they're here for.  They have no clue.  They box themselves in a career and that's what they do and then they wonder why they're stressed all day and they're stressed because they're not doing what they were put here on this earth to do and they're stressed because they're not doing what they're supposed to be doing and it is an uneasiness about it, and that uneasiness is stress and makes them feel like garbage and sometimes you have to let go and just start over and it's okay.  And it's okay to go out there and explore and live the world and make mistakes because those mistakes are what builds character in your life, and it's okay to do things that you know you're, you're not, you know, fond of or you may be ashamed of, but it's the lessons that you learn that make you who you are, not what you've done.  You can, you can get above all that, but as long as you do what you love and that's what it is that you think you're here for, everything else plays its part; everything else plays its part.  And you don't have to--you're not doing anything to impress people.  I know so many people that are in jobs because they wanna impress somebody and you know they, they looking for every other way to make themselves happy.  They're buying cars and houses and clothes and everything materialistic to make them who they are, but that's not who you are.  Just be who you are.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you would like to share?
Speaker 2: No, I mean thank you--
Speaker 1: Well thank you.
Speaker 2: --To The HistoryMakers for taking the time out to tell my life story.
Speaker 1: Well you're very welcome and we wanna thank you for taking the time to tell us the story because it's gonna be an inspiration to so many people.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
