Story_ID: 21876
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Claibourne D. Smith, C-L-A-I-B-O-U-R-N-E, D., S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Now, is there, what does the 'D' stand for?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Dave.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 6, 1938, Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation.  Currently, I'm retired.  I retired from DuPont Company in 1998 as Vice President for Technology and Professional Development.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you've been like the interim president of--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was interim president of Delaware State University [Dover, Delaware] for sixteen months.  I serve as a chairman of the board of trustee at Delaware State University.  I've been on that board since 1987 and been chair since 1993.
Speaker 2: Okay, what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is May 25, 19--I mean 2012.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: You're currently in Greenville, Delaware at my home at 317 Pentland Drive.
Story_ID: 21877
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No favorites, but I enjoy the Caribbean when we get a chance to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of, that it's a favorite phrase.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 21878
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  Then we'll put 'em together--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so we don't get 'em confused.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Lessie, L-E-S-S-I-E, Bernyce, B-E-R-N-Y-C-E, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Lessie Bernyce Minor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 2, 1915, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Coldwater, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  And what were they doing in history, and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, my mother was one of seven children born to Dave and Elisha Minor.  And Dave Minor's roots can be traced back to slave, slaves by the name of Sam and Kizzie Minor.  They were slaves in the state of Maryland, moved to Virginia and then later to Mississippi where the offsprings--my grandfather was an offspring of the union between Sam and Kizzie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about Sam and Kizzie, what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The, the only information available is in a small compendium that was developed by one of the offsprings.  And they only describe him as a smallish man was kind of a handyman and a yard person.  And Kizzie was a house person who took care of children and did housework.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, they go all the way back 18--
Speaker 2: The 1820s, I believe.  And my grandfather, Dave Minor, was about six years old, I believe six or seven years old when the Emancipation Proclamation was, was put together [order issued on January 1, 1863 by President Abraham Lincoln].  He was born into slavery.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what slavery was like passed down?
Speaker 2: Not really, other than the fact that I heard from my, one of my uncles that Dave Minor, as a youngster, was very fascinated with books at an early age, and although he didn't get a chance to go to school, he taught himself to read, and--post-slavery, and as he developed a family he encouraged his offsprings to take up books and read and to educate themselves.  My mother is a high school graduate, but she did not go beyond high school.  And most of my cousins, and particularly on my grandfather's side were mostly educated actually.  He encouraged all of his kids to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there any--I think we were talking earlier about some land that was actually in the family from way back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my uncle, Sam Minor, born in Mississippi, worked as a sharecropper for most of his early adulthood and was able to, through the good graces of an owner of a plantation in Mississippi, was able to buy some parcels of land in Coldwater, Mississippi and later developed a thriving farm business there and a landowner, well, the first black landowner in, I think, Arkabutla County [unincorporated community in Tate County, approximately nine miles west of Coldwater], Mississippi.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that county?
Speaker 2: I think it's A-U-C-K-B-U-L-A [Arkabutla]. I've got it written down.  I can't, I'm not exactly sure.  But we can get that spelling for you.
Speaker 1: Arkabutla County, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and the family's been having reunions from what I understand.
Speaker 2: The Minor clan, and I call them the clan because they're my uncle's offspring, will have what they call a homecoming the first Sunday in May of every year in which the Minor clan will come back to visit.  And because we were close, and my mother, obviously, was close to Sam and we all try to get back there from time to time.  I've not gotten back there for several years, but they invite us all the come back the first Sunday in May.  But the broader family has never really had a reunion in which everybody tries to get together.
Speaker 1: Now, it's on your mother's side of the family that you're related to, in some ways, to the actor, James Earl Jones, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandfather had a family, early family before he met my grandmother.  And from that family, there were three children born.  And there was a, an offspring, and I forget the exact person, but I think his name was Rufus Jones.  That may not be correct, but I have that information.  And James Earl Jones is an offspring of that part of the family.  In other words, he is, we're related through my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, I read about his father somewhere.  I think it was Robert Earl Jones?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they have roots down in the same part of Mississippi, Coldwater?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Arkabutla.
Speaker 1: Arkabutla County.
Story_ID: 21879
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your mother finished high school, but did she have aspirations to go to college?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lessie Minor] would have been a fantastic college student.  She was a very studious person, worked hard, I mean her work ethics were something that I always admired.  But she never had a chance to go to college.  She went directly to work as a housekeeper when she graduated from high school.  And there was no encouragement.  She was--, I think she had the desire to go to college, but the family was extremely poor.  And she felt compelled to work as a housekeeper to get a family started.
Story_ID: 21880
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, James Smith, Jr.
Speaker 1: That's the regular way you spell James Smith?
Speaker 2: Yeah, James, J-A-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly.  I've got it written down, but I don't remember his date.  It's 1914, I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, that's what we have, 1914.  All right, and where was he born?  Was he born around Coldwater [Mississippi, where Claibourne Smith's mother, Lessie Minor was born]?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Alabama.  My grandmother and grandfather are from Alabama, and Tuscaloosa, I believe.  And that's where he was born.  He was an only child.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not much.  My grandmother was an orphan at a very young age.  And she met my grandfather, James Smith, Sr. when she was a teenager.  And they married and started a family with my dad in Alabama.  She had probably a third or fourth grade education.  My grandfather probably got as far as ninth grade, but he didn't have a high school education either.  They moved from Alabama to Tennessee and from Tennessee to Oklahoma, and from Oklahoma they moved to Colorado.
Story_ID: 21881
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you know if your father [James Smith, Jr.] had a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my dad was semi-illiterate.  He probably went as far as the fourth or fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a cook most of his life.  He and my mother [Lessie Minor] divorced when I was about two years old.  And he was not in my life for most of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me now, so he would show up, I mean he would come to see you at certain junctures, I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My father left Memphis [Tennessee] when I was about six years old, and I didn't see him again until just before I started college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't available--
Speaker 2: He wasn't available.  He wasn't around.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  But did his, did he have relatives that lived in the same vicinity?
Speaker 2: No, no, he remarried and, and had another family.  They, I didn't know that family at all.  They moved from Memphis to Colorado.  And when I saw my dad later in life, I was about a junior in high school.  And he was living in Colorado at the time and working as a cook on the Union Pacific Railroad.
Story_ID: 21882
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a sister, Caroline Smith, who lives in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of all of the years that I've had conversations with my mom, she never really talked much about how she and my father met.  It was kind of a, I wouldn't call it tumultuous relationship, but she never talked about it.  And when I finally met with my dad later in life, he never talked about it either.  So that's part of the relationship that I never really had a good grasp of.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so now, did your mother remarry?  Did you have a stepfather?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, and when you grew up, did the household consists of you and your sister and your mother or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Grandparents too?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, my grandmother lived with us from time to time.  As my grandfather, Dave Minor, died when I was about seven years old.  And my grandmother lived with the, her kids, maybe six months with us, six months with another aunt or an uncle.  And I would see her periodically, but from time to time, she would stay with us for about six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21883
Speaker 1: All right, now, I think I know the answer to this already, but as far as you know, when you consider your parents personalities and their mannerisms and their talents and their looks--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mom.  She (laughter), she was the dominant person in my life.  As I may have mentioned earlier, she has a strong work ethic, a very religious person and her chief contribution in my view growing up was the fact that growing up in the South in the period that I grew up in an area of segregation and Jim Crow, her main focus was survival and teaching me survival skills and being able to kind of understand what living in that environment was like and what I had to do to keep safe and to keep focused.  And to get an education was one of the high priorities.  And I love her dearly for the fact that she kept that focus on and work was something that was second nature.  I mean she did it, she worked hard all of her life, and she taught us to work hard as well.
Story_ID: 21884
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember, I gave a talk, well, at my mom's [Lessie Minor] funeral, I talked about her and recalled that in, from the time that I started to talk, I never called her "mom" or "mama" or "mother".  I called her "sweetheart".  And that was a name that I had for her until I started to have friends and relatives over and visit their homes and noticed that they called their mothers "mother" or "ma" or "mama" and they used to tease me about calling my mother "sweetheart".  So I ended up, you know, making the transition from calling her "sweetheart" to calling her "ma" (laughter).  So I told that when I was speaking at her funeral.  I said, you know, she would, she was always my "sweetheart," but that's what I called her early on in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did that get started, do you know?
Speaker 2: Probably one of my aunts or relatives came over and referred to her as a "sweetheart", and that name stuck with me, and I said, "Well, if they could call her sweetheart, that's what I ought to call her."
Story_ID: 21885
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you--you grew up in Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you all stay in basically the same place?
Speaker 2: Same house the whole time I was there.
Speaker 1: All right, and does the neighborhood have a name?
Speaker 2: Magnolia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where is it situated in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Magnolia is in south Memphis, located in a, an area that probably most folks who grew up in Memphis knew very well, a neighborhood called Orange Mound.  And Magnolia was kind of an offshoot of Orange Mound, but we call it Magnolia.  And it was made up maybe of, I would guess, seventy-five to eighty houses, fundamentally, and small neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, how are the African American people in Memphis deployed?  Are they, is there a one side of town that's the black side of town or they're kind of a different pockets--
Speaker 2: Always been segregated.  When I grew up, obviously, it was very segregated.  South Memphis is the area, geographical area that I could best describe where I grew up.  And prototypically, it was situated next to a railroad track.  You've always heard the terminology, you know, he's from that side of the track.  Well, that was absolutely true in my situation.  We were, the neighborhood I grew up in was, was bounded by railroad tracks on each side, north, south, east and west.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you describe the house you grew up in?  Was it a big house or little house?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was best described, and the terminology they used at the time, was it's a shotgun house, meaning that it was a straight house with three rooms in a row.  If you took a shotgun and shot in the front door, you could, the bullets would exit the back door.  And they used that terminology to describe it as a shotgun shack.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where we grew up in.
Story_ID: 21886
Speaker 1: All right, so we always ask this question like this.  Can you describe the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Noisy, trains, almost incessantly all the time, and surrounded by tracks on the north, south and east and west of town.  You always heard train whistles and the rumble of railroad cars almost incessantly.  Those were the sounds.  The smells, rather innocuous.  It wasn't a dirty community.  It was a poor community.  Folks tend to know each other and support each other.  And one of the notable parts of growing up there is that almost everyone in the neighborhood knew who I was and knew my mom [Lessie Minor].  And it was a community that could best be described as a village, and the terminology people use from time to time, "It takes a village to raise a child", that was absolutely true in my situation because any disciplinary things that I required that, of some offense that took place outside the home, my mother always knew about it because there were neighbors who would look out for each other's children.  And they all knew me and knew my mom.
Story_ID: 21887
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what school did you start in the first grade?
Speaker 2: Magnolia Elementary School.  It was a, a building of four rooms, two grades to a room.  First, second grade; third, fourth grade; fifth and sixth grade.  And I tell the story to my kids, and matter of fact, I told this to a--, in a talk I gave to the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce.  They had a leadership forum and asked if I would give a talk at their leadership forum.  And the theme of my talk was 'What parts of my life influenced me as a leader?'  And I described to them my background, growing up in Memphis [Tennessee] and my memory of going to school was when I first went to school at age five years old, sitting in the first grade, having a teacher teach the first grade for about an hour and then she would have us either practice writing or reading or, if we couldn't read, put your head on the desk and take a nap.  And she'd go teach the second grade.  And when she finished teaching second grade, she would give them an assignment and come back and start teaching the first grade again.  Well, logically, I would sit there and listen to the first grade lessons and the second grade lessons.  So at the end of the year, I knew first grade and second grade.  But then the next year, I had to move to the other side of the room and listen to the lecture all over again for the first grade and second grade.  And by the time I got through the second grade, I was pretty bored because I knew all the stuff already.  And that kind of pattern followed the next year when I moved to the third grade and went through a same sequence of instruction, which was a very wasteful use of talent of the teachers.  And I would surmise that we were not benefitted by virtue of having, in a, being put into a structure like that because we could have moved ahead much faster had we been given the opportunity to have a teacher thoroughly focused on first grade, second grade, third and fourth, etc.  But that's the way the situation was at that school at the time.  And when I left that school, I went to Melrose, and after the sixth grade, and that was, had a middle school and high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Science.
Speaker 1: Okay, even in grade school?
Speaker 2: Even in grade school.  I was always fascinated with things of a scientific nature; inquisitive, I was always questioning, trying to understand nature, understand things.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: In grade school, my most memorable teacher was the principal, Ms. Harry Mae Simon.  She taught--, was a principal and taught the sixth grade.  And I recall that she was a very caring person who did the best with the talents and the resources that she had available at the time.  And she was always committed to her kids, all of--, everybody was "her kids".  And she made it personal, and will always remember her.
Story_ID: 21888
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, what would you typically do in the neighborhood, growing up?  Did you like sports--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --or did you like going to the library or did you like--
Speaker 2: There were no, there was no library, unfortunately.  And I also mentioned this in my talk [titled 'What parts of my life influenced me as a leader?' at the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce leadership forum], that one of the profound issues that made life rather challenging for someone who was ambitious or someone who had a desire to delve into as much information and gain as much knowledge as possible, books were limited.  There was no library.  And it wasn't until I got to high school that I was exposed to what might be described as a library, which was very rudimentary.  In the segregated system in the South, those kind of assets were not available to black people.  I think in the city of Memphis [Tennessee], they had perhaps later on when I was in high school, they had one library.  And in order to get there, you had to ride a bus.  There was not a neighborhood library.
Story_ID: 21889
Speaker 1: All right, so no library in town.  So did you have a television growing up?
Speaker 2: Not until I was high school.
Speaker 1: Was radio important?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have favorite shows that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, 'The Shadow'.  I used to listen to the 'Grand Ole Opry' [live radio program featuring country music], listen to classics.  So I--, growing up, I had kind of a broad repertoire.  Whatever was on radio, I probably had a chance to listen to and spend some time, delving into it a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you know, well, did you know any scientists growing up?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the black professionals?  Were there any in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: The only black professionals that I was aware of was the preachers and a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was--
Speaker 2: There was one physician in Orange Mound [neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee], and I never met him because if there was any medical needs that I had, my mother [Lessie Minor] took me to the clinic.  And I mean because we couldn't pay a doctor, she felt--, you know, she didn't have funds or insurance to deal with the doctor.  So you go where the services were free and the clinics were where she took me most of the time.  And so I never met anyone with a professional degree other than knowing that there was a doctor in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So who were your heroes growing up?  Did you have any heroes?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  The only heroes that I had was the, the ones that, that I read about and, you know, George Washington Carver [African American scientist] and that was about it.
Speaker 1: Now, what impression did the life of George Washington Carver make on you?  I've heard, well, how was it presented to you--
Speaker 2: As a scientist, someone who had that keen knowledge and inquisitive mind, looking to explore the unknowns, to find answers to questions not answered. And as a youngster, I was full of questions and I found it fascinating to try to find answers when no one could give you an answer.  And when I got to high school, I just developed that innate desire to delve into things unknown.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was church an important part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was very church-going, very religious.  We went to church every Sunday, started with Sunday school, and I was there for regular services at eleven [O'clock].  We came home and had dinner, went back in the evening.  So Sundays were almost always consumed with church.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Magnolia Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, were you involved in various youth activities in church and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  Sunday school was always part of my life, and there was a young--I forget what they called it, 'Young Christian Association' that they had in the evenings.  And you went back and young people would get together and read scripture and talk about various aspects of the bible.
Speaker 1: They have the Baptist Training Union or something like that--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Was it the Baptist Training Union or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union] or something like that (laughter).  When you mentioned Baptist training, that struck a bell there.  It was something like that.  I forget exactly what they called it, but it was made of young people.
Story_ID: 21890
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So let's see.  Were civil rights [American Civil Rights Movement] discussed in the household?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, no.  The theme that was most prominent in the discussions were recognizing your place as my mother used to say to me and the experiences of growing in an environment in which you quickly understood what were the major things that you had to watch out for to survive was critical for young people, young black men, young black people, particularly, fearful of the police, making sure that you were not in the wrong neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So meaning that if you went into, you, as a young African American boy, if you went into the white neighborhood, you would be in trouble?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and particularly in the evening time.  You had no place there in the evening.  In the daytime, you were either there to work or, you know, seeking work or doing work.  In evening, you had no place there.  And, and making sure that you spoke quietly and non-threatening to anyone of, who was eighteen years or older.  And my mother used to--, and it used to puzzle me when she would--someone who was eighteen, nineteen, twenty years old, male would speak to her, she would always say, "Yes, sir."  And the same with women, she would say "Yes, ma'am."  And I recall when she--, I had a first visit when I left Memphis [Tennessee], and I was in school in Colorado, a white friend of mine met her for the first time.  And her response to him was "Yes, sir."  And it just threw him off kilter and embarrassed me to no end that, that this was so ingrained into her psyche that it didn't matter where she was, that was, you know, the way you dealt.  That's the way you survived.  And that's what I grew up with, having to understand what my place was and make sure that I did not, either inadvertently or overtly cross the boundary and put myself in a threatening situation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you went to downtown Memphis, or did you all go to downtown in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there signs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, white only, movie theaters, we sat in the balcony.  Water fountains, white only, restrooms, white only.  I remember my first job at a grocery store carrying out groceries.  The only task, job that they would give us, the black kids was to carry out.  We couldn't stay in the store and bag.  Those jobs were all white boys who had those jobs.  And, of course, in the heat of the summer, you wished you had a chance to be inside, but that was not, you know, those jobs were for the white guys.
Speaker 1: They'd let you carry the bags out to the car?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 21891
Speaker 1: Okay, so in terms of science what was the--, so school was your introduction to science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And did, in your opinion, when you look back on it now, did the school do a pretty good job of presenting science to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I felt--Joe Westbrook, Mr. Joe Westbrook was my chemistry and physics teacher, did an outstanding job of really capturing my imagination for science.  And he allowed me and a few others to kind of do some probing of our own, knowing very little about some of the hazards of some of the things we were, (laughter), we were getting ourselves into.  And one of the remembrances that I had of high school was my being able to put together a formula for an explosive.  And (laughter) frightened the heck out of the teachers, but my teacher would just simply caution me to be careful and not do things that were overtly dangerous.  But I was just kind of curious.
Speaker 1: What kind of explosive was it?  I mean what did you make?
Speaker 2: Well, well, there were a couple of things that I did.  One was putting together some nitrate salts and heating them to the point where they would, they would detonate.  And the other one was making a material called nitrogen triiodide, which is made from iodine crystals and household ammonia.  And it was a very unstable material when it was dry.  Wet, there was no problem.  And those were the two little curiosities that I had as a youngster in high school, being able to put that together and demonstrate to people what you could do with something that was very easy to come by.
Speaker 1: Now, could you make a pretty large explosion with these items?
Speaker 2: Oh, you put enough together, it would be fairly dangerous, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you learn just use just enough of it or--
Speaker 2: Trial and error (laughter).  Trial and error.  Sometime I'd, I used to tell my mother [Lessie Minor], I said, you know what?  You were a very prayerful person.  You prayed for me a lot, and the good Lord must have been listening to you because I really did some dumb things in my life.  And I'm still around.  But growing up, I really did some dumb things, looking back on it.  But it was part of, you know, my nature, being curious.
Speaker 1: Did you get, was there someone who was a guide in terms of these kinds of things?  Where did you learn about how to make an explosive?
Speaker 2: Read.  Just read.  Stuff was there in the literature, and you just read.  I was a voracious reader.
Speaker 1: Now, where were you getting this?  There's no library now, so where are you getting your reading materials?
Speaker 2: From school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever books were available in school, that's what I latched onto.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, did the school--this probably just a--, I know the school probably didn't have all the facilities that the white schools had--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in terms of chemistry lab and that sort of thing.  Did you have any kind of a lab?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, we had, we had a laboratory that doubled as a classroom and a lab, very rudimentary, no fume hoods, and we didn't have safety glasses.  We didn't have smocks.  We didn't have anything.  We just, we came as we were and, and we had Bunsen burners and a gas line.  And we could, had a few beakers and you could heat things up in the open.  And it was, it was a miracle that no one either got hurt seriously or ended up being poisoned either by fumes or liquids that we shouldn't have had long exposure to or any exposure to for that matter.  It was just, it was just, it was a bad scene, and we were just fortunate, very fortunate that no one either got hurt or became ill.
Story_ID: 21892
Speaker 1: Okay.  Describe Melrose High School for us?
Speaker 2: Melrose was the high school in Orange Mound [neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee].  It was one of about, let me think now, four or five high schools in the city of Memphis that were earmarked for African Americans.  Orange Mound was south Memphis.  Hamilton [school] was southwest Memphis, Manassas and Booker T. Washington High School.
Speaker 1: Right, we've heard a lot about Manassas and Booker T [schools] (unclear). Some Melrose.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so the population was all black?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What about the teachers there?
Speaker 2: All black, yeah.  [De]Segregation did not occur in Tennessee, in Memphis at least until many years after the major Supreme Court decision outlawing segregation in public schools [Brown v. Board of Education (1954)].  As you probably know, the South was, was very reluctant to even conform to the law.  We, of course, know from Governor Faubus in Arkansas and Mississippi and Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] and Alabama with Governor Wallace resisting any attempts to segregate--desegregate the, even at the collegiate levels and the undergraduate, and in secondary level.  I can't remember what years Melrose became a, an open school.  But it was a neighborhood school.  Whenever they did the-, desegregate, there obviously were not gonna be any white kids who would come there.  And they made it very unlikely that black kids would go to white schools, even though they had to probably drive past a white school to get to their regular black schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you started at Melrose in what year?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh grade?  So you'd be twelve, so talking about nineteen forty--
Speaker 2: I started school when I was five.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So seventh, you'd have been eleven in the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's 1950, 1949?
Speaker 2: '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '49 [1949], okay.  So through the grade really World War II is going on?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And were a lot of the men returning from the war in the latter part of grade school, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I recall seeing some of the soldiers on a troop train passing through the neighborhood actually.  They were being switched from one rail line to another.  And we were, you know, in a neighborhood where we could see them in the cars, in the troop cars.  And we would stand along the tracks waving at them as they passed through.  I recall that vividly, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the attitude of the black soldiers when they returned?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I had, didn't have an opportunity to talk to anybody personally and did not get a chance to really sense what it was like as a black person in the military until my cousin went into the military.  But I read, obviously, a lot about that.  My, one of my high school classmates went to Tuskegee, and she would come back and tell us about the stories, tell us the story of the Tuskegee Airmen.  But, of course, that was years after the, you know, the World War II.  And when the armies were desegregated right after the War.
Speaker 1: So, 1949, Melrose High School.  Now, you're, I take it your grades are good in school coming along?
Speaker 2: My grades were okay in school.  I wouldn't call them great.  I did pretty good.  They were As and Bs.  And while my mother [Lessie Minor] insisted that, you know, I work hard to--I really didn't have to work hard in school.  And for whatever reasons, everything came kind of natural to me, everything except math.  I really had to struggle with math, and my mother was always good in math.  I used to bring algebra problems, homework home.  And they would stymie me, and she could run through those problems like they were nothing.  And I used to be amazed at how well she knew that.
Story_ID: 21893
Speaker 1: So, back to the explosives, was your prime interest in chemistry, first make something that would explode?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, chemistry, my first fascination was with, was with physics because of all the publicity around the atomic bomb.  When the atomic bomb was used to end World War II in Japan, I was fascinated with how could something be that powerful and not be made out of TNT [trinitrotoluene] or the conventional explosives?  And so I quickly got a hold of a book and started to read about nuclear fission and started to think about perhaps, maybe I wanna be a physicist, but the only problem was that I was not strong enough in math to be physicist.  So chemistry was, was the subject that really kind of captured my imagination.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were reading about the atomic bomb?
Speaker 2: Right after the war ended, and they had all the publicity about it.  So this was actually pre-high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: This was about the eighth, eighth or ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother subscribe to periodicals?
Speaker 2: No, newspaper was the only thing my mother [Lessie Minor] subscribed to and I was an avid newspaper reader too.
Speaker 1: Was that the 'Memphis Commercial Appeal'?
Speaker 2: Commercial Appeal, yes.
Speaker 1: Was there a black paper in town?
Speaker 2: There was the 'Chicago Press Semiter' that was distributed locally sometimes, but not regularly.  So, no, I never read any black newspapers.  But the 'Memphis Commercial Appeal' was the main newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay, they had something called the 'Tri-State Defender' that might have--, was being published down there, but I don't--out of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you really are gleaning for things to read and to learn from (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did the people your mother worked for, did they, did she bring magazines home from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she would get a magazine, you know, 'Time Life', not 'Time Life', 'Life Magazine' or, I forget which other ones she would have from time to time.  But those were the only books, I mean magazines that I was exposed to at home, the ones that she could bring from work.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a good mentor in high school in terms of chemistry?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Joe Westbrook, Mr. Westbrook was our science teacher, chemistry, physics.  But he was also a football coach.  And, and while he was a good teacher, he didn't spend a lot of time counseling or mentoring.  He did enough to keep my interests up in chemistry.  He would always be encouraging about it, although he would get kind of ticked off at me with some of the stuff I was doing (laughter) and creating around there.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get in trouble for (unclear) (simultaneous), explosives or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had the principal come over one day and threaten to toss me out of school if I set off one more explosive over there (laughter).
Speaker 1: What happened?  Did you blow something up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And one of the teachers came out and she said, she was pleading with me, "Please, don't do that again."  And she said, my nerves are really on edge.  And my kids are frightened.  Anyway, she was trying to teach her class and I'm in the lab blowing something up.  You know, it wasn't big enough to do any damage, but it was, it was pretty loud.
Speaker 1: So you never got hurt by--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Would you do any, would you take any precautions?
Speaker 2: I got enough, far enough away from it that (laughter), I wouldn't get hit by the flying glass.
Speaker 1: So you'd heat something up and just get back out of the way?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, back away from it and watch what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, how are your grades in high school?  Were you getting--
Speaker 2: I was, I was an honor society student.  I was in the National Honor Society.  I was the first member of my high school to go to a National Honor Society convention.  And my first trip outside of Memphis, going to a Northern city was Minneapolis-St. Paul [Minnesota] as a representative of my high school in the National Honor Society.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was this when you were senior?
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: Junior?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would have been, calculating 'cause I know you're--
Speaker 2: In 1954.
Speaker 1: 1954, okay.  You graduated in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 21894
Speaker 1: Now, in 1954, was there--, I know there was some publicity about it, but did you, did your teachers and your mother [Lessie Minor] discuss the Supreme Court decision in 'Brown versus the Board of Education' [U.S. Supreme Court ruling that made the state-sponsored segregation of public schools unconstitutional]?
Speaker 2: No, my mom said very little about it, as a matter of fact.  The teachers were very cautious in terms of what they would say about it other than the fact that for the time being the nation was exposed to the inequities of the system we were caught in, namely, we all knew that we were getting second-hand books.  And we all knew that the classes that they had to teach were much larger than classes in other schools, white schools.  And we would get books that were written in.  They were just kind of out-of-date.  They were not new.  And this is the other thing that I found very fascinating in looking back at this, and I used this in my talk with the [Delaware State] Chamber of Commerce [where Smith was invited to talk about leadership], was that when I was in the tenth grade, it, we started to talk about college.  And my teachers were telling me that if I really wanted to go to college, then I would need certain subjects that were not being taught, particularly math courses.  They taught algebra, and that was it.  And in order to be successful in college, you had to have math beyond algebra, namely trig [trigonometry], geometry and calculus.  Well, those subjects were not taught at my high school.  And I asked my math teacher, Ms. Sharp, how can I, you know, take these classes.  She said, "Well, I could teach them, but we would have to have a petition, we would have to petition the Board of Education to let us do it."  So I said, "Well, what is a petition."  She said, "You have to get fifteen signatures of students committing themselves to take this course."  So I got a petition together, got fifteen kids to sign it.  Some of 'em didn't know what they were signing, but they signed it.  And we took the petition to the Board of Education, and they allowed her to teach trigonometry, solid geometry and some calculus.  But we had to petition the Board of Education to let the teachers who were qualified to do it, do so.
Speaker 1: So the Board of Education basically put a ceiling on what you were learning?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.  They put us in a box.  You were in a box.  This, you know, if you say, "Look, I wanna be a scientist," people said, "What's a scientist?" Or a chemist, "What's a chemist?"  At the time, you know, my knowledge of chemistry was what I read about George Washington Carver [African American scientist] and some others.  But that was it.  But I had this innate curiosity, and I knew that I wanted to be a chemist and I wanted to be a research chemist, someone who was seeking knowledge, looking for things that were new, unknown, adding to the body of knowledge that we didn't know.  And that as early on.  And so I got the opportunity to have Ms. Sharp be able to teach courses that really made it possible for me to, to get into college and to be successful at it.
Speaker 1: So you had to actually circulate a petition to get that.  All right, so did she teach geometry and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, she taught trig and geometry.  And imbedded in some of the stuff she taught was a little calculus, but not much.
Story_ID: 21895
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you a very popular student in high school?
Speaker 2: Sort of (laughter).  I was pretty well known in my circles in school.  I wouldn't call myself popular because I would--, I'm a introvert.  And I had what I call social skills that allowed me to survive not only in a black-white situation, but allowed me to survive in a situation in which I had to navigate from one neighborhood to another neighborhood.  And even when I was growing up, there were gangs.  And you didn't wanna be caught in the wrong territory or gang.  If you had to pass through Orange Mound [neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee], you'd better know somebody, you know, or somebody should know you to pass through their (laughter) area.  So I got to be known by a lot of people in both neighborhoods, Orange Mound and Magnolia.  And I would guess today, I would be called a nerd, so to speak, but that's not the way I behaved when I was growing up.  You know, I grew up being kind of ordinary, to fit in.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you like music growing up?
Speaker 2: I listened to all kinds of music.  And I didn't really develop a taste for any particular music until I got to college, and then I got into Jazz which I found very, in Memphis, you know, the home of the blues, and we knew and listened to radio stations in which, you know, the blues was played a lot.  And we had the opportunity to socialize on Beale Street which is a notorious place there in Memphis for Blues and a lot of artisans who got their start their start in Memphis.  So I knew that music very well.
Story_ID: 21896
Speaker 1: All right, we were, we were just alluding to the blues [genre of music] for a minute.  Now, and you mentioned, you said Rufus Thomas as one of the figures in town that people knew, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was he a figure on the radio?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he have his own show?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Did he have his own show?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard that B.B. King had a show at one time.  Was he broadcasting when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was broadcasting.  There were a number of young artisans at the time.  Phineas Newborn, Jr. was a sax [saxophone] player that got his start in Memphis [Tennessee].  And, of course, Isaac Hayes came along after I'd left, long after I left Memphis.  But there were a number of others.  I don't recall names at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you feel about the blues growing up 'cause there's a certain juncture in which young, African American teens reject, kind of reject the blues down South?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum, well, when I grew up, when I was growing up in Memphis, we used to, there was a place that we used to pass through called 'Tin Pan Alley', and they had what they call juke joints there in which folks would come in and, and play and sing the blues.  And, and it was kind of what we called normal course, natural course.  And my interpretation at the time was that Blues was a expression of, of a lot of things that were going wrong in the lives of people and mostly black people.  And you expressed the emotions of those things in song and they were usually, you know, called the blues.  And someone would say, you look like you got the blues, meaning that you were down and out, feeling bad or whatever.  And that was the expression I think that was pretty well acknowledged or accepted at the time.  It was not uplifting and joyous and, you know, what have you.  It was sad and had some story to it, storyline to it that dealt with something going wrong or someone being oppressed or losing a loved one or things just weren't working well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there any particular style--well, you said that you liked jazz later on, but when you were growing up, you didn't have any particular style of music you gravitated towards?
Speaker 2: No, no, as I said earlier, having a radio only, we used to get broadcasts from Nashville [Tennessee].  And, you know, you heard a lot of country music as well, Minnie Pearl.  I listened to concerts out of Nashville, Tennessee and got a chance to listen to country music.  And then there was a classical station there as well, and I remember a artisan by the name of Gesell McKenzie, I remember listening to her and found her name fascinating.  And Peggy Lee and a lot of other folks who you could catch on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, these are people singing the, what we all "standards" now.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, music from some of the Broadway shows.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, absolutely.
Story_ID: 21897
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's see, all right.  Now, were you, did you run for class officer or anything when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was, I wasn't class president.  I did, was president of the Student Honor Society and the Science Club and I have to get my yearbook out and look at some of this stuff (laughter) that I was involved in.  But, but if one would describe, you know, was I a leader in high school, yeah.  I was pretty much involved in arranging and leading discussions and being part of the student leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how did your sister [Caroline Smith] do?  How was she doing in school?
Speaker 2: My sister struggled.  And she and I in later life used to talk about her coming behind me.  She was six years younger than I was, and she would say, you know, you made it tough for me because all the teachers remember you.  And they expected me to be as good as you, and I told them that I couldn't match, live up to my brother's standards.  But she (laughter), she said you made it tough for me.  And I said, well, I apologize.  I didn't mean to (laughter).
Story_ID: 21898
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were thinking about college, what were the options that were presented to you?  Did you have counseling from the staff there?
Speaker 2: I--, the expectations around college for me, around tenth grade was that I would go to college, either at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And there was an opportunity for early admission to Morehouse after the tenth grade.  And if you qualified test wise, high school, grade point average [GPA], etc.  And I qualified, but my mother [Lessie Minor] wouldn't hear of it.  You know, I started to school when I was five years old, and she felt I was much too young and immature to be taken into that kind of environment.  And she was absolutely right.  Otis Higgs was a member of my class, and he opted to do that.  He later became a--, made judge in Memphis [Tennessee], a fairly well-known judge in Memphis.  And I think looking back on it, Otis would describe it as a tough chore to do, leaving high school at that early age and starting a career in college.  Interestingly enough, we're now in Delaware proposing to have an early college charter school located on the campus of Delaware State University [Dover, Delaware] which would start with ninth grade.  And over the course of ninth through twelfth grades, you could accumulate up to sicty hours of coursework at the collegiate level which is kind of a theme that was not similar, but kind of like leaving school early.  But I wouldn't--, I'm glad I didn't do that because I was just immature.  I wasn't ready for that kind of change in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you were on the verge of graduation, did you know where you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: It was very interesting, the way I ended up deciding where to go to college.  My grandmother had been back to Alabama, and she and my grandfather was driving back to Denver [Colorado].  They stopped off in Memphis to see me for the first time in I don't know how many years.  And they talked my mother into allowing them to take me with them to Colorado for the summer.  And once I got to Denver, I got a chance to travel around the city and found out there was a college there called University of Denver.  And so when I went back home, I said, you know what?  Since my grandmother lives in Colorado, and my father [James Smith, Jr.] was there as well, that I would apply to University of Denver instead of Tennessee State or Fiske or one of the other schools that my counselors that offered up as an opportunity for me.  I applied to University of Denver.  They gave me a half tuition scholarship and that's where I ended up going.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they gave you half tuition?  So could you raise the rest of it by working or what?
Speaker 2: I had to.  That's the only way I could do it.  My mother, when I left home to go to my--, when I left home to start my freshman year, my mother gave me twenty dollars, and that was it.
Story_ID: 21899
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, what did you like about Colorado?  And had you--now, you had been to Minneapolis [Minnesota], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And had you been anywhere else outside of Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was going on in Chicago?
Speaker 2: There were some relatives that I didn't know very well, and my mother knew them.  And there was an opportunity to travel to Chicago for a two-day visit, and I was there for about two, three days and didn't like it.  And--
Speaker 1: What was it about it that you didn't like?
Speaker 2: It was a different urban setting than I had known in Memphis.  Memphis kind sprawled in place.  This was south side of Chicago, tenements, you know, very confined, very crowded, lots of people.
Speaker 1: Well, this is, you're talking about the black belt probably before they even built the high rises, the big projects.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's when that was all like, you said, tenements, what they described in the old sociology books about Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right, right.  And it just, it just didn't, you know, I think I made up my mind after that visit that this was never the city--if this is Chicago, I don't wanna go back.  And that's, that was the image that I had at the time and really didn't have a chance to change that image until after I'd graduated from college and had the opportunity to visit Chicago as a professional and see, you know, Chicago, you know, downtown, lakefront, you know, the whole nine yards.  And then had the opportunity to be transferred there by DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, American chemical company] for two years and stayed there, lived there and really got to know the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21900
Speaker 1: Okay, so Denver [Colorado].  So were race relations better there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, you know, I used to tell people this, and I talked to my kids about this.  And I say, you know, there were, there wasn't what we call overt segregation or racism.  It was very subtle.  It was very, it was there.  It was very--and it was awkward because I was extremely naive.  I thought racism and Jim Crow was confined to the South.  That was my image, you know.  It was legally accepted to treat black people the way they treat black people, but if you go to the--, up North, and I was influenced by the reception I got as a visitor to St. Paul, Minneapolis [Minnesota].  The National Honor Society convention was held on the campus of the University of Minnesota.  And I happened to live with a professor at the University of Minnesota while I was there for the convention.  And they were just the most gracious people I've ever met in my life.  And I just had the image that, well, this is the way things are outside of the South.  So I went to Colorado and I was expecting Coloradans to be the same way the, this group of people were when I visited Minneapolis-St. Paul.  But then I started to understand that, there were certain things that you weren't welcomed in and you weren't a part of.  I remember my first introduction to the realities of being black in a society that was in transition around, and ambiguous about integration and the University of Denver, I can best describe was being ambivalent a little bit about integration.  They knew it was probably okay, but a lot of the kids there came from communities in which there were no black people.  And they had a freshmen orientation, and I remember being very naive about this, saying, well, you know, this is gonna be a different day and a different environment.  I'm gonna be accepted as who I am.  So I put my little red beanie on and started to partake in the activities that they had constructed for incoming freshmen and looked around, and there weren't very many people like me as incoming freshmen (laughter).  So I said, well, yeah, that's the way it is.  And they had this little get-acquainted exercise in which they had an outer circle of, of girls and inner circle of guys.  And it was kind of like musical chairs.  When the music stopped, that's who you're supposed to introduce yourself to.  And when the music stopped, there was absolutely no one in front of me.  And I kind of looked around and said, oh, (laughter), this is kind of fascinating, embarrassing, but fascinating.  And I started to develop some insights into what our society was really like.  And it was not what I thought it was supposed to be or what it ought to be, what I thought it ought to be.  But it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there were no signs posted about--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.
Speaker 1: --colored people.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I could go to the theaters, and I could go to restaurants and stores and people were typically cordial, but when you started to encroach on the social scene, then, you know, there were signs that you weren't welcomed.  And nothing very overt, but it was non-mistakeable.  Yeah, you didn't, yeah, you quickly knew where the boundaries were.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any other, were there any black females on campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  We, there weren't many, but there were, there were some.  But Denver was a fairly metropolitan area, and you got a chance to, to meet members of the community, and the kids that I knew who commuted to the campus, who didn't live on campus, had circles of friends outside in the city.  And that's where we typically congregated and socialized, you know, the black cliques would have their little social activities outside of the school.  And that's where we gathered most of the time, not on campus.
Speaker 1: Now, did you live on campus?
Speaker 2: The first year I lived with my grandmother, and then I moved on campus in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know the old black neighborhood.  It's called Five Points--
Speaker 2: Five Points, yes.  Yeah, yeah, that was where you could go get a home-cooked meal and a number of bars and restaurants there.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the theater there that--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  I don't remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's kind of a name, I keep forgetting it.  It was, it's almost like a classical name (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's a black theater where the acts would come to town and--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: So there's a proper little black community there.
Speaker 2: Yep, it was five--
Speaker 1: And businesses and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that's the first time, I used the--, you heard the term 'Five Points'.  Yeah, it was there.  It's a notorious area.  Gathering of folks from all around the city.
Story_ID: 21901
Speaker 1: Okay, now the chemistry department at the University of Denver, now, did you take chemistry right away?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I got involved with chemistry right away, and there was a rude awakening for me coming from high school in which I never studied--I never really had to study hard until I had to start to change my study habits.  And, and my, I remember getting a C in chemistry, which was a shock.  And I went in to see my advisor, and he said, "You wanna major in chemistry, and you're getting a C?"  Said, "Maybe you ought to think about changing your subject, your major?"  I said, "No way." (laughter)  That was my wake-up call, that, that C in chemistry.  And from that point on, I just had to do what I had to do.  I buckled down and by the time that I was a sophomore, I was given a job as a lab assistant, in which I worked with a professor to prepare the lab for labs, you know, the course, lab courses.  And I was able to mix the reagents that were used in experiments, and I had responsibility for collecting all the data and what have you.  So I made that transition from being a C student to one in which I had the confidences of my professors to, to be an assistant.
Speaker 1: That's a, I suppose this was the first time you'd been around that much equipment in terms of the type of equipment they had?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, first time.
Speaker 1: What things did they have that you didn't have back, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, you had an array of glassware and apparatuses that you could set up experiments.  You could, you had vessels and flasks and burners and filters and centrifuges and all kinds of things that, you know, I'd never seen before.  And you had a fume hood that you could work in and not get asphyxiated by the vapors of the materials that you're working with.  And by the time I got to my junior year, I was able to do independent work in the laboratories without supervision.  They allowed me to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, were there particular teachers there that were like, you know, that you admired, or were like mentors (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The chairman of the Department of Chemistry, a fellow named Earl Engle, kind of took me under his wing and was very supportive of my efforts and desire to become a chemist, very amiable person, very likeable, quick smile and very easy to talk to and very encouraging.  So he was my advisor, and he kind of encouraged me and supported me the whole time I was there.  I didn't, I didn't know that I was gonna become an organic chemist until my junior year in which I, I had developed a liking to organic chemistry because basically, I'm an experimentalist.  I like to do experiments.  And I worked one summer, independently to do some work in inorganic chemistry, and I found it okay, but not exciting.  But organic chemistry was very exciting, and this is where I started my inquisitive nature around a whole different approach in chemistry and got a job at a research institute that was on campus, called Denver Research Institute, kind of like SRI, the Stanford Research Institute.  They do contract government work, and they had a number of scientists who needed some hands to, to, you know, clean up and do what I call the routine stuff that had to be done in a lab.  And I got a chance to get hired on as an assistant there before I graduated with my bachelor's degree.  And then after I graduated, they hired me as a, as full-fledged chemist.  I worked there for a couple of years before I went on to school at Oregon.
Story_ID: 21902
Speaker 1: Now, you got married at some point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right after my, I got my bachelor's degree I got married there in--
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet--was she from Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: This is not my current wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  Okay, so, yeah.  So, but you did get, you got married and you had a child, I think, before, around 1960.
Speaker 2: Yep, the year after I got, graduated from, with my bachelor's, we had my first child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21903
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so you were telling me off camera about how you choose the University of Oregon to do your graduate studies.  And what, tell that story again (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, well, while I was at, at the [Denver] Research Institute [at University of Denver, Colorado], I, I was able to do some--, lot of independent work.  They quickly allowed me to be more than just a pair of hands to one of the scientists.  They allowed me to really follow my own nose, so to speak, in terms of inquiry, scientific inquiry.  And that was that point where I knew I had to go on to get a Ph.D.  To get the master's degree, was just not the end of the game.  And I was doing some literature work in an area that fascinated me, namely, studying the nature of aromatic hydrocarbons.  And I ran across some work by a professor named Virgil Boekelheide, who had just moved from the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York] to Oregon.  And, and in just trying to decide where I wanted to go to graduate school, I knew that I wanted to stay out West, and it was either going to be the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] or the University of Oregon [Eugene, Oregon] or University of California.  And since I was fascinated by the work of Virgil Boekelheide, I wrote him a note and asked if he had any money to support a graduate student.  And he quickly wrote back and said, I do, come on out.  And I bundled my family up and we drove out to Eugene, Oregon and I enrolled in school there in 1961.
Story_ID: 21904
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is, so you're in Eugene, Oregon, the University of Oregon?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, now, what was your dissertation?
Speaker 2: The synthesis and study of 2H-benz[cd]azulene, a hydrocarbon that had properties similar to perinaphthene [perinaphthenone] which Professor Boekelheide was interested in determining whether it was aromatic or not aromatic because of the configuration of the bonds in the hydrocarbon.  And he wanted me to look at finding a way to make the five, six, seven-ring system that was analogous to perinaphthene [perinaphthenone] which is a--, if you're an organic chemist, it's very easy to visualize.  It was a three-benzene rings kind of fused together, and it was, it was--, some work had been done on that system.  And he wanted to see if the same properties would be extended to a different ring structure.  And he asked me if I would take on that task, and I was more than anxious to take it on.  And that's how I got involved with that kind of work.
Speaker 1: Is there a way you can break that down for lay people that may be watching this?
Speaker 2: Um-hum. Well, it--organic molecules have various kinds of properties, and the ring systems in organic molecules are made up of, and, of the ones that are called aromatic or made up of double bonds.  And in the, the most simplest of the aromatic system, namely, benezene, has three double bonds.  And the cyclic system of the benezene molecule demonstrates properties that are very different than if you open up the chain and had three, six rings, six molecules of carbon with double bonds, a triene system and it would have very different kinds of properties.  One would be very reactive, and would display certain kinds of properties.  But if you put 'em in a ring system, it was, the properties were very different.  And this phenomenon was called aromaticity, and this aromatic molecule--, the molecules that he wanted to study were similar.  And he went on--, some other of his work was to construct a very large ring system with multiple bonds that had aromatic properties.  But he was a very prolific researcher and I was thrilled to have the opportunity to get involved with looking at this very simple, at the time, it was kind of complex, but a very simple stepping stone to develop some very, much larger molecules with different properties that also had aromatic tendencies.  I know most lay people would not grasp that, but I don't know how to do it much simpler than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is work, now, is this, did this work form the basis for what you would do at DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Company, American chemical company]?
Speaker 2: Not really.  What this--yes and no.  What this did was to capture my imagination around ring systems that had not been developed yet, mainly, if benezene is a six-ring system, six-member ring system, the next ring system down was a penta [five] system.  And you could only have a pentadiene, and if you made an anion out of that, it demonstrated aromatic properties.  And the next system down would be a four-member ring system, which would be cyclobutadiene with just two double bonds in it, and would be the smallest molecule that--not the smallest because cyclopropene would be the next step down.  Well, I was interested in going down with the smaller chains than going up with the larger ones that Professor Boekelheide was most fascinated with.  And when I started to work at DuPont, I was given an assignment to look at some very unusual strained ring systems.  And I saw this as an opportunity to kind of capture some of the, the thoughts that I had as a researcher for Boekelheide to do some work at DuPont along the lines that they wanted some work done on, and also satisfy my curiosity about the smaller rings.
Story_ID: 21905
Speaker 1: All right.  So was it--, did you find--, was working on your Ph.D. easy?
Speaker 2: It was a lot of fun.  Let me put it this way.  It wasn't easy, but it was fun.  I thoroughly enjoyed it because it just opened up all kinds of ways that I could express myself as a synthetic chemist.  I'm a, like I say, I'm a synthetic chemist.  And I like to make stuff.  And this just offered up a number of opportunities for me to do that and that's what really fascinated me about the opportunity I had at DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company].  DuPont's a chemical company, and when I started there, they had research operations in almost all of their departments.  They were broken up into various departments.  And most of the operating departments, those departments who had commercial product responsibility, had research groups as well.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this before, you entered DuPont, I mean how did you find out about the job at DuPont or did they recruit you or, and were you one of the first black folks to work for DuPont?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.  My thesis professor [Virgil Boekelheide] was a good friend of the laboratory director in the Central Research Department at DuPont, a fellow named Ted Carrens (ph.).  And Ted came out to [University of] Oregon and gave a talk, a lecture about some of the work that was going on in the Central Research Department at DuPont.  Now, Central Research is a little different than regular, commercial departments.  Central Research was a group of, a department made up of a group of scientists that were exploratory in nature.  In other words, they did research that was not dissimilar from research that you would find in a college campus actually.  And that kind of work really fascinated me.  I was prepared to do, you know, commercial research, but if I had the opportunity to do this kind of research, I prefer to do that.  And when I interviewed DuPont, this department interviewed me for the job as well as the other departments, namely, organic chemicals and films and, I forget the other departments, plastics department.  And, and the job that Central Research offered me was the one that I really jumped at.  And that's where I got my start to come into a department like Central Research because I'm a synthetic organic chemist.  And I had an opportunity now to have some of the best equipment in the world and some of the most available scientists to collaborate with.  I thought that was a real dream.  And was I--I was among the first African Americans to come in with a Ph.D. at DuPont.  There was probably three other scientists there with Ph.D.s, as I remember, a fellow named Dick Cooper who had started maybe about four years earlier than I, five years maybe; a fellow named Dan James who was a scientist at the organic chemicals laboratory across the river in Deepwater, New Jersey and a fellow named Dick Goldsby (ph.) who was there at DuPont.  So I was the fourth African American at the time with a Ph.D. at DuPont.  So I was not the first Ph.D. African American scientist.
Story_ID: 21906
Speaker 1: Okay, and I've heard a lot of the people we've interviewed in science say that once the segregation and some of the racial tensions that exist in the outside world is not in the laboratory.  Once you get in there, it's not there.
Speaker 2: Well, here again, it is--, you had to demonstrate that you had the skill and the knowledge and the innovative talents to be successful. Now, the University of Oregon [Eugene, Oregon] was not necessarily equated with say a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or a University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or a Cal-Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] or University of Illinois where DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company] drew a lot of scientists from those, those schools.  But there was no question that I competed well with scientists from any of those institutions.  And it didn't take me long to recognize that I had the training and skills to be a top-notch scientists if that's what I really wanted to do.  And, and it wasn't long after I started at DuPont that I had developed a reputation as being a very innovative scientist.  I was out on the lecture circuit after two years at DuPont giving talks at the University of Illinois, at my alma mater in Oregon [University of Oregon] and a number of other very prestigious universities around the country.
Speaker 1: So you started at DuPont in 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], '64 [1964], I'm sorry, 1964.
Speaker 1: And DuPont is, you know, kind of famous for, I know in the old days on television, they would talk about all of the different synthetic materials they developed like Lycra or nylon, Teflon.  Did you work on any of these kinds of products?
Speaker 2: Not on any of those.  Again, my focus early in my research career at DuPont was not into the commercial products or commercial inventions.  Mine was trying to define a body of knowledge that would give DuPont a leg up in some novel area of chemistry that might prove to be commercially valuable to them.  Would I come up with another Teflon?  I don't think so, but I could come up with some knowledge that would give rise to perhaps some other discoveries that would give DuPont a leg up, particularly, in the area of agricultural chemicals or pharmaceutical chemicals.  Many of the materials that we developed and discovered in Central Research was always screened by the Stine Haskell Laboratory as either having biological activity, both in plants and animals.  And if something that you discovered or happened to discovery in a laboratory had those kind of interests, then they would further come back and say, well, can you make some additional derivatives of this or molecules similar to this and see if there's a pattern of activity that we can perhaps specialize in or, could you come up with a molecule that has some unusual reactivity that could make a polymer.  DuPont was making plastics and films and fibers out of polymers.  And if you could come up with a unique monarch structure, this could, in fact, give rise to perhaps a new commercial fiber or film or plastic.  So those were the kind of connections they were trying to foster with this activity at the Central Research Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are the days of, this is the days of the space program and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of different, I mean I just remember so many different materials (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mylar, Teflon, later Kevlar and Nomex, particularly, were very heavily used in the space program, and still is for that matter.
Story_ID: 21907
Speaker 1: '71 [1971], now, you were voted Talleyville's [Delaware] outstanding young man by the Jaycee [or JCs, United States Junior Chamber].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you're a community, you get involved with the community too?
Speaker 2: One of the first things I did when I moved here to Delaware was to try to get to know the community in which I was living and, and find ways in which I could make a connection with the community and take on, excuse me, take on some of the, the things that I saw moving from Memphis [Tennessee] to Colorado to Oregon and to Delaware that I thought perhaps I might have the energy to support and help out in.  My entry into the community here in Delaware was first brought to the attention of people I worked for at DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company] was when I couldn't find housing for my family.  The community here was segregated in a housing, from a housing perspective.  And so another organization I got involved with was the Fair Housing Council because I had--, the laboratory director at Central Research had to put my, me and my family up in a motel for a couple of weeks because I couldn't find an apartment that would rent to a black family.  And my conversation with the lab director was that, you know, look, I took the job here at DuPont with the idea that you were an equal opportunity employer in that I would be afforded the same privileges and accommodations that my white counterparts would.  And they quickly got involved, and within about two weeks I had a place to stay with my family.  And that led to me, you know, being in, not an overtly activist, but a person who joined forces with other members of the community, who said, look, things need to change and we need to figure out how we can help bring about these changes.  So that's how I got started.
Story_ID: 21908
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, from 1966, you publish in the 'Journal of American Chemical Society' a number of articles.  What's the nature of what you're writing--
Speaker 2: The work I originally got involved with at DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company] was to, again, to look at some strained ring systems as a way to generate novel structures that could have either biological activity or, or intermediate activities for new systems or new molecules that we were interested in.  So I discovered a, a interesting reaction with a very highly-strained molecule called quadricyclane that gave rise to some unusual products.  And I was allowed to study that for a while and part of the, the work that I did, I published in the 'Journal of American Chemical Society' and later on some other works that colleagues and I worked on were published as well.
Speaker 1: And what were your, I mean what things did you find out that--
Speaker 2: Well, this, this reaction that I initially found out with quadricyclane was, was a interesting reaction in a sense that the, the products had all the earmarks of a reaction called a Diels-Alder reaction in which you take a diene and a dienophile.  A diene is a molecule having two double bonds, two carbon, carbon double bonds, and a dienophile is another molecule that would come together and form a cyclic system.  You know, diene, diene, dienophile, they come together.  And with this reaction, we didn't have any olefact structure.  It was a ring system with some highly-strained rings.  And they were kind of, if you looked at the quadricyclane molecule, it had two highly-strained cyclopropane rings hooked together.  And what I found was that the dienophile would react with this system and give you a product that had the earmarks of a diene-dienophile reaction (laughter).  And this was the first time anyone had seen the phenomenon of two strained rings reacting like it was a diene, like an unsaturated bond.  And, and we got a lot of interesting responses to that because it was, it had a lot of unusual and unanticipated outputs that you wouldn't have predicted had you looked at the molecule and said, this is the way it would react, you know, no one had predicted that kind of reaction.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right.  So is there a product that--well, I guess it's not a product that emerges out of this, but the research was able to--
Speaker 2: Well, the research was interesting.  Let me put it that way.  It had no commercial possibilities or connections with DuPont.  The, the one thing that my lab directors recognized is that, number one, having a young scientist like myself come in right out of graduate school and get involved with some research that had the kind of buzz that this had, I could go out on a lecture circuit and give talks to universities where there were other young graduate students that might have an interest in working at DuPont.  And it was kind of, you know, let's send Clay out and see if he fascinates enough young scientists that they might be interested in DuPont.  So it was a kind of a marketing aspect of it.  And it's a way that DuPont kept its name and its work in the front of scientists and young scientists around the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is fun at this stage--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 21909
Speaker 1: So did you do this for your whole career?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  That's interesting because--
Speaker 1: That was in the beginning--
Speaker 2: --when I started at DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company], that's what I thought I was gonna be.  I was gonna be a career scientist.  That's, that's, that was my passion at the time.  But as I got involved in the company and had chances to interact with management around workplace issues and issues of what I call equity in the broader community, and DuPont was a company that was community focused and community involved. They asked me did, did I have any interests in a career path other than being a scientist.  Yeah, I said, yeah, I'd be interested in being a supervisor.  And, but I wanted to be a supervisor in a central research operation where I could continue my involvement in science.  But they offered me a job as a research supervisor at a commercial laboratory up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I took it, and that got me on, off on a track of research, supervision and then into product management and into sales management and into business management.  So it took me off that path, off a scientific track onto a management track.
Speaker 1: So when did you make that move?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see.  This would be about, I started in '64 [1964], about '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, '69 [1969], okay.  Now, did you like that better, I mean than you thought you would or--
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it convinced me that I had a lot more to offer perhaps potentially in influencing the company's direction, philosophy and operations around people.  DuPont found it very challenging to hire a diverse workforce.  It was a company that obviously recognized that it had to be diverse, and it was a company that had reinvented itself many times.  And it needed people like me and folks like me who brought a diverse point of view to the organization in order for it to achieve that kind of transition from a mostly white-male operation to one in which you had a diverse operation with both men and women of various backgrounds and diversities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So DuPont was making a commitment to change by--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --moving you into a position.  Okay.
Story_ID: 21910
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the highlights of what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, typically, I was one of the first African American supervisors and managers in DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, American chemical company] so I was kind of a pacesetter in this area.  This was challenging for the simple reason that, that I was pioneering a pathway here in which no one else had been.  And I had to do it and learn how to do it at the same time without having any people like myself to look up to or talk to or converse with and say, "Hey, what do you think?  Is this the right career path or is this the right approach to a set of issues that I'm trying to deal with in the organization?"  So I had to do it on my own, and what I found out early on is that what I wanted to do is to be successful and to overcome the notion that if you take on this task, you can't fail because failure would probably set back the changes that needed to occur because you would kind of feed in to the irrational approach that people would take.  Well, see, we gave an opportunity to do something and he failed.  And in the back of your mind, you just felt like failure was not an option, a lot of pressure, a lot of tension, a lot of what I call my lonely journey, trying to make tough decisions and to be successful at integration into an organization in which there was no models to work from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you consider your legacy in this role, I guess?
Speaker 2: That I brought a, a commitment to work with a broad array of people in an organization in a very collegial way and a very challenging way of getting change to take place without a lot of drama.  There were some colleagues who came on after me who felt like you had to do some radical things in order to get people's attention.  And my approach was, let's approach this in a very rational way.  Let's understand, first off, we are here to be successful in the tasks and jobs that we have to do.  And in order to gain credibility around change issues, you've gotta be able to demonstrate your ability to be successful.  And in an environment in which success is not always defined the same way as it would be defined for your white counterparts.  Success for you might be that you've gotta do some things that you didn't think you could do and they didn't think you could do, but you did them and tasks that you took on that no one expected you to take on and you were able to do them.  But more importantly, to be able to communicate, to be able to talk to people on their terms and to be able to converse in a way that convinces others to be compelling, to use an argument that is absolutely compelling to get your point of view across.  And that's not easy to learn.  It's not easy to do, but you do it.  Some people have a knack for doing it, and other people don't.
Story_ID: 21911
Speaker 1: Okay, so you continue to do research though even as you continue--you're not completely out of research, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I've, I'm not a scientist at a--people say, you must still do science, don't you?  I say, nah, I wish.  But I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we've got like--okay, I have here a note that you published the preparation of quadricyclane in 'Organic Synthesis' [journal]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '88 [1988], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a resubmission of work that I had previously, submitted early back in 1969, I think.  And it was then republished in a later volume of 'Organic Synthesis'.  That's the date that you see on the publication.  It'll just be republished again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no, after I left the labs in '69 [1969], I didn't do any more scientific work at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you miss it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I missed it for a while.  And I still have friends and colleagues that I talk to from time to time.  My, my first lab partner at DuPont in the chemical labs is still a friend of mine named Owen Webster.  And Owen was one of the top scientists at DuPont.  And we still see each other regularly.  Matter of fact, I have a poker group here once a month, and he's a member of the poker group.  So I keep up to speed on some of the things that, that are going on.  But I have long since left the scientific arena.  Now, as a trustee at the University, Delaware State University [Dover, Delaware], I'm a strong supporter of science education at the university level.  When I was acting president, I started some initiatives there to give a lot more support to training students in what we call the STEM areas, science, technology, engineering and mathematics.  And over the years I've served on a number of committees and boards around this area of science preparation for under-represented groups.  I was on an NSF [National Science Foundation] panel for a couple of years looking at the, the issues of women and men, minorities in science and what we needed to do and change in order to get larger numbers of minorities involved in science.  And now that I'm at a historically black college, university [HBCU] at Delaware State University, this is a kind of a natural involvement for me to, to work with this university to improve and enhance its ability to attract young people and attract them into the science areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna go back a little bit and just talk about--now, when did you retire from DuPont?
Speaker 2: In 1998.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: December 31, 1998.
Speaker 1: And when did you first become involved with Delaware State [University]?
Speaker 2: My first involvement with Delaware State was in 1967 in which I became a, an industry representative to the Department of Chemistry at Delaware State College at that time, and became a science advisor to that department and helped them establish a local student chapter of the American Chemical Society there at Del[aware] State.  And little did I know at the time that I would later become a member of the Board of Trustees.  That's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you start involvement in '67 [1967]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, helping them organize their chemistry department.  Okay.  So, in '87 [1987], I guess, is the first time that you served as chairman of the board, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Delaware State.
Speaker 2: Well, I became a trustee at, in '87 [1987] and a chair of the board in '93 [1993].
Story_ID: 21912
Speaker 1: Okay, so throughout the time, even though you're working at DuPont, you're like volunteering at Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware], and so what are, I mean things kind of culminated in your being interim president at Delaware State?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So how did things come to that, and well, what are the steps leading to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's--
Speaker 1: --more and more intense involvement at Delaware State [University]?
Speaker 2: That's fascinating.  I--Mike Castle, who is a recently retired representative from Delaware was governor at the time.  And, and Mike and I served on some study groups and committees before he became governor and while I was still, you know, kind of getting engaged and involved in the community.  And there was a vacancy on the board and someone recommended my name to him, and he remembered me and called me up and asked if I'd be willing to serve.  And I said, yes, I'd be happy to.  And that's how I got started.  And I'm a gubernatorial appointee, and I've been appointed by four different governors now, and I'm on my last six-year term because I've given the board notice that I'm not gonna stay on any longer.  But being a person of, with a great deal of interest in education is what led me to support Delaware State and having served on the board for that long, but mostly as chair.  I started serving as chairman of the board in--it was then called the President of Board, in 1993 and had gone through one transition from president, retiring, Bill Delauder (ph.) and Alan Sessoms was hired under my tenure as chair of the board.  And Alan left early in his second term as president, second, third-year term as president to take on a job at the University of the District of Columbia.  And the board turned to me and said, we need to have a president so we can find a new president because Alan left unexpectedly.  And I agreed to do so with the proviso that I would return to the board as chair once we found a new president.  So it took us sixteen months to find a new president.  So I served as interim or acting president for that period of time.  And that was really kind of a highlight in my career.  Being involved with the board as long as I had been, I got to know the University pretty well and knew the needs and the things that had to change in that institution.  It is an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] land grant.  'U.S. News and World Reports', I guess it's 'Newsweek' ranked Delaware State at number--at the time, it was Number Seventeen out of 101 HBCUs.  And now it's Number Fifteen, and my, our goal and objective is to be Number One, and we'll do that, my guess, in the next five to six years.  And that's a challenging thing to do, but we're gonna do it.
Speaker 1: As we sit here today, who is Number One?
Speaker 2: Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Spelman.
Speaker 2: Spelman and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] in that order.
Story_ID: 21913
Speaker 1: Okay, what are the strengths of Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] right now as we speak?
Speaker 2: Its strengths, fundamentally, it's a school of about 4,000 students.  Its strengths is that it is a very student-oriented institution with a excellent and dynamic faculty who have demonstrated a track record of training young scientists, young students to be successful, not just scientists, but students to be successful in careers.  And we've done that consistently.  And we are poised to do it in a much larger and more dynamic fashion.  We've attracted some very stellar faculty.  We have one scientist there who has established a center of applied optics, one of few centers in the country in optics.  And, as a matter of fact, one of, a piece of their work is on the current Mars Mission, Mission to Mars, and Delaware State has equipment on that mission and will, in fact, be the center for determining whether or not we're able to discover any life on Mars.  The laser equipment was built by Delaware State and the capabilities to interpret the results from that experiment is all, resides here at Delaware State.
Speaker 1: So the optical equipment that's on the--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, laser.
Speaker 1: Laser, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there will be, equipment will have, as part of its function a laser that will shoot a beam of light that will vaporize materials, Martian materials, and from the plasma that would be generated from that, that laser will be analyzed.  And they can determine whether or not the signal is consistent with there being some form of life or not on the planet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is Delaware, is the commitment of the state of Delaware to Delaware State strong?
Speaker 2: It hasn't been, but it's getting better.  We have a young president who has come in to really energize the institution, energize the community and energize the state government that Delaware State is more than just a 1890 land grant school, serving mostly African American students, but is a place where quality education is available to all students in Delaware.  And the state is giving us a lot more attention than they've given us in the past.  And that's taken some time to do because most states, southern states that, where HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] are located have been reducing their support to HBCUs, but they've been reducing their support to higher ed[ucation] in general, state budgets are tightening in decline.  They have really shortened, in my view, short changed higher ed.  The State of Pennsylvania, for instance, made major cuts in the higher ed this past year.  California made major cuts in higher ed, and that's occurring across the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about the Center for Integrated Biological and Environmental Research at Delaware State?
Speaker 2: This is a, a center that was established in collaboration with the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware] which is the other major institution here in Delaware, to conduct some fairly far-reaching research in the environment.  We have, at Delaware State, we are a campus that is, has a very strong green initiative.  We're looking at ways in which we can sustain the environment by making fundamental changes in the way we operate as a university and the way we train our students to think about the environment and become a lot more conscious of, of things that we can change through research and things that we can change through practices.  And we're working in collaboration with the education institutions here in Delaware, Delaware State, Delaware Technical and Community College [Dover, Delaware].  And we're being supported by federal funds to do some of that work.
Story_ID: 21914
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you have received quite a few honors here in the state of Delaware, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and we mentioned before other honors.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I hope that people will remember my passion for education.  Early on in our interview, I talked to you about the challenges I had as youngster, growing up in Memphis [Tennessee], and the quality of the education resources that were available to me and us, kids like me.  And I tell this story to a lot of our students when I have a chance to talk to them, and adults for that matter, that in the community I grew up in, in Memphis, in which we were truly short changed in terms of resources, I was not the brightest kid in my circles.  I had a pretty decent I.Q., but there were kids that I grew up with had I.Q.s that would knock your socks off.  They didn't make it.  They did not make it out of the neighborhood.  And I look back on that and see that as a tragedy because that, you can probably multiply that across this country with a lot of other communities like Memphis, like Magnolia, like Orange Mound [communities around Memphis, Tennessee] in which there are young minority kids, African American most generally, who somehow never get captured in a educational system that truly gives them a shot at being productive.  And I have felt that someone, whatever it is that I can do, keep that in the back of my mind and help transform what is happening today so that that tragedy never occurs or reduce the chances that it can occur again; that every young child has an opportunity to be successful in an educational arena because the greatest assets that we have in this country is our children.  And I've seen too many of them get wasted by the wayside because of the way our system operates.  Then it was a segregated system in which the tradition was, you didn't make it equal.  It was separate and unequal.  Today, it is a system in which we have achievement gaps in which minority kids are not achieving at the level of the majority kids.  And there are a variety of reasons for that, and we have to understand those reasons and change that.  And one of the strong beliefs that I've had over the years of being involved as a member of the state school board, as a member of the board of trustees and served on a number of national committees in studying these issues is that we have to make sure that when our kids start school, they start ready to learn.  We do not fund early childhood at the level it should be funded for children at risk.  Many of our young kids come out of poor families, poor backgrounds, come to school not prepared to learn.  And they get lost in the system.  And many of these kids will be stats that will reach something like 60 percent of the kids.  At one time, when I was on the state school board, who are raised in the city of Wilmington [Delaware], a city where mostly kids are minority, 60 percent of those kids never make it to the twelfth grade when they, after they enroll in the ninth grade.  Now, that, to me, that's shades of what was happening when I was a youngster in the system.  And we have to change it.  We simply have to change it.  It is an imperative.  It is not an option to do something.  It must be changed.  And so whatever I can do in whatever part of the system I work in, I want to be able to do that.  And I see Delaware State University as a way in which we can train young people to be aware of needs in education, to be successful and to demonstrate that we can, in fact, educate first-generation kids.  I was a first-generation college student.  70 percent of the young people who come to Delaware State University [Dover, Delaware] are first generation.  And so I can identify with them.
Speaker 1: And that's 70 percent.  That's probably not, that's probably typical of a lot of black colleges--
Speaker 2: Yep.  It is, with the exception perhaps of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right, and maybe Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Howard.
Speaker 1: When you look back over what you've done to this point, and again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, I don't know that I would do many things differently other than to perhaps be a stronger advocate for early childhood.  We don't really, truly understand the impact of, of what it is when a child starts to school unable to write their name or know the alphabet or to count or to have a, be able to read a very simplistic story out of a book.  I've got grand kids and they all started first grade or kindergarten able to read books.  And that's because, you know, their daughter, their mothers, my daughters had a quality education, and they are committed to reading to their kids.  Well, there are a lot of parents out there who aren't able to read to their kids because they didn't make it well--they didn't do well in school themselves.  They're products of teenage pregnancies in which teenagers are trying to raise kids, and they're not prepared to give these infants and young kids what they need to be successful.  But we can invest in early childhood so that every young child, when they start kindergarten, first grade, know their alphabets, can count and can read.  And I truly believe that we will revolutionize our whole educational process if we, in fact, give those kids that shot early on.  Right now, we're trying to fix it after these kids have started school and then get them up to speed.  And by the time they get to middle school, if we haven't done it, we've lost them.  We've simply lost them.  And we look at the stats and the data, and many of these kids who come from families that I just described are lagging way behind.  And we still socially promote, move 'em on up, even though they are not ready for the next grade level.  And typically, after the ninth grade, they fall, they, they lose any interest in going to school because they're not learning.  They drop out.  So they become part of the stats that don't show up in their twelfth grade.
Story_ID: 21915
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about your children.  Now, you have children, and you also married again in the '80s [1980s] and that's your current wife.  Just tell us something about your family today.
Speaker 2: I have two daughters who have had the opportunity to grow up with a father whose strong focus is on education and working hard and being successful.  I picked that up from my mother [Lessie Minor].  And I delight in the fact that my wife and I have been successful in launching two daughters, the oldest of whom is a senior managing consultant for SAP Americas in Georgia and having two, three grandchildren, grandkids who have been very successful in school.  And my youngest daughter is a consultant with Booz Allen Hamilton out of Maryland.  And now she struggled because, for a number reasons she struggled (laughter).  First off, she was born premature.  She was born weighing only a pound, eight ounces, nine ounces and was not given a chance to succeed, to be, you know, to make it, but she did.  And so we nurtured her as a youngster having a lot of physical issues, sight, early development.  But she's grown up to be a marvelous young lady who's recently married and has a master's degree from the University of Maryland in Information Science and--Information System, I'm sorry, and been successful at it; don't know that she's gonna have kids any time soon, but we're delighted with how they've, they've developed.
Story_ID: 21916
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always ask this question, and you addressed it on some level, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That, Number One, we never lose sight of the fact that we are still a country divided, even though we have a black president today [President Barack Obama], we are a country divided and that typically, the route to achieving success in the black community is through a system of education that provides for all of our youngsters.  In order to do that, the system has to be available and successful for everybody.  And we tend, African Americans tend not to be engaging in an active way in educational politics.  They're not, you know, they typically, in my experience, they're reluctant to show up in school and demand.  Even now, I tell, I encourage my daughter to go to her school and volunteer; to not be simply an advocate for her child, but to be an advocate for all the kids in the school.  If every parent took on the task of making sure that the school where my child is being educated is a school where all kids get a quality education, then we all benefit from that.  But it's typically looked at in many cases of the zero sum gain, and that is, you know, I want everything for my child, and if your child happens to get everything, that's good.  But if they don't, then that's your problem.  Our system won't work if we simply become focused solely on what's good for me or my child but what's good for every child.  And I would hope that the black community will rally around the notion that we shouldn't allow ourselves to be divided along political, economical or other lines, that we have to come together and recognize that this is a country that's made up of a diverse population.  And we have, as black people, have been marginalized for many, many years through segregation, Jim Crow and many things that occurred post-slavery.  And while that's history, and we shouldn't be dwelling on history, but we have to focus on the future.  And the future is one that we must hold all of our leaders to that equality is best for this country.  It's best for everybody, and when there is inequality, we've got to be concerned about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything we haven't touched upon that we need to bring up before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think we've covered a lot of ground here.  The, the, as you can tell, my passion, while it started out to be science, transitioned into a broader area.  My interest is still in science.  I still watch 'National Geographic'.  I still watch 'The Universe' on television and how the universe works.  I'm fascinated by the changes that are occurring in science.  I stick my nose into the science areas when I am visiting Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] because I'm fascinated by some of some of the stuff that they're working on there.  But my energy is trying to make sure that access is available for all of our kids, and access has not been there truly for African Americans in all walks of education yet.  And we can't truly realize the dream of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and others until we have equal access for everybody.  And that's my focus, and I hope we can, through changes in local areas that will encourage others to do it on a much broader context.
Story_ID: 21917
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As being a person who is not caught up in personal success but caught up in trying to find ways in which success can be broadly available for everybody who works hard for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 21918
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 2: This is my sister, Caroline Annette Smith.  And she is about 35 years old there.  And she was visiting--was she visiting?  She was on vacation I think when she had that picture taken.  And we were not there when she had that taken.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture from my high school days.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of me at DuPont.  That's probably my first role as a manager.
Speaker 1: And that's my daughter, Patricia Smith and myself.  She's a teenager there.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of me and my wife the year after we got married.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with my two daughters, Patricia, the oldest one on the right and Christina, the one in the middle, the little one.  She must have been about two years old there.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of my sister, my mom, me and my nephew, my sister's son.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: He's about nine years there, so that would be probably in the '70's [1970s], the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of the family at my mom's funeral, end of my mom's funeral.  We all got together and took pictures of my cousins and my daughters and I've got a couple of (unclear) in that picture as well, but mostly these are my daughters and their husbands.  My extended family, the young family, I didn't talk about them.  But they're the, my mother's sisters' kids.  We were all very close, lived in the same community, and they all were there at the funeral for my mom.
Speaker 2: And that's me and my mom.  This was taken about, I would guess about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of my sister and her son.
Speaker 2: What was her name, just to get--
Speaker 1: Caroline Annette Smith and her son, Tony Smith.
Speaker 2: That's another picture of my mother, and she was going to church that day.  They called her the church lady.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in a tuxedo (laughter).  I don't know which function that was, many, many years ago.
Speaker 2: And a picture of me and my youngest daughter.
Speaker 1: And what's her name again?
Speaker 2: Christina, Christina Smith, well, her name is Christina Flack.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of us at her wedding, Christina, her husband, Patty and her husband.
Speaker 2: Could you name everybody from left to right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my son-in-law, Alfred Perry, my daughter, Patricia Perry, my son-in-law, Harley Flack, my daughter, Christina Smith, myself and my wife, Roseanne.
Speaker 2: Are you related to Harley Flack?  You said, Harley?
Speaker 1: Harley Flack, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a Harley Flack, president of Wright State, the school (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's his father.
Speaker 2: That's his father?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That's my daughter at her high school graduation-
Speaker 2: And you, sir.
Speaker 1: And myself, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Harley Flack passed away, and they had a--I never met him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's his, that's his son, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's me, my daughter and I, Christina and I.  I don't know what occasion that was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was well respected [referring to Harley Flack].
Speaker 2: And again, she's about two years old, three years old.
Speaker 1: And that's at her wedding, I'm walking her to the altar, Christina and myself.
Speaker 2: And that's my oldest daughter's wedding.
Speaker 1: Can you name the people in it?
Speaker 2: Well, same folks, myself, my wife, my daughter, Patricia, her husband, Alfred, my daughter, Christina, her husband, Harley.
Speaker 1: So did you know his, Flack?  I didn't--
Speaker 2: I didn't know him, but he became the president of the school that I graduated from in Ohio, Wright State.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was the president, and he passed away while I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 2: And he's well respected.  People talk about him all the time.
Speaker 1: That's my wife and I and my youngest daughter at our wedding.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, where did she find that?  That's (laughter) my wife and I.  Man, that's an old picture.
Speaker 1: That's she and I, my wife and I.
Speaker 2: And that's a recent photo here, taken downstairs right here in this room, my wife, and my two daughters.
Speaker 1: Oh, my, that's on a ski trip, my wife and I.  I don't do much of that anymore.
Speaker 2: And that's she and I at a function at Delaware State University.
Speaker 1: Another picture of she and I.
Speaker 2: And that's my oldest daughter as an infant.
Speaker 1: What's her name again?
Speaker 2: Patricia.
Speaker 1: And that's Patricia and Christina at my oldest daughter's grad, high school graduation.
Speaker 2: And that's my grandson, Anthony Roberts.
Speaker 1: And that's my grandson, Alex.
Speaker 2: Again, that's my daughter at her high school graduation.
Speaker 1: And my oldest daughter at her high school graduation.
Speaker 2: That's my mom and I.  I must have been two years old about then.
Speaker 1: My mom and I again.  And I must be about five or six, the knickerbockers (laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's my youngest grandson, Austin.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
