Story_ID: 621553
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Sprinkle-Hamlin.  Actually my middle name is Yvonne, Sylvia Yvonne Sprinkle-Hamlin, and it's spelled S-Y-L-V-I-A, Y-V-O-N-N-E, S-P-R-I-N-K-L-E dash H-A-M-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 25th, 1945, Winston-Salem, Forsyth County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am director of the Forsyth County Public Library [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 23rd, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're also the director of the National Black Theatre Festival, right?
Speaker 2: I'm the executive producer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the National Black Theatre Festival, and president of the board of directors of the North Carolina Black Repertory Company, which do the festival.  It's an outri- out- outreach program of the company.
Story_ID: 621554
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that, that we ask that are just a warm up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --sort of.  And the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think I do.  Strawberry shortcake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes--no.  Most people think that my favorite color is purple, but it's not (laughter).  Purple is the company colors [of the North Carolina Black Repertory Company].  So, I like purples, I like reds, I like blues and I like yellows and greens; so I don't have a favorite, favorite color, but I wear purple a lot.
Speaker 1: You like color, that's what--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall is the favorite time of year for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I love the Caribbean islands.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  See, what is it?  I can do all things--all things are possible with the help of God [Matthew 19:26].  My strength come from the Lord.
Story_ID: 621555
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Arthur Sprinkle, Jr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first so we don't get 'em mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's full name, it is Thelma Irene Norwood Holtzclaw, and her--Thelma is T-H-E-L-M-A, Irene, I-R-E-N-E, Norwood, N-O-R-W-O-O-D, Holtzclaw, H-O-L-T-Z-C-L-A-W [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw].  My mother was married twice, so her last married name was Holtzclaw.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 17th, 1921 and her place of birth is also Winston-Salem, Forsyth County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well I can go back as far as my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name, his name was James Norwood and he lived to be 103 years old.
Speaker 1: So when was he born?
Speaker 2: Well, he's not sure.  They did a story on him in the newspaper and I have the story with me and they said he could be from 93 to 103 years old.  He remembers the Emancipation Proclamation, 1865 when the announcement were made that the enslaved people were free.  He grew up on a plantation.  His master's name was Joe Norwood [ph.] and that's how we got the--my mother got that last name, maiden name of Norwood, and I think the plantation was in South Carolina, and then later he moved to Charlotte, North Carolina.  And then finally he settled in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he, so when did he pass away?  What year?
Speaker 2: He passed away, it had to be, had to be in the fif- '50s [1950s] I think and the reason why is because I remember him slightly.  I was very, very young, so, we can look at the article and sort of--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so he would have had to, yeah, he was 103, and remember the Emancipation Proclamation because that was issued in 1863, so that means he was old enough to remember it coming out.  So I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but he wasn't sure exactly how old he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was he--okay.  I would imagine he would be at least five if he could remember, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, that, that puts him in the 1850s, 1858 maybe at the earliest or maybe even older, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  So here, here you have a relative that can remember slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what did you great-grandfather say about it?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) what he said we really didn't like (laughter) because well, number one, he, he thought that he was treated fair.  He was--lived on this plantation, he loved the master (laughter) and sometimes he felt that he was, he lived better then than when he was--he did the interview, so.
Speaker 1: You know, that's, that's a story though that we hear sometime--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --out of slavery, really.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean there are--it's something that I think we don't expect to hear but I've, I've heard those kinds of stories (unclear).
Speaker 2: And he said, he also say he saved his master's life during the Civil War, so.
Speaker 1: Did he explain what happened, how he was able to do it?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  No.  I think he did but I can't remember what he said.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's in the article that I'll share with you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd like to see that.  Now was he interviewed by the Library of Congress project [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] in the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: No.  He was interviewed by the--it was the Winston-Salem Journal at the time.  It's the journal newspaper, the local newspaper here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I may have a picture too.
Speaker 1: You know what I'm talking about, the Library of Congress--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --interviews (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they interviewed him in the '50s [1950s], I guess, or '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We'll look at the paper and see (unclear).
Speaker 1: All right.  Any other reminisces by your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Well, he had a pet chicken (laughter).  And he would sit on the front porch, you know, and the chicken would come up and he would pet the chicken and so we remember we used to laugh about that.  My older, my older brother, brother and sister [Gwendolyn Norwood Williams], they--and my uncle used to tell us all about how he had this pet chicken.  Nobody could touch that chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the chicken's life held--hung by a thread--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, I guess on a place where you might cook one of 'em, so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 621556
Speaker 1: Did he [Hamlin-Sprinkle's maternal great-grandfather, James Norwood] have other families other than that one your mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] came out of?  I mean was he married before?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was married and I think he had fi- seven children I think, and my grandfather was one of his sons, and my grandfather was a very ambitious man.  He worked at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] for a few years and he made something like five dollars a week and he saved the five dollars a week and then he bought two homes in, it's called the Ardmore section of the city [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] now.  And he rented out the homes to s- to make more money and he was able to save enough money to buy fifty-five acres of land in Tobaccoville--Tobaccoville, North Carolina, which is maybe about fifteen to twenty miles from here, from Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and he started farming.  Tobacco was his major crop, but it was, we also had vegetables, a apple orchard.  And I remember most of the things, the only thing that we bought from the store was sugar and flour.  Everything else was grown on the farm--and salt.  Everything else we had, salt and pepper, everything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Lonon, L-O-N-O-N, Norwood, Lonon Eugene Norwood [Lonon Norwood].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you, do you remember your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother's name was Lessie, L-E-S-S-I-E, Lockhart [Lessie Lockhart Norwood].  She came from Hamlet, North Carolina, which is sort of east, eastern part of North Carolina.  But she died at the age of forty-four, 1931.  And I think my mother was twelve years old, between ten and twelve years old when my grandmother died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't, but then my grandfather met--remarried so I had another grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 621557
Speaker 1: How many children in your mother's family?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  There's my--I'll say five to seven I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, she grew up on the farm [in Tobaccoville, North Carolina].  (Laughter) I don't think she liked that too much.  But the family was very, a very strong family unit.  My grandfather [Lonon Norwood] was a part of the community.  As a matter of fact, he was a councilman on the school--he was a councilman in the community and also served on the school board.  They had a one, one room school building and he was very active in the choir; he used to sing a lot.  And my mother had a pretty interesting childhood.  She just didn't like living on the farm (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she get a chance to go to school and finish?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  She went to school.  At that time you only went to the eleventh grade, so she went to school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now do you suspect that that set up was by design?  I heard a lot of people say that their parents or grandparents only had a chance to go to the eleventh grade, which means you don't graduate, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you graduated.  This high school only went to the eleventh grade when she was in high school so she graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then later on they added another year here in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but if you have an eleventh grade graduation, you don't compare to someone who has a twelfth.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think during that period it was okay, because everybody had an eleventh grade education.  You knew you went to the eleventh grade and then you graduated.  But I think later on they added another year.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you suspect that the white people had a twelfth, twelve grades?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: That's the way it is in a lot of the stories that I've heard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably, they--probably.
Speaker 1: And the reason why it's eleven is so they won't get as many as white people, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I don't, you know--I don't know if--that's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The community that we grew up in, or that my mother grew up in and I grew up in too, was a strong African American community.  We had white people who lived around us, probably in the same (laughter) neighborhood, but, of course, we didn't really socialize with them.  And actually according to, according to history we were supposed to be a poor family, but we never felt that we were poor.  We were very self sufficient.  My grandfather had land.  He grew his crops.  My mother tells the story of how excited she was, the most exciting thing that happened to her in the '30s [1930s], her father came back from the city [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] with a brand new T Model Ford truck [Ford Model T], and she was very excited about that.  He was a very thrifty man and he had--we had horses, we had pigs, we had chickens, you know all of the farm animals we had.  So we, when I think about it now, we really had a very rich family, you know, as far as the family relationships, going to church, the good neighbors that we had and my brother and--I have a younger brother [Arthur Sprinkle III].  We were so young we didn't have to do any work.  We didn't have to do anything on the farm because my grandfather would say we were too young, so we loved that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me go to your father's [Arthur Sprinkle, Jr.] side of the family.  Oh, can you give us the name of the school your mother went to?  Do you know the name of it?
Speaker 2: I think it was, the school at Carver High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the school that she graduated from.
Story_ID: 621558
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Arthur William Henry Sprinkle, Jr. [Arthur Sprinkle, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind that name because he has a long name, so?
Speaker 2: I just know that his father was Arthur William Henry Sprinkle, Sr. [Arthur Sprinkle, Sr.], and my brother, my youngest brother, his name is Arthur William Henry Sprinkle, III [Arthur Sprinkle III].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But I don't know about the history of the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Forsyth County [North Carolina] in 1898, and he died at a, at a very early--young age, I think.  He died in 1947 at--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was just--he was, he wasn't fifty.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Well, now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not too far back.  What I've been doing, I found out about my grandfather and his wife, what his wife's, my grandmother's name was [Lillie Miller Sprinkle].  And about two years ago, we met some Sprinkles from South Carolina, Mississippi, West Virginia, Detroit [Michigan].  They came here for a family reunion.  They had been having a family reunion all the time and we didn't even know about it, and because of the Internet, Facebook, we found the Sprinkles and they really have done a lot with our history and it's something that we need to work on, the North Carolina side needs to work on, but I don't know as much about my father's side as I do my mother's [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] side.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you were two when your father passed away, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But I had some uncles, his, his--he had about six or seven brothers and I knew them very well.  But I don't even have a picture of my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm told he looked--my brother, youngest brother looks a lot like him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you know if your father had a chance to finish school or where he went to school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, no.
Speaker 1: Well what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked at a lumber company in this place called Rural Hall, North Carolina, which was like--he grew up in Tobaccoville [North Carolina] also, which was maybe ten or fifteen miles from Tobaccoville.  I think a lot of his brothers also worked at that lumber company.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's in Rural Hall?
Speaker 2: Rural Hall.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: R-U-R-A-L then H-A-L-L.
Story_ID: 621559
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, but you know my father [Arthur Sprinkle, Jr.] was much older than my mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw].  My mother was something like twenty-four or twenty-five and my father was like forty-something, but they met in Tobaccoville [North Carolina], that's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, when did they get married, do you know?
Speaker 2: I think they got married in--I was born in 1945, so maybe they got married in 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a matter of fact I do have that information because I, like I said, I'm trying to work on my genealogy.  I'm a librarian and our history section [at Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is really known throughout the country as being where a lot of people come to do their genealogy, so I think I should start now, myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But--so okay now, you were basically raised by your, your mother then right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and grandfather--and [maternal] grandparents [Lessie Lockhart Norwood and Lonon Norwood].
Speaker 1: And grandparents, all right.  Okay.  So, just considering all these influences on you, when you think about your mannerisms, your disposition, your talents, your hobbies, your looks even, your voice, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take after--on my mother's side pretty much.  A mixture of both (laughter) I would think.  My mother's side, her mother, Lessie, had some Indian, Lumbee Indian [Native American] blood.
Speaker 1: That's L-U-M-B-I?
Speaker 2: L-U-M-B.
Speaker 1: L-U-M-B?
Speaker 2: Lumbee, L-U-M-M-B-I-E [sic.] I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can look at my cheekbones and see I got the cheekbones, from my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I look more like the Sprinkles than the Norwoods.  I have a picture of my mother too, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now so you grew up on a farm basically.  Now your grandfather's farm?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  On the farm.  We used to go--well my mother had her own house, which was maybe about five miles from my grandfather's house, but we spent a lot of time at my grandfather's house, every Sunday after church we would stop by my grandfather's house for, for lunch, and during the summer we spent a lot of time there--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) while my mother was working.
Story_ID: 621560
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I remember is on Saturdays, there used to be these really big baseball games and my uncles on my father's [Arthur Sprinkle, Jr.] side was really into baseball, and it would be other communities that would come to the schoolhouse and it would be this big baseball game and it would be fish fries and that kind of thing.  They was from different communities coming together; I remember that.  I remember church a lot because, you know, this way you met your friends and I remember Easter, you know you had to be in a little play (laughter).  Christmas you would have to say a speech or be at a play, and you get the little fruit bag; I remember that.  I also remember revival.  Our church, I went to Center Grove A.M.E. Zion Church [Tobaccoville, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what--how--
Speaker 2: Center Grove.  C- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Center Grove A.M.E. Zion.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, church, that's--I grew up in that church.  And they would have their homecoming like the last Sunday in September, and that would be a big event because churches from all over would come and you would have lunch at the church.  The only bad part you had to stay all day, be there all day and night, but it was fun because you--I had a lot of friends there and that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was your pastor's name?  You remember?
Speaker 2: No, it's been a lot (laughter), I don't know.  It's been so many I don't remember all of the names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, because A.M.E. Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion], the bishop appoints different ones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they stay a certain amount of time and then they leave.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's right, there's an A.M.E. Zion school here, right, in--
Speaker 2: Oh, Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Livingstone, yeah, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I don't go to A.M.E. Zion now, I go to a Episcopal church--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but I'll tell you about that later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621561
Speaker 1: How did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  As a matter of fact, I graduated third in my class and I was voted the most likely to succeed, and I had a lot of opportunities.  My senior year in high school, I was able to go to Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] to take advanced courses on Saturdays, so I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And one of the things I liked about school is I lived in Tobaccoville [North Carolina] and then you had other community--communities like Walkertown [North Carolina], Clemmons [North Carolina], Kernersville [North Carolina] and all of the black children that stayed in these different communities was bused to this one high school, so you would have--your best friends would be friends from that community, from those communities and then in the summer your best friend would be the people who lived around you, so that was nice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the name of the community you lived in?
Speaker 2: Tobaccoville.
Speaker 1: Tobaccofield?
Speaker 2: Tobaccoville, like tobacco.
Speaker 1: Tobaccoville, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what was, what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Carver.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Carver Consolidated High School [Carver Consolidated School; Carver High School], first through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--okay so you went there your whole--?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From beginning to end.  So you were bused there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the whole time?
Speaker 2: The whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right.  And Carver Consolidated is, is in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] went to Carver High School, the high school.  It was the old Carver High School then.  And they built a brand new consolidated high school from the first through the twelfth grade, and that's where all of the children who lived in Forsyth County [North Carolina], African American children who lived in Forsyth County would be bused to Carver Consolidated High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so is there any particular subject matter that you were drawn to in school more than anything else?
Speaker 2: Well, my goals were to be, (laughter) I wanted to be a psychiatrist or psychologist.  That's what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Now, how are you influenced in that regard?  I mean what influenced you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the reasons, I mean the reason, one of the reasons I thought I wanted to be that was because I was a problem solver.  People would come to me and talk to me about their problems or challenges and I would listen and give advice.  So I thought that would be a really good career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  So were there any teachers that, that particularly stand out when you look back as a mentor?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  My first teacher, her name was Ms. Berry, Evelene Berry [ph.].  And I had some teachers in high school that I really liked, Mrs. Olivette Bynum--Bynum, she's still alive.  Mrs. Virginia Wiseman [Virginia Alexander Wiseman], she's still alive.  And then there was another one, teacher named Ms. Modesta Earl.  She's deceased now, but those three ladies really had an impact on my life.  Those four ladies actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621562
Speaker 1: I guess if you're a good student, you liked to read right?  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So was there a library available?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I started working in the library at an early age.  High s-library at the school [Carver Consolidated School; Carver High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], I probably started working in the library when I was probably in the seventh or eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was there a public library in your town or your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, but I couldn't go to it at the time.  The library that I'm director of now [Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], at one point (laughter) in the early stages of my life, I couldn't even go to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was segregated off completely (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but they had a book mobile that would go around into the county [Forsyth County, North Carolina] and they would stop in my community and I could jump on the book mobile and get books.
Story_ID: 621563
Speaker 1: We were talking about the libraries in Winston-Sa- Salem [Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  The public libraries, they were segregated, but they had a book mobile that they would send around into the county for the, I guess they were called the colored people in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Well, it was--no, it was not, it was for everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you couldn't get on there at the same time, or what was it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right, well the stop that I, it stopped at a certain spot.  The spot that I got on, it was only for black people.  It was like in a black neighborhood, but they had other stops too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the same mobile--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --could go to the neighborhoods--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Not--
Speaker 1: --but all the neighbors couldn't go to the same public library?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when did that break down would you say?
Speaker 2: I think in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Now would you describe segregation in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] as being real hardcore or kind of soft like?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm trying to think about my experience.  It might have been sort of in between (laughter).  It wasn't a hard hardcore, but it wasn't that soft either.
Speaker 1: Did black people vote in Winston-Salem when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Because my mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] tells the story of how when she went to register to vote, how she had to write parts of the [U.S.] Constitution and how they tried to keep her from voting, but, you know, they had had meetings and stuff and they were prepare- prepared for whatever they ran into.  And she was able to vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they started voting early.
Speaker 1: So they had some unfair rules--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you could still--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --get past it if you--and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you could write.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you were saying also that the community organized around trying to vote.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was this through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, this was like in Tobaccoville [North Carolina] in--I don't, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You don't think they had a chapter there?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Was this organized out of the church, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, church leaders, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So now when you went--did you ever go downtown Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  We would go down, come to town every Saturday, you know, you would come downtown.  And at one point in Winston-Salem, they had a, a downtown area that had all black businesses so that would, that would be the streets that you would go on, where the black businesses were.  They had two black theaters, or movie theaters, restaurants and businesses such as barbershops, beauty shops, clothing stores and even a bank, and so when you would come to town that would be the area that you would go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you see other black people walking around.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a name for this part of town?
Speaker 2: Well, was it, Third [Street] and--I guess they call it East Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Just East Winston?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) East Winston.
Story_ID: 621564
Speaker 1: Now we heard something--we were asking people, I think, when we got here, like we were just at a restaurant, where (laughter) where Winston [North Carolina] and Salem [North Carolina] were actually two separate places or--I--
Speaker 2: It used to be a long time ago, it was separated by this coffee pot, a big coffee pot, and it's a story behind the coffee pot.
Speaker 1: What is the story behind a coffee pot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was huge coffee pot as a symbol, you know like--and the story is a Confederate soldier hid in the coffee pot, you know, during the war.
Speaker 1: During the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But Salem, it's still Old Salem [Salem-Winston, North Carolina] now, but Salem was a sort of town of, for the Moravians, you know the Moravians that came from Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Winston was the other part, but they became one city, Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is, now I've heard this, there's still an Old Salem that you can go to that's historic or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now was, was--of the two sections of Winston-Salem were, was there any difference in terms of how they treated black people in Winston or Salem?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About the same?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 621565
Speaker 1: Now did you all have a television when you were growing up, or did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year that we got a television though.  We didn't always have one.  I guess we got a television when I was about thirteen, and before then the next door neighbor had a tele- television, and whenever we heard that a black person was gonna be on television, all of us would go over to that person's house and look at it.  Like Sammy Davis, Jr. or a fight or something like that.  But then by the time I was thirteen, everybody had a television.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And a telephone.
Speaker 1: Now was music something you paid attention to growing up?  Were you into music?
Speaker 2: Not that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I knew all of the latest songs and all of the latest dances.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that was--you came along I think, when rhythm and blues was really starting to hit the radio.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite artists?
Speaker 2: Do you remember this disc jockey called Randy [Randy Wood] out of Nashville, Tennessee I think?
Speaker 1: 'Randy's Record Shop' ['Randy's Record Shop Show'] in Gallatin, Tennessee, I think it was (unclear)?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it would be, we used to listen to that a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to listen to country and western.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, rhythm and blues.
Speaker 1: At WLAC, WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah, see everybody knows about it (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was right--we heard it in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'd tune it in late at night.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they had a 'Night Train' TV show at one time that came on, but I don't know, I don't know how long it lasted, but, okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think I used to like Johnny Mathis, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, James Brown, of course.  Let's see who else, James Brown, people like that.
Story_ID: 621566
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite author?
Speaker 2: Hm.  A favorite author?  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I read a lot of different things.  My favorite book though growing up was 'The Boxcar Children' [Gertrude Chandler Warner] (laughter).  I can't even remember the author's name, but that was my favorite book.
Speaker 1: Was that a series or just one book?
Speaker 2: It was more than one I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the reason I remember it was these children whose parents died and they lived in this little boxcar.  It was a real nice story.  That was my favorite book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I read a lot and I read a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Now when they--when you were growing up, I mean, we have so many books for black children now, were there any books for black children on the market then or at the library that you know of?
Speaker 2: I think it probably were books, sort of like history books about, you know, famous black Americans because every February (laughter) in school, you know, you would get, they would have something about black Americans and I think we may have had some biographies about black Americans.  But I'm trying to think--I don't think it was a lot of books.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all would celebrate Black History Month in February (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew a lot of the, the people that you need to know and some that most, a lot of people didn't know.  Because I went to an all-black school [Carver Consolidated School; Carver High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] for twelve years.
Story_ID: 621567
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Carver Consolidated School; Carver High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] were you a member of the various clubs and groups in high school or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So which ones?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I was just about a member of every--the honor society, the library club.  I was a member of a little social club called the Debonairs [ph.].  Let's see, what other kind of clubs did they--Homemakers of America [Future Homemakers of America; Family, Career and Community Leaders of America], a 4-H club, I think I was in the choir.  Those are some of the ones I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, okay.  So you were pretty popular, high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, well, you say, and you say you graduated third in your class?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were getting ready to graduate, what were your goal--career aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go to college, and of course the schools that I wanted to go to I couldn't afford to go to, but I was able to get a scholarship to go to Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], which is here in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you very familiar with it before you applied?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had anyone else in your family gone to Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: I had an uncle who had gone to Winston-Salem, Winston-Salem State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a school that the young ladies in my community, all of us went to Winston-Salem State University.  It was about, about five of us that went and we want- I wanted to stay on campus, but, of course, I couldn't.  I had to stay at home.  And so it was this man who worked at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and he had two daughters who was also at to Winston-Salem State, so we all would ride with him and he would drop us off and pick us up in the, in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that the only thing I didn't like about that was a lot of the activities that took place on campus I wasn't able to participate because I was a day student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from high school in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1963, and you started Winston-Salem College the same year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Winston-Salem State University.
Speaker 1: Okay, state university by then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621568
Speaker 1: Who were some of the, your fellow students and who were some of the teachers that stand out at Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Mary Bowman Williams [Mary Bowman] was one of my friends, Laverne Graham Gaither, Sheila McCoy Grisard.  I'm trying to think of the people I used to hang out with.  Those are some of the local people there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, I met a lot of different people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was in the class with Earl Monroe.
Speaker 1: I've, you know, I've got a note to ask you about that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But, yeah, the famous Earl "The Pearl" Monroe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was he like?
Speaker 2: He was sort of quiet.  Good student, very good student, sort of quiet.  As a matter of fact, my junior year in college I was selected to go to--to participate in Experiment in International Living program, and I was selected to go to India.  (Laughter) And I was told to go home and ask my mother [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw] could I go and she told me no, I couldn't go because they, she didn't have the money, and I went back and told 'em that she said yes, and so they raised the money for me to go, so.  The basketball team, they did a game where they donated money for me to go, and then the school came up with the rest of the money.
Speaker 1: Now did you know Coach Gaines?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's Ernest "Big House" Gaines [sic. Clarence Gaines].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Coach, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Famous legendary black basketball coach.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yeah.  He and Dr. Virginia Newell really organized the fundraiser for--in order for me to get money for me to go.  Her daughters had, one of her daughters had been a part of the program, Experiment in International Living, and she brought it to the campus that she wanted somebody from Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] to be a part of that program.
Speaker 1: That is something.  I'm really moved by that, just sitting here listening to that, that they would do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, do you remember all the excitement--now I've heard from other people who say that if there was a game and Earl Monroe was gonna play that people would come at five o'clock in the morning and sit out in front of the stadium to get a--I mean the gym, to get a seat so they could get in 'cause they--he was that good.
Speaker 2: He was really good.  He brought a lot of inter- national exposure to the school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you remember his nickname?
Speaker 2: Earl "The Pearl" Monroe?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was another one too.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know they called him Black Jesus too, remember that (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm (unclear) that, I know too much about sports, so I (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thought I'd put it in there.  But, yeah, all right, Earl "The Pearl" Monroe, was he in grade school with you too?
Speaker 2: No, he was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, that's right, that's right, from Philadelphia.  Okay.
Story_ID: 621569
Speaker 1: Well who were some of your teachers that really made an impression on you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Dr. Virginia Newell; William Rice, R-I-C-E; Dr. Joseph Patterson [Joseph N. Patterson]; and I had a Cuban teacher too, Rossirch [Martha C. Rossirch], I think that was her name, I can't remember her name, but she was--taught Algebra and math in college and she was really good.  I remember her good, just can't remember her name.  And, of course, one of my mentors, Lucy Bradshaw [Lucy H. Bradshaw], she's the reason that I decided to go to library school.  Plus I worked in the library as a work study student for my sophomore year until I graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Now, now Lucy Bradshaw, is she the one that had the Ph.D. in library science?  Or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think she had a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  All right.  So she, she was the school librarian, or?
Speaker 2: No, she was the college university librarian.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I meant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  All right.  So she was the university librarian and so did you work in the library when you were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from my sophomore year up until I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what, what persuaded you to become a librarian?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked in the library.  (Laughter) It was fun and I wanted to go to graduate school and it was an opportunity for me to get a scholarship to go to graduate school.  So, in talking to Mrs. Bradshaw, she convinced me that I would be a really good librarian so I got the North Carolina Library Association scholarship and then a Joseph Ruzicka scholarship, and so I went to library school.  And she--I even went to the library school that she had attended, Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so here we are in 19--is this nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Seven [1967].
Speaker 1: --seven [1967] you go to Atlanta University (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went straight--yeah, I went straight to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before then I finished my studies at Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] early.  Like I had taken all my coursework in March, and so I got a job teaching in Goldsboro, North Carolina.  I taught from March until May.  (Laughter) I decided I didn't want to be a teacher.
Story_ID: 621570
Speaker 1: So you got the library association [North Carolina Library Association] scholarship and, and so you're at Atlanta University.  Now how is Atlanta U different from Winston-Salem University?
Speaker 2: Well Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was an undergraduate, and Atlanta University was graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's now called Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the, what was it like, what was the experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.  Well first, I was away from home (laughter) and I got to meet a lot of different people from, mainly from southern, most of the people at the time was from southern states like Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, Virginia, and a few people from the North.  And, of course, Atlanta [Georgia] was a really good city to be in, and freedom.  I loved the freedom that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now well who were some of your teachers and mentors at Atlanta University?
Speaker 2: Let's see, teachers.  Who do I remember from Atlanta University?
Speaker 1: Now you were there, now let me say this you came to Atlanta--
Speaker 2: I was there--
Speaker 1: --right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right?  Or, or during the time (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During the time he was, because I went to his funeral.  I remember, they had it on the campus of Atlanta University and I was there, I remember that.  And I remember what happened, how people were sort of rioting, pulling people out of cars and stuff.  Yeah, I was there, I was there during that, during that time.
Speaker 1: So the whole world was watching that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: One--I think one of the teachers I remember, her name was Mrs. Brooks [ph.] and Miles Davis--not Miles Davis, Miles--can't think of his last name, but I didn't really have mentors there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember--
Speaker 2: Miles Jackson [Miles Jackson, Jr.]; that was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, Miles Jackson, okay.  Did you, were you befriended by any of the instructors from the other disciplines that used the library or, you know?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I know, I'm thinking I don't know, [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding was there.  Did he--did you ever run into him?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had a center for the black world at Atlanta U [Institute of the Black World, Atlanta, Georgia].  Let's see.  Well those were the days of a lot of former members of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] were on the campus.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember encountering them and having discussions or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--you stayed in the library (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I used--as a matter of fact, my first semester there I think I went to a party every weekend and then the second semester they started sending people home, you know.  And I didn't get sent home so that was a wakeup call for me so I sort of slowed down a little bit.  But, it was just a lot of things happening during that time.
Speaker 1: Right.  Those were the days when the Atlanta Underground [Underground Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] was going on downtown.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: What else about Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew, I knew going to Atlanta University my opportunity for employment was really good, once I finished, because they would have recruiters that would come from all over the United States looking for, you know, that black person to hire.  And, in library school they would have, like the Philadelph- Free Library of Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the public library from Cincinnati [Ohio], from Baltimore [Maryland], California; all these recruiters would come and we would joke and we would say--I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], they would pick like every (laughter), every, every three years they would pick maybe three black people to add to their staff and so I interviewed for Philadelphia, I interviewed for Cincinnati and I decided to go to Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 621571
Speaker 1: Now what does a master's in li- library science prepare you to do?
Speaker 2: To be a librarian in the public setting.  What people don't understand is that all of the people that are librarians that work in the public--they have master's degrees; you have to have a master's degree to be a librarian.  Some people do reference work, some people are into technology, some people do children's work.  I am an administrator.  I oversee an $8 million budget.  I have over 125 employees in ten different locations that I oversee.  So it's like a business.  You can be--all--we have all different categories of librarians that you can be.  And then most people when they walk into a library they usually meet a library assistant, the person at the circulation desk, but in order to be a professional librarian you have to have a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So somebody with a bachelor--a bachelor's in library science are qualified to do what (laughter)?
Speaker 2: To, to circulate books, to do interlibrary loans, to do para- para-professional stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, so to be a real librarian you have to have a master's?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then some people have Ph.D.'s and technology--to get a master's degree in library science and go into technology is really big now.
Speaker 1: Now did you, did you have a specialty, something that you specialize in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my specialty was children.  I was a children's librarian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first job, I was hired as a children's librarian.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because I had education background, education background.
Speaker 1: So what does a children's librarian study that's different from somebody else?
Speaker 2: Children's literature.  You have the basic courses that you take to be a librarian, and then you specialize, and so I specialized in children's services so I took a lot of the children's literature classes, how to do story time, you know, how to, to work with groups, how to do outreach in the community to get the children to come.
Story_ID: 621572
Speaker 1: You went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to work for the Free Library of Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so you were in Philadelphia for quite a while?
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay, ten years, that's--.  Okay what are some of the jobs that you've had in Philadelphia, and?
Speaker 2: I started my career working with the Free Library of, of Philadelphia, which is the large public library system, and then I moved from there to an experimental program that was in the Mantua community, which was in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  This is where they had a lot of gangs and they started an experimental school and they needed an information specialist, and so the public library lent me to this organization, to this private school.  And I was there for maybe--I've forgot how long, maybe three or four years and then I transferred into the school system and I became a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is this--I'm sorry.  Now is this the Benjamin Banneker Center [Benjamin Banneker Urban Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I taught reading and was a librarian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went into the school system and I was there until I moved back to Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you also pursued a master's [degree] in educational administration at Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's near Philadelphia, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so you became--did you say this already, that you became instructional media center director?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  At--for the Philadelphia public schools [School District of Philadelphia]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so instructional media in those days was?
Speaker 2: A school librarian.  They had changed the name (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Basically, that's what it was.  You know we had a little bit more technology and so the name was changed, but actually it was just the school librarian.
Speaker 1: So would you do (unclear) machines and film strip projectors and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Story_ID: 621573
Speaker 1: So you came back to--so now why did you come back to Winston-Salem [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: To start a business.  While I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], on the weekend I sold Fashion 220 Cosmetics, and I really enjoyed that because I got to meet the people and plus my sales volumes were really great and so at one of the conferences I found out that they didn't have any cosmetics here in the Winston-Salem area and so I decided to come back and open up a studio and sell cosmetics and I did that for a while.  But then I realized that I could do that at night and on the weekend, but during the day, most of my customers were working, so I decided I could work at Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in the library and also do that, so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, so you had two, a part time job and a full time job?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621574
Speaker 1: So in 1978, you're back in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and you're working two jobs and, now this is when, when you meet Larry Hamlin [Larry Leon Hamlin], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I meet Larry in 1979, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: June 1979.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now how did you two meet?
Speaker 2: Well, Larry had come back to Winston-Salem because of family crises.  He had lost his brother [Charles Hamlin, Jr.] and his father [Charles Hamlin, Sr.] had had a stroke and he decided that he needed to come back because his mother [Annie Simpson Johnson] and two sisters [Sherrie Hamlin and Linda Hamlin Moore] were here.  And, of course, he was pushing his theater company.  He decided--he had a theater company in Providence, Rhode Island [Star Theater Productions], but he decided that he wanted to stay in theater so he came, moved back to Winston-Salem to start a theater company and I was here selling cosmetics [Fashion 220 Cosmetics], and, of course, I was trying to meet people and he was trying to meet people.  So they had a social on Saturday night where young professionals would meet, they would have a dinner, they would have a speaker and then they would have a dance.  And he was there pushing the theater and I was there pushing makeup, so that's how we met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: He gave me some tickets to sell (laughter) this--that night that I met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were the tickets for the first production that they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for his first production.
Speaker 1: And that one, from what I understand, was 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead'--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --by Athol Fugard and some others [John Kani and Winston Ntshona].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did you come to the production?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I sold more tickets than anybody.  I think I sold over sixty tickets (unclear) actually.
Speaker 1: Well did he propose right away?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So, well how long was the courtship?
Speaker 2: We dated for two years before we got married.  We got married in 1981, August, 1981.
Story_ID: 621575
Speaker 1: So, but you were in the top ticket salesperson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I knew a lot of people in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  He wasn't from here originally.  He was from Reidsville, North Carolina, which is about fifty miles from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a good time then to tell us something about Larry Hamlin [Larry Leon Hamlin], like how he got started and what he was trying to do when he came back to Winston-Salem.
Speaker 2: Well I think he became interested in theater when he was very young.  His mother [Annie Simpson Hamlin] is like, she loves theater and she acts a lot, and she always had them doing little plays and performing at churches and everything so that's how he really got interested in theater.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so we were, so you were telling us about Larry Hamlin and how he got interested in theater.
Speaker 2: Yeah, his mother.  Basically his mother was the one that got him really interested.
Speaker 1: Now did she have a background in theater herself?
Speaker 2: Not really, but she write plays and she does community theater sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so she had her children performing, you know like at church, and, of course, Larry was the one that really loved to perform.  And I think his first performance where people really saw him was when he was in elementary school.  I think he said something like, I think he was in his first grade and he was on stage and he saw all these bright lights and he just really got excited about the bright lights, and he touched one of 'em 'cause he didn't realize they were hot, and he talk- he had a really good sense of humor and he talked about how he screamed and hollered, but after that he loved the stage from then on.  He was sold on the stage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  And now he went on to, what was it, Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Brown University, but he actually graduated from Johnson and Wales in business.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where is Johnson and Wales?
Speaker 2: Johnson and Wales University is in Providence, Rhode Island, and they got a campus in Charlotte [North Carolina] now, and some other state.  But his major was not theater, it was business and he went to Brown for further studying for the theater part of his career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he went to business college first, then went to Brown to study theater?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he talk about who taught him at Brown, or?
Speaker 2: It was one person in particular, what is his name?  I can't think of his name right now, I may think about it later.  But it was one person who was outstanding in theater who had a theater company at Brown University--Rites and Reason was the name of the theater company.  I can't think of his name.  I guess his last name was Bass [George Houston Bass], because he came to the festival [National Black Theatre Festival] in the beginning, when we first did the festival.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Rites and Reason Theatre Company.  All right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 621576
Speaker 1: Now he--when he got here he formed the North Carolina Black Repertory Company (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, North Carolina Black Repertory Company, which was the first professional African American theater company in the State of North Carolina, in 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his goal was to develop theater here, and to bring professional actors and actresses here to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] to do plays.  And plus in the beginning he did all of the classics, you know, like 'Home' [Samm-Art Williams], you mentioned 'Sizwe Banzi' ['Sizwe Banzi is Dead,' Athol Fugard], 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III]; those classics he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we used to have people who would come from New York [New York] down here, and they would stay with us (laughter), and we also had supporters of the theater and if we didn't have enough room to accommodate the people who'd come, then they would stay at other people's homes, and we would have people who would take then out to dinner and everything, so it was something really exciting happening in Winston-Salem when we first started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he, he become familiar with the New York theater people when he was in Connecticut, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--yeah, Providence [Rhode Island], yeah, he knew some of them.
Speaker 1: Rhode Island, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And the company was, was really growing and doing well, and he started a theater guild [North Carolina Black Repertory Company Theatre Guild] in 1981 and the theater guild was supporters, people who decided they really wanted to support the company and they would support it by being members of the guild and sell tickets to our productions, so that worked for a while.
Speaker 1: Now, now what theater guild, now he formed the theater guild, or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  We was one of the largest theater guilds supporting black theater in America for a while 'cause at--at one point we had over a thousand members.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you organized the patrons into a theater guild?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 621577
Speaker 1: Were there many resources here for theater--I mean in terms of the black community, were there any, were there many people here that had any training in theater already or did he [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] have to kind of train all of them himself?
Speaker 2: Well, in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] we have a lot of singers, musicians, and so whenever he wanted to do a musical, it was no problem finding talent.  But to do acting, you know like dramas, then he would have to go to New York [New York] to find people, basically.  It was a few, but we brought a lot of people in from New York--
Speaker 1: Now did he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or surrounding cities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he start classes, drama classes?
Speaker 2: We, he had a few acting classes, yeah.  Workshops actually, every once in a while.
Speaker 1: So did they generate some talent that he could?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: Now what about set design and tech, you know, were there any people here that knew how to do that?
Speaker 2: He, let's see, I think he went to New York and he was working with the NEC [Negro Ensemble Company], and he ran into this guy named Artie Reese [Arthur Reese], who was a technical director, and Artie would come down and do a lot of our technical stuff.  But you know we have the school of the arts here [University of North Carolina School of the Arts, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], so we could get some tech people from there.  Reynolds High School [Richard J. Reynolds High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], they had, they have a really good theater program.  We would use interns from that, from that school too, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did--what venue did he use when he started?
Speaker 2: This venue.
Speaker 1: This same place we're we at right now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first play we had was at Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in that huge auditorium that seat over a thousand and some people, which was really too large.  One of the other things that he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now explain why that's true because a theater person would know, but why is a thousand seats too large of seating?
Speaker 2: Because theater is very intimate.  You want an intimate setting and if you do 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men' [Lonne Elder III] or 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' [Athol Fugard], which si- 'Sizwe Banzi is Dead' is like a two character play and to have a huge theater, it just won't work, just doesn't work.
Speaker 1: So what's the ideal size say for a theater for a play like that?
Speaker 2: I would think no more than 100, 150 seats, if that many, yeah, for a very intimate setting.  Now the theater here seats 540 people and that's really good for our musicals and when we do drama, it's, it's too big actually, but we try and make it work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know I've heard it said too the audience feels like there's not enough of them that they're sitting in a great big theater, they don't feel like they're--
Speaker 2: We try and get them to move down front so that the actors can feel, you know, know that people are there, yeah, yeah.  One of the other things that he did in trying to promote his theater company [North Carolina Black Repertory Company] which I thought was unique, he started what he called a living room theater and he would get people to invite their neighbors over to their house and he would take, and he and his cast would go over and do excerpts from plays to try and familiarize people with the different plays that we were doing and what we were doing and what we were about.
Speaker 1: I know I've never heard of that before, but that sounds like a really effective way to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to do that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to try and generate audiences.
Speaker 1: Now did he get any, get any advice from, on developing the guild [North Carolina Black Repertory Company Theatre Guild] say from AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.] in New York or any of those?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think just by, you know, looking at friends, you know, different organizations that had friends, other organizations, I think he sort of got the idea of--that what we need is a theater guild, people who could join the guild.  The membership used to be ten dollars, you could join for ten dollars and you'd get a membership card, you would get a dollar off your ticket when you came to a play.  So, and it was real popular for a long time (laughter).  A lot of people wanted to be members of the guild.
Story_ID: 621578
Speaker 1: How did he fund the theater [North Carolina Black Repertory Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] aside from the tickets?  I mean did he have, did he get any--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would write grants and we got grants and we still do get grants for the North Carolina state arts council [North Carolina Arts Council], and then in 1984, we were funded by the local arts council [Arts Council of Winston-Salem and Forsyth County].
Speaker 1: Now for tho- the benefit of those who are thinking about starting a theater who will watch this in the future, though things could change, I don't think they'll change that much, what do you have to do to get somebody--say I start a theater company, what does that mean to start a theater company?  What do you do?
Speaker 2: Well to start a theater company, first of all you have to have a plan, you have to have a vision, and then you have to come up with a plan and you have to really think about sustainability and you have to decide how you can support yourself because Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] used to say, "If you live by a grant, you'll die by a grant."  So you--not only you try and get grants but you try and come up with other ways to support what you're doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's not, it's not an easy job.
Speaker 1: So the business aspect of it I know.  The public money that's available for the arts can, you can only access if you have 501(c)(3), right?
Speaker 2: Right.  You have to have a board of directors, a 501(c)(3) status and you really have to have a really good working organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you have to, (laughter) when you write the grants, it has to be for what the people who review the grant, it has to be for what they want the grants to be for.  But our grants from the state is like general operating grant, general support grants, and also from the Winston-Salem arts council is for general support.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is the state pretty much supportive of the arts here in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And you know Winston-Salem [North Carolina] is known as the City of the Arts and Innovation, so it's--
Speaker 1: Now explain why.  I read why but explain why to us.
Speaker 2: Winston-Salem had the first arts council in America, and so that's, it's always been like in support of the arts.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1949 from what I read, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  Now when Larry first came on the scene, we didn't get as much support as we--we had to fight to get the support that we wanted from the arts council.  As a matter of fact, in 1984, we were the first African American group to become a funded partner of the arts council.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this remains kind of a theme in--I know the National Endowment for the Arts was concerned about that in '84 [1984]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the year that you started.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well we started in '79 [1979], but '84 [1984] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy--yeah, but when you got your first grant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They were concerned that minority arts groups weren't getting their (unclear).
Speaker 2: I think that's one of the reasons too (laughter) that we got the grant, yeah.  But, you know, we, we use our funds wisely.  We had to do a budget, we had to do this--I mean we really earn what we get.  I mean, you know, we work really hard.  And we've had a steady program since 1979.  You know we have a season, we do a lot of outside things.  We do a lot of things in the community and we have developed a respect, you know, from the larger community, as well as the African American community.  And I think we, a lot of the shows that we have done had not been done here before, so that was good too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 621579
Speaker 1: Tell us about the National Black Theatre Festival and how that idea (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so I think in 1988 Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] went to a conference that was held in Atlanta, Georgia, and I think he was supposed to write an article on black theaters in America, and I think in writing that article he realized that it was quite a few black companies in America, but they weren't communicating with each other, and they all had the same problem: funding, how do you really get funds?  So at first he just thought about having a conference and bringing these theater companies together, but then he decided it would be probably more fun to have a festival, so the idea of the festival came up.  So what he did was invited some theater companies that he had relationships with to come to the festival and Dr. Maya Angelou, he went to her with his plans and she gave him a lot of pointers as to what he should do, and she also recommended that he bring in celebrities because, you know, if you have celebrities, that would get a lot of the people who wouldn't come to a theater festival, to come to the festival to see the celebrities.  So she helped him to get some named people, known people, to come to the first festival.  And Oprah was our first celebrity guest.
Speaker 1: Okay, now from what I've read here, he sort of accidentally bumped into [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou in the airport, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how does that, well tell us that story.
Speaker 2: Well that's all I know, he started--he bumped into her at an airport and he talked to her about what he wanted to do, because you know she had moved here.  She was living here.
Speaker 1: Oh no, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she lives here now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a Reynolds Scholar [Nancy Susan Reynolds Scholar] at Wake Forest, Reynolds Scholar for life.
Speaker 1: Wake Forest is?
Speaker 2: Wake Forest University.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's close by Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: It's here.
Speaker 1: It's in Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  A lot of people don't know 'cause the name is Wake Forest and we don't know where it is (laughter).
Speaker 2: It used to be in Wake Forest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then they moved to Winston-Salem in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she helped him to get it off the ground in 1989.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So it was her clout that got Oprah Winfrey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Oprah Winfrey was one of the most popular people in America, if not the most popular.
Speaker 2: Right, (laughter) but I like to tell the story, is that when Larry said he was going to have a festival and Oprah was going to be here and some of the other people who came in 1989, the people in Winston-Salem didn't really believe it.  And so you know we have an opening night gala and in 1989 gala tickets were only fifty dollars so the people from across the United States was real excited and so they bought a lot of the tickets.  So two weeks before the, the festival then the people around here started believing it.  Oh yeah, it's really gonna happen, it's really gone happen, but we were sold out, so a lot of people missed out on the first one.  But they haven't missed out any more since then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how was that first festival?  What I read here is that Oprah was there, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Esther Rolle, Cicely Tyson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of those people were there.
Speaker 1: Maya Angelou too, was she, was she?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she was, yeah, she was chair, the first chair we had, co-chair, the first chair we had for the festival.  It was very exciting because it happened, people came.  I think we were most excited that people came from all over: from California; New York [New York]; Chicago [Illinois]; Atlanta [Georgia].  You know, they saw it, they believed in us and they came and they had a really good time and we had some really good shows.  And so that was the beginning.
Story_ID: 621580
Speaker 1: Did you have to raise a lot of money for transportation of the artists or did they donate their transportation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we, we had to pay.  We paid.  For the celebrities, we don't pay them a fee at all; they come if they're not busy.  We pay their transportation and hotel accommodations, and they get to go to all of the shows, and, of course, they're treated royally, so that's, that's how we get the celebrities.  Because it's always someone who know someone who know someone.  But for the theater companies, this was one way for them to earn some revenue during the summer, so we, we paid the theater companies and we also paid for their transportation and accommodations, so.
Speaker 1: So this can be really expensive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it can be.  It is.
Speaker 1: How many theater companies do you bring in on average?
Speaker 2: Well, when we first started out I think the f- in 1989, I think it was maybe ten and now we're up to about thirty, thirty, I think about this time we had about thirty companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ten, okay.  Say we start with ten theater companies, how much does it cost to put up ten theater companies, they have like what maybe, how many members you think (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's say, let's say our festival budget now, this past year, was like $1.4 million, but that's not, that's, that's transportation, accommodation, performance fees, technician fees.  We have a whole lot of other activities.  We do things for children, for young adults, entertainment; it's just, it covers the whole gamut.  Transportation for our theatergoers.  You know we have transportation wherein they can catch public transportation and go to the different location for the shows.  We have to pay for rental theaters.  And we, we raise money, we get grants, donations and ticket sales, basically, that's--that pays for the festival [National Black Theatre Festival].  But the first year we didn't make money on the festival at all.  As a matter of fact, we lost money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of people ask, why don't you do it every year?  (Laughter) Do it every year?  We probably would go crazy trying to do it every year.  We has, you know, you have to plan it.  It takes two years to actually get the festival together.
Story_ID: 621581
Speaker 1: The venues you say are--there are enough venues all over town to do the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, quite a few.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: We had fourteen different locations that we have shows.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so I assume all of these are not theaters with all the theater gear, and?
Speaker 2: No, all of them are not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the--almost, let's see, Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] has two theaters that we use.  Salem College [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] has three.  Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] has two.  The Stevens Center [Winston-Salem, North Carolina]; this theater [North Carolina Black Repertory Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]; actually Reynolda House [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] has a theater.  Summer School [ph.] had a theater.  When we use Reynolds' auditorium, they have a theater.  It's probably only the shows that we do down at the hotel, the Benton Convention Center [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] where we had to create a theater, but basically most, most of them are in theaters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because this is the City of the Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I've heard that, but I'm just--would not, you know the average person I think, coming from out of town would not necessarily think there would be that many venues in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Because see we have small shows, medium size shows and large shows.  The musicals are usually at Winston-Salem State and Stevens Center, and when we use Reynolds [Richard J. Reynolds High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], auditorium there.  And then we have one person shows and they are in smaller venues.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then medium sized here and in other places, similar in size.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I think this might be an exercise for anybody wherever they live is to discover how many theaters are in their town.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they may be surprised, that there are more than they think.
Speaker 2: And see, one of the things that happened in 1989, Winston-Salem downtown was not happening at all.  And they were trying to think of what they could do to revitalize the city.  So our first festival [National Black Theatre Festival], all these people came and there was this one restaurant that decided they would have outdoor seating and they were packed.  They stayed open until two o'clock and they were packed every night.  And all of a sudden in the next two years, it was more restaurants, and now they have a restaurant row actually on Fourth Street.  Of people who came in 1989, when they came in 2011 they couldn't believe it was the same city; so much has changed since the first festival.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This past year the festival had a $10 million economic impact on the city in the Triad area [Piedmont Triad].
Story_ID: 621582
Speaker 1: You said the first year, you didn't really, you went in the hole?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And so did that threaten to bring the whole thing down, or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And why not?
Speaker 2: Well because we felt that it was a really good project, product actually, and that we would just have to do something things differently, and it was the first time and we didn't know whether it would work or not.  And it worked, although we lost money.  And a lot of people, we got more--gained more support.  Some of the companies that we had gone to before did not lend their support, and after the first one, they decided that they would, so it worked out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.  So people kind of signed onto the success of the first one.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so does the organization like make money on the project now when they?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that helps I guess to--
Speaker 2: Help the theater company because one of the things that we preach and Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] preached was that the company is the North Carolina Black Repertory Company.  The festival [National Black Theatre Festival] is just an outreach program of the company and it generates funds to help us to run the company through, through the year, along with the donations and the grants that we would get.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, is the North Carolina--or how many people I guess are staff for North Carolina Black Repertory Company?
Speaker 2: There's about six people on staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they work full time?
Speaker 2: Well, we have three full time and three part time, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So actors and musicians are paid by the show I guess, if they're--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're contract jobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's not a repertory--I mean there's not a set of actors that's always paid, you know, except for the--I mean there are three paid, paid employees, but they're the--
Speaker 2: They're staff.
Speaker 1: They're staff really.  They're not performers necessarily?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our part time per- our artistic director is part time, but she is in charge of all of the shows and we have a few people who are in most of our shows.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I know, the way it works in Chicago [Illinois], there are regulars that you'll see--if they're not in one show, well in Chicago, they'll be in another show in Chicago, or (unclear).  They move around a lot, but they keep working.
Speaker 2: Well our musicals are regulars.  It's the same people every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But with--our dramas is different people.
Story_ID: 621583
Speaker 1: What is a season like for North Carolina Black Rep [North Carolina Black Repertory Company]?
Speaker 2: Well, we try and do at least three to four productions a year.  We now have a teen theater and so they do, we--our artistic director meet with the theme--teens every Saturday and they do productions.  We try and do, we do black nativity, that's a staple; we have to do that every year.  We do a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] celebration.  We have been reader's theaters lately because we have Samm-Art Williams working with us and also Ted Lange is working with us.  And then we have--try and bring in new playwrights, or your up and coming playwrights to work with us, and then we try and bring one outside show during the season and then we do the other shows here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --using people within North Carolina basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is Samm-Art Williams from North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Burgaw, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know we--Kuumba Theater years ago in Chicago [Illinois] did 'Welcome to Black River' by Samm-Art Williams and it was a big hit in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Though I think Val Ward [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward] said she had to change some of the language.  It was a little too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --too raunchy for family (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: But it was really successful when she did it.  And he came to Chicago and I think he directed it or something in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 621584
Speaker 1: Do you have a subscription program, I mean a--
Speaker 2: No, we don't.
Speaker 1: You don't have any subscribers?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.  Now I'm surprised at that 'cause, you know, one time they were telling all the not for profit theaters you need to get a subscription program, you know, that's how you keep your house filled, you know, you have a season and a season subscription.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I know I saw an announcement for all the things you're gonna do in a season but there's no subscription program.
Speaker 2: No, we never had one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any reason why not?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the founder [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] didn't necessarily believe in having a subscription program, and one of the reasons is if you have a subscription program, you have to say this is exactly what I'm going to do and sometimes we had to alter our program.  We were looking into it but we haven't really gotten into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you've been successful a long time without it, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We find that word of mouth is really good in getting the word out about the shows, and we still struggle with getting people to come to our regular season, unless it's a musical.  They love musicals here.  Festival [National Black Theatre Festival] is no problem.  The whole, a lot of the community come out.  You know, the theaters are filled.  As a matter of fact in 2011 we had about four or five shows that were sold out, so, it's no problem during the festival, but we're still working on audience development.  About maybe six months ago, we hired a audience development person, a marketing person, to market more.  We're using technology, you know, Facebook, Twitter, Constant Comment [sic. Constant Contact]; all of those different, what you call technology based programs to try and market our theater [North Carolina Black Repertory Company].  And we also know that we need to get more young people involved in the theater.  You know that market, say twenty-five to forty [years old]?  We need to do things to get them more involved too, so that's what we're trying to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--yeah, that's, that's, are you having any success in that regard, getting a younger generation involved in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, especially during the festival.  And, you know, we have that teen theater for young people between the ages of thirteen and eighteen.  When they do shows, people come out to see them too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and we have run across some shows that would appeal to the younger generation and that's what we're trying to do.
Story_ID: 621585
Speaker 1: Now what have been some of the highlights of the, the Black Repertory's [North Carolina Black Repertory Company] seasons over the years?
Speaker 2: Some of the highlights.  Well I think--the milestones that I think that we've--?  Creating the guild [North Carolina Black Repertory Company Theatre Guild], I think was a high point.  Well, first we'll start with the living room theater, how we start at first marketing the company then creating the guild.  We now have what we call--at one point we had a music division, where we had singers and musicians that were involved.  I think we have what we call now, Marvtastic Society; that was created in 2003.  And in order to be a member of the Marvtastic Society you had to pay a thousand dollars to be a part of that society, and you get some discounts, and that has really worked really well.
Speaker 1: Well tell us what--this is a good time I guess to tell us what does marvtastic mean and where did it come from?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] coined that word, marvtastic, marvelous and fantastic together, so (laughter) that's what it means.  And he came up with that word and then it caught on and everybody started using it, everybody started asking what does it mean and so he decided he would come up with a Marvtastic Society, and these people donate, especially to the festival [National Black Theatre Festival].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well keep going.  I didn't want to, I just wanted to have you say something about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the Marvtastic Society I think is a milestone.  I think the teen theater, having actual--doing the teen theater has been a milestone.  And I think our longevity, you know, we been in business since 1979 and we've been through a lot and we're still around and we're still doing the festival.  And, of course, the biggest thing is the festival in 1989.  And I think in 2007 when Larry passed, people didn't know what was going to happen.  You know that year, he passed that--the festival was that year.  The festival was in August and he passed in June, so we--the board decided that we should go on and do the festival 'cause we were already working on it.  And everybody was there and people were having conversations because they really didn't know what was gonna happen with the festival.  But I knew that he really loved the festival and sometimes I feel that the festival probably was one--working really hard late at night, not doing what you're supposed to do health wise probably contributed to his early death.  I decided that I would do all I could, along with some other supporters, to make sure that it still happened.  And you know I was always in the background.  I was the person that worked with the community.  I knew a lot of people in the community.  I worked a lot with the volunteers and I would be around at the meetings and all of that, so I was in the background so I knew some of the things that were involved.  And then he had a lot of people who had worked with him before.  We call 'em consultants.  Lawrence Evans from New York [New York]; lark hackshaw from Atlanta [Georgia], Artie Reese [Arthur Reese]; those people had worked with him before.  So we knew that it had to continue.  So we just did what had to be done and we just had to do it without him, but we are doing okay, but his presence, we feel that his presence is still here.  We feel his spirit, you know, when we start planning the festival.
Story_ID: 621586
Speaker 1: I know you've had a lot of support from the celebrities, some of the more serious ones, like [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.  I'm looking on the walls, August Wilson.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Brown.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we see them all over the--.  So you know Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] is really, been supportive of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Woodie King.  Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] saw Woodie as his--as a mentor.  He really looked up to Woody King and he would go to New York [New York] and spend time with Woodie King.  And he got to meet a lot of people too through Woodie King, so we have that support.  We just have a lot of support.  Tommy Hicks from California is one of his strong supporters.  And we had another lady, her name is Irene Gandy, and you know, she has a, she's a big, she's part of a PR firm in New York [Jeffrey Richards Associates], and one of the things that she did in the beginning, she got us coverage in The New York Times, the U.S.--what is it?  U.S. Day--
Speaker 1: USA Today?
Speaker 2: USA Today.  I think we were in the Times Magazine [The New York Times Magazine].  She got us a lot of national exposure, exposure when we first started.
Speaker 1: Now is she a PR [public relations] person?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she's in New York City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 621587
Speaker 1: Larry Hamlin was, you know, was known as Mr. Marvtastic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Larry Leon Hamlin you mean (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Leon Hamlin, okay (laughter).  Larry Leon Hamlin.
Speaker 2: He would always remind you if you said Larry Hamlin, it's Larry Leon Hamlin, Mr. Marvtastic, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he seemed to really feed off the energy from the shows, right?  The purple suit--suits and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  His favorite color was purple.  And so the colors for the company [North Carolina Black Repertory Company] is purple and black.  I don't have on black today because (laughter) the memo said not to wear black, but our colors are purple and black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so he loved purple.  Everything was purple.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so he, he was working on this right up to the end.  Was it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, almost, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He became ill in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did he, did say anything before he passed away about the festival [National Black Theatre Festival], about what he?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Any reflections about what he would like to see happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he's always talked about--he always said, he made statements like: "If I die tomorrow, I'm satisfied.  I've done what I wanted to do," you know.  And he felt that his ultimate goal he had reached you know.  So he was really satisfied with life.
Story_ID: 621588
Speaker 1: Another fantastic story is your story in library science.  You seem to--and you seem to be on every board in town.  I'm looking at this list.
Speaker 2: Well I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were on everything.  Now I don't know how, advisory board of Winston State University [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]; Friends of the Library; the Roadbuilder's Award from the Round Table for Ethnic Minority Concerns; the American Library Association Black Caucus [Black Caucus of the American Library Association].  You were president of the Black Caucus--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of the American Library Association, that's the association of librarians of America.
Speaker 2: For African American librarians, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Diggs Gallery [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], you're on the board of directors of the Diggs Gallery; the president of the black, well the board of directors of the Shepherd's Center - Greater Win- Winston-Salem [Shepherd's Center of Greater Winston-Salem, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Just--it just goes on and on, so, a vice President of the Forsyth County Employees Credit Union (laughter); you know, American Business Women's Association, round- affiliate chapters of the black caucus of the--.  It just goes on and on and on.  So and you currently the, the head of the--
Speaker 2: Forsyth County Public Library [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Forsyth County Public Library, so you've had quite a career in library science in addition to doing this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --volunteer work for the North Carolina Black Rep [North Carolina Black Repertory Company] and the National Black Theatre Festival.
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm the type of person that has to be busy.  And I take my job very seriously and I feel that I do it very well.  Well I know that I do it very well, and I love theater and so this is my hobby actually, to volunteer for the theater.  And I have been on many boards because that's how you get to know the community and people get to know you in the community.  And you can pick up a lot of tips how boards are run and that kind of thing.  And just get to know people and I like people and I like being around people and so that's why I'm on a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that my biggest, one of my proudest accomplishments is in 2008 I was named the woman of the year by The Chronicle newspaper here, and that was a, a nice achievement I felt.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is by the Winston-Salem Chronicle?
Speaker 2: Well, it's The Chronicle now--
Speaker 1: Chronicle (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because they're more, not only now Winston-Salem [North Carolina], but they're in some other cities, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621589
Speaker 1: How many libraries do you preside over in Forsyth County [Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have, we have--actually we have ten locations and two outreach programs and two book mobiles.  And we say we have a virgin library too; that's the online catalog.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what has, how has being a librarian changed, or how have libraries changed in--since the time you started as, you know, 'til now?
Speaker 2: Well, technology, technology, technology.  We went from the card catalog to book catalog to something we call a ROM catalog [CD-ROM catalog] and, and now we, you know, have the automation system, you know, online catalog now.  And we went from books, now we're e-books, we have the Kindle [Amazon Kindle], the Nook [Barnes and Noble Nook], we have Internet, wireless connection, Internet for everybody to use.  We, we used to have, we started off at the public library with the Apple com- Apple computers when they first came out.  We got a grant from the state to have a lab of Apple computers and we've gone from that to computers for everyone.  It's technology, technology, technology.  And the one thing I like about my staff and I like about librarians are that we're willing to change you know.  The card catalog, who would ever thought that it would be no more card catalog.  We just change with the times; we are very flexible.  We love technology.  We don't know what's down the road but whatever it is, we will be a part of it.  People make statements there may not be any libraries anymore, but we say yes, we'd just be maybe a different type of library in a different form, but we'll still be around.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What has, do you think the black community needs public libraries more or less now?
Speaker 2: They still need public libraries.  We see people every day (laughter) that come in the library to use the computers because everybody don't have the technology, believe it or not, and we can tell you that we have quite a few people who come in to use the computers to do resumes, because now you can't even, you have--the only way you can apply for a job now is on-line.  People come to learn how to e-mail their grandchildren, people come into the library to use our free wireless connections, free Internet.  People come in, still come in to read the newspaper, still come in to get books.  We have e-books with--you can download and you don't have to pay for them.  So we have people that come in for everything and I think all people will still need the library.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you need the same kind of staff basically as in the past, or has that changed?
Speaker 2: Well, we will need a staff that is very flexible and that can change with the technology and just--can keep up, and the people who are graduating from library school, they know all of the technologies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you sponsor many public programs?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Demonstrations and readings and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: We do a lot of programming, but we have programs on jobs; how to interview for a job, how to write a resume.  We have programs on gardening.  We have programs on how to get your taxes done.  We have all types of programs.
Story_ID: 621590
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that we will know our history because the younger generation sometimes I don't think they know the rich history that we have because you need to know about your past in order to do well in the future.  I hope that we keep up with all of the technologies that are happening in, in, happening in the world.  I hope that we will continue to think global, you know, just, you know how we can just be narrow in our thinking?  We should think global.  And I worry about family, the family sometimes.  I hope we can continue to see how important families are.  And I hope we will continue to communicate with each other because I don't know if you feel the same way I feel, but it seems like everybody is on the computer, everybody is texting, everybody is on the cell phone and a lot of times people are not communicating with each other, and I think communicating, that one on one relationship, sitting down and talking to people is so important.
Story_ID: 621591
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Hm.  (Pause) Well, I think my legacy will be when people think of me, they will think of me as a person who was willing to go the extra mile to help someone if they needed help.  I think they will be--will say that I was someone who really cared about people, and I also hope they say that I set some good examples for the younger generation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Likewise when you look back over what you have done, is there a major thing that you would do differently if you were to go back and do it?
Speaker 2: Hm.  I don't really think so because at one point I was gonna go to law school.  As a matter of fact I probably could have gotten in law school.  I was taking--studying and getting ready to take the test to go to law school, but then I say well if I went to law school I may not have the opportunity to meet a lot of the people that I've met.  So actually, I think that I have lived a really good life and I've met a lot of people that I find that are very interesting and if I had went in that other direction I might have missed some of these people.  So I'm pretty pleased with how I turned out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621592
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Do you have children at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a stepson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Larente Leon Hamlin, and two grandchildren, Ja'Quan Hamlin, he's sixteen now; and then Angel, well Larente Ange- Angel Hamlin [Larente Angel Hamlin].  He's in his twenties and he's in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  But I have a lot of godchildren and favorite niece- nieces and nephews, so I play a part in their lives so it's like I have children.  And I have one sister [Gwendolyn Norwood Williams] and three brothers [Nathaniel Norwood, Charles Norwood and Arthur Sprinkle III].  And one of my brothers is deceased.
Story_ID: 621593
Speaker 1: Now in terms of Larry Leon Hamlin, how do, how do you think he should be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think that he should be remembered as a very creative person who loved his people, who--he cared a lot about people.  What's really amazing about Larry is a lot, he had a lot of relationships with people that I didn't even know about.  And my staff, when he was ill, my staff would tell me that people would come in the library [Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and ask them how was he doing.  After he passed, I would be a different locations and somebody would come up to me and say, "You know I met your husband, and your husband really inspire- inspired my son," or, "your husband did this," or, "your husband gave me this," and I was really surprised.  I remember one time I was in the grocery store and I was writing a check and they say, "Are you Larry Leon Hamlin's wife?"  I said yes and then they started telling me stories, so he touched a lot of people in the community; not only in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], but in other communities.  And whenever I sit around with people, somebody always has a Larry Leon Hamlin story to tell.  So he's still much--his memory is still--people still talk about him a lot and somebody always has some kind of story that they can tell.  I know I ran into a lady once and she said she really miss seeing him downtown because you never knew what he was gonna have on.  You know it would be purple, but you didn't know what it might be (laughter), and she said she missed that.  And they opened an arts center recently, like last year, and they had a big party and this lady came up to me and said, "Larry is here," you know, "he would be so excited," so his presence is here, so I think that's a really good, big legacy to have.
Speaker 1: When you think back on it, what was his, what was his philosophy of life would you say?
Speaker 2: I think his philosophy was to enjoy life, and his whole thing was theater, and he didn't do theater to make money because one of the things he said to me before we got married, "Now if you wanna marry somebody who gonna make big bucks [dollars], then you don't need to marry me because theater is what I do.  Some people make money in it, some people don't, but this is what I want to do."  So I think his philosophy was to just enjoy life and be proud of who you are and I think that's, that's what he was.
Story_ID: 621594
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, you got a last question.  No.  You didn't ask me the thing about the people here, the artistic director.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, yes, let's talk about that.  Now who, who currently runs North Carolina Black Repertory Theater [North Carolina Black Repertory Company]?
Speaker 2: The executive director is Gerry Patton and the artistic director is Mabel Robinson, and Mabel Robinson has, has a really long tradition in theater.  She's been on Broadway before.  She's a dancer, she's written plays.  So we're very fortunate to have her as our artistic director.  And Gerry has been in business, working the banking business, worked in private businesses and so we're really happy we got her to run the company also.  Both of the ladies are hard workers and are dedicated to the vision that the founder had for this company.  And, as a matter of fact, both of the ladies had worked with Larry [Sprinkle-Hamlin's husband, Larry Leon Hamlin] before.  Mabel, well Gerry as a volunteer, but Mabel, as a artistic director, you know, like she would be directing our musicals and everything, so she had a relationship with Larry and she, and she knew, she knew what his vision was and they worked really well together so it was really great when she accepted the position.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I read where she'd been a member of the cast of 'Golden Boy' [Clifford Odets and William Gibson] with Sammy Davis, Jr.--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on Broadway.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They directed--she and your husband directed 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope'--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --by [HistoryMaker] Micki Grant.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You remember that show called 'Hullabaloo'?  Mabel was one of the dancers.
Speaker 1: Oh, she was a go-go dancer?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the go-go boots.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so the three of you really are key figures in keeping the legacy of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Larry Leon Hamlin alive.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm glad you asked me about that so we can clear that up, and what are you all doing this season?
Speaker 2: Let's see, this season.  We have done already 'Black Nativity' [Langston Hughes], (Unclear), that's our teen theater.  We had a show this past weekend, 'Big Mama Speaks' [Hannibal B. Johnson] and 'Dr. May Chinn,' 'Dr. May Edward Chinn'.  We brought a company in from New York [New York] and then a lady in from Tulsa, Oklahoma to do those shows.  We're getting ready to do--we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was this show about the Tulsa riot of 1921?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'Big Mama Speaks.'  Yeah, it was great.  We're getting ready to do a reading of one of Samm-Art Williams' plays.  He was commissioned to write a play about our organization that's celebrating forty years as an agency.  So we're getting ready to do that reading and then Ted Lange is going to come in.  We're reading his play.  He has a play called 'The Black Unicorn' [ph.] that we're reading.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's the actor who used to be on 'The Love Boat,' right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's his most famous role.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We've done his plays before.  We did one play of his called 'Four Queens - No Trump.'  It was really good.  We did it at the festival [National Black Theatre Festival], it was a hit.  And one of the things we're thinking about doing is doing a community talent show to give people an opportunity in the community to display their talent, and hopefully by doing that we might be able to find some more talent to be in our shows.
Story_ID: 621595
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would just like to be remembered as a person who really cared about mankind, a person who was willing to go the extra mile to help someone and a person who liked, liked being in the background.  I like, (laughter) I like the work and everything, but I don't have to get recognition for the work, as long as it gets done.  That's how I think I want to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 621596
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my [maternal] grandmother, Lessie Josephine Annie Mariah Lockhart [Lessie Lockhart Norwood], and she was born in Hamlin, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me at the 2005 National Black Theatre Festival with one of my favorite niece, Artesha Conrad [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of Larry Leon Hamlin and his two grandsons, Angel [Larente Angel Hamlin] on the right, and Ja'Quan [Ja'Quan Hamlin] on the left, and we're celebrating Ja'Quan's birthday.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of Larry Leon Hamlin and [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Sprinkle-Hamlin.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Larry and I were married in 1981 and this is a photograph of the wedding party.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Larry and I had an African American wedding and here we're jumping the broom.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Larry and his son Larente [Larente Leon Hamlin] at the wedding, at our wedding.  You can tell Larente didn't want to have on that (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is my wedding photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my [maternal] great-grandfather, James Norwood.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this is a photograph of my [maternal] grandfather, Lonon Norwood and my sister, Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Norwood Williams].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's--how do you spell his first name?
Speaker 2: L-O-N-O-N.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is a photograph of Larry and me on our wedding night.  We'd just only begun.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my grandfather, my step-grandmother, my uncle and my sister, and that's, and that's when I was in college [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and I was selected to spend a summer in India under the program, Experiment in International Living.
Speaker 1: That's a great story.  I really like that (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I think it was over a thousand dollars to go and they raised eight hundred.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my mother, Thelma Irene Norwood Holtzclaw [Thelma Norwood Holtzclaw].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my siblings and my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you name them left to right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay.  My brother, Nathaniel Eugene [Nathaniel Norwood]; Arthur William Henry III [Arthur Sprinkle III].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, that's me.  Okay.  That's Nathaniel Eugene; Sylvia; my mother, Thelma; my sister, Gwendolyn; and my brother, Charles Alexander [Charles Norwood]; and the brother in the center is the baby brother, Arthur William Henry III.
Speaker 1: This is the article done when I became the woman of the year in 2008.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was taken at the 2005 National Black Theatre Festival, the last festival that Larry attended, and this is a poster promoting our scholarship, the Larry Leon Hamlin and Sylvia Sprinkle-Hamlin / Winston-Salem Urban League Endowment Scholarship.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Larry Leon Hamlin, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and I forget the lady's name right now.  Oh, gosh, what is it.  She used to be on 'The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air,' she was the mother.  We know her name, what is her name?  Gosh, what is her name?  I'll think of it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, let's move on and get back to it.
Speaker 1: I'll get her name in a few minutes.  We'll come back to it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a souvenir journal of the National Black Theater Festival which was held in 2011.
Speaker 1: This is the Black Masks magazine [Black Mask] which is published in New York [New York], and they did a commemorative issue on Larry Leon Hamlin.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a book that was written on the history of the company ['The North Carolina Black Repertory Company: 25 Marvtastic Years'] by Dr. Felecia Piggott McMillan Long [Felecia Piggott Long] in 2005, when we celebrated twenty-five years of the company [North Carolina Black Repertory Company].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the two thousand--the 1989, 1991 festival, Joe Seneca; Larry Leon Hamlin; Sylvia Sprinkle-Hamlin; and Larry's moth- mother, Annie Hamlin Johnson [Annie Simpson Johnson].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken at the 1989 National Black Theater Festival, the first festival that we had with Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], Larry Leon Hamlin, and our special celebrity, celebrity guest, Oprah Winfrey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was taken at the 2005 National Black Theater Festival with Ruby, Ruby Dee, Larry Leon Hamlin and Janet Hubert, who was one of the co-chairs of the festival.
