Story_ID: 551144
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer and Janet Sims-Wood [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood] is ob- observing today. Would you please state your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Curtis Symonds, C-U-R-T-I-S, S-Y-M-O-N-D-S.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, twelve, fifty-five [August 12, 1955]
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Tell me your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the COO of the WMBA [Women's National Basketball Association] Washington Mystics.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 4/23/07 [April 23, 2007].
Story_ID: 551145
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Blue, okay. And what about a favorite food? What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: I'm a shrimp man. I love shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, when you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'd say Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the time of the year that's--that you love the most? What time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all four seasons. That's one of the reasons I've kind of always loved living--when I first grew up in the Midwest, in Ohio, you really got a chance to enjoy the four seasons and now being in the East, it's very similar, it just doesn't get as cold as the Midwest does in the wintertime, but we do have a--spotty times, when it gets kind of--but I like the four seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. And that would be, doing the right thing.
Story_ID: 551146
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your parents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Barbara Symonds [Barbara Horton Symonds], and it's spelled, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, S-Y-M-O-N-D-S.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Do you know when?
Speaker 2: I don't the exact year. She's eighty years old. It was May 14th, and if we retract--I'd just have to figure out years for you.
Speaker 1: Okay. And that's fine. Now do you have any memory of your grandparents [Josephine Horton and James Horton]?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes on my mother's side. I got to know my grandmother the longest of all my grandparents from my mother's side. She passed away when I was probably between eleven and twelve years old, and I know--even spent a little time with her. It was kind of tough because she was in Bermuda and we were in Ohio. I used to spend the majority of my summers in Bermuda when I was growing up, up to about fourteen years old. So I got a lot of time to spend, three months a year with my grandmother, and we were close. We weren't as close as I'd have like to have been. I've seen other friends of mine grandmothers because I really, really didn't get, in my opinion, the true tutelage from grandparents that I see other friends of mine. I wish I had gotten to know my grandparents much better. Either I think that I'm all about hearing from the old school and learning and understanding, and also, a question you'll probably ask me, when we get more deeper into, is my roots. I never really found out much about my roots and I haven't really dug into the tree to begin to find out. All I did know was that my grandmother was from the West Indies and came from a big family. My mother is from a big family. She's also got probably, it's now, I think, seven or eight brothers and sisters in her family. So I knew we had a very strong growing tree, but I didn't get a chance to really spend a lot of time with her like I would have liked to.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a good question, I haven't--wow.
Speaker 1: So you just called her granny.
Speaker 2: I just called her grandma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I just knew her by--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: Well, do you remember any of the times that you spent with her in Bermuda during the summer?
Speaker 2: Yea, she was, it was very interesting because Bermuda is only twenty-five miles in length, so when my grandmother was probably in her sixties and seventies she rode a bicycle to work. She had her own, she had her own little shop.
Speaker 1: What type of shop (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was an ice cream shop.
Speaker 1: Okay, ice cream shop.
Speaker 2: Ice cream shop and little grocery store type thing. And I always remembered her for riding her bike. You know, she always, you know, that was Mother Horton, you know, was always on her bicycle. She'd get up early in the morning, leave and she--we lived on we called Cooks Hill in Somerset, Bermuda. So you had to come down this big hill and, you'd go through, you know, Somerset a little bit to find her store, but that was probably the most interesting thing was her store. And she did that for a lot of years.
Speaker 1: Did she make homemade ice cream?
Speaker 2: Well, in Bermuda, every one's a Simmons, almost, so, the ice cream that was famous in Bermuda is called Simmons Ice Cream place [Simmons Ice Cream Factory Ltd., Somerset, Bermuda], which is spelled S-I-M-M-O-N-S, and that was a cousin of mine. And they had their own ice cream factory in Bermuda. It was the most famous ice cream and sherbet on the island, so all of us, you know, my grandmother included, bought a ton of it all the time for her shop.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Now tell me about the difference in the spelling of the names.
Speaker 2: The Symonds', you know, name is a very interesting name in Bermuda, probably seen--that's probably one of the places that I've seen it spelled many different ways. We're spelled S-Y-M-O-N-D-S. A lot of them is spelled S-I-M-M-O-N. Some of them is spelled S-I-M-M-O-N-D-S. Some of them is spelled S-Y-M-O-N-S. So, it's a lot of different spellings and, it just, every time I seem to go to Bermuda, I find a new cousin for some kind of relationship or something, that I didn't know about, you know, that is also a different spelled Symonds name--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --other than S-Y-M-O-N-D-S. So, it's, it's kind of funny when you look through the phone book because Symonds is spelled so many different ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Different ways.
Speaker 2: --in Bermuda.
Story_ID: 551147
Speaker 1: In Bermuda, where your mother [Barbara Horton Symonds] grew up and where your grandmother [Josephine Horton] lived, tell me about the area in which they lived.
Speaker 2: It's beautiful. Somerset, Bermuda, we lived on a house on the top of the hill, Cooks Hill, that you could come out on the porch and see all of Bermuda. It was a gorgeous, gorgeous house there. It was twenty-one rooms in the house. My grandfather [James Horton] and grandmother lived there. It had a guest home in it. All my uncles and aunts lived there throughout the years with my grandmother, and it was just a spacious, just a spacious house. And then in Bermuda one of the big woods that is famous is cedar. Everything is made of cedar, so all our beds, cabinets, everything and one of my uncles was a specialist. He was a carpenter, and he was one of the best in Bermuda at the time and so all of our cabinetry was cedar, which that's a big thing in Bermuda. But, the island of Somerset, one of the parishes rather, is just gorgeous, you know, pink sand, beautiful water. The hospitable folks that are in that, on the island, it's one of a kind.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents own the property where--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how they acquired it 'cause my mother ended up buying the property and she owns it now. In fact, I take that back, she just sold it. She owned it for many years. But, I don't know how they acquired it.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your grandfather? You mentioned him, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't get to know grandpa very strong--very much because when I--by the time I got older, he'd became very sick. All I do remember is I was holding his hand the day he died.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: It was traumatic, it was tough and I still feel it, you know, it's emotional for me as time went. I was young and I was really into him, and, you know, I just knew that he wasn't going to make it, and he told me that regardless of how things turned out, he still loved me. And I didn't get to know him. You know, I mean I just, he was always--smoked his pipe. He would always sit outside and we always had a little garden and he'd always tend his garden and we had some goats and other things like that, and so, you know, I got in a little conversation with him, but I didn't really get to know him, so when I was caught up in that, that was pretty strong for me as a young, as a young kid, you know, trying to get through it. And, it hit me hard for a minute. And really, I think today that's one of the things why it's hard for me to go to funerals now, because of my grandfather. Because I was struck with him and I didn't want to see him in a casket. You know, so, it was tough.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much education your grandmother and grandfather might have had?
Speaker 2: Didn't have any. Bermuda was a very, a lot of folks got their education, but Bermuda was very hands on, you know, it was craft driven, still is. Most Bermudians are, they have trades, but a lot of it is with their hands. And so a lot of them, the older Bermudians did not finish school. The younger Bermudians now are finishing school and coming across and getting higher educations in college. But in the old days, that really wasn't a big push, you know, your thing was to just try to get through possibly high school and then learn a trade and start to work. That was just, that was just the mentality in Bermuda.
Story_ID: 551148
Speaker 1: Well let's talk more about your mother [Barbara Horton Symonds]. Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother was special. My mother apparently, from what I know, what my aunts and uncles have told me, she was an unbelievable talent. She played the piano. She was one of the first--she was a dancer, and she was one of the most--the youngest dancers to--she did modern dance. She did all kind of dancing but she was a very big entertainer at a young age in Bermuda. And apparently she was the life of the town from what everybody tells me, you know, and then she decided that she was going to get her education though so she did her years in Bermudian school and then came over to the states and went to Central State University [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and got her B.S. there in physical education. And then she went and got her master's [degree] at Columbia [Columbia University] in New York [New York], and then came back to begin teaching at Central State in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what type of mother she was to you. What was your relationship with your mother?
Speaker 2: It was a very good relationship. I mean it's spotty like everybody has, you know, but I mean I appreciate--I saw my mother work very hard, you know, and that she was very, she was all about helping kids do the best they could (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. Where were we?
Speaker 1: We were talking about, about my mother.
Speaker 2: Okay. And you told me that she came back to become a teacher, is that right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. And then I asked you what type of mother, what type of person she was and your relationship with her.
Speaker 1: She was a very energetic person. She's eighty years old now and my mother has had a bundle of energy from day one. I've never seen a person that has less energy than my mother. She can light up a room, she's got the attitude and the energy to really get you motivated to do things when you probably didn't want to do things. She would never take no for an answer. That's not her game. She would make it a yes. And she would get it done. I mean that's the one thing that I've taken away from her is learning to get it done, you know, at all cost, you know, and so, that was a big plus for me and watching her over the years, I actually want to emulate a lot of what she did because one, I liked her spunk and energy in teaching so I went to school and tried to major in physical education like she did. And two, it was all about giving to the kids you know, and that's something that has hit me very strongly over the years because I'm trying to do things now to try to give back--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you now, and that's what she taught me.
Story_ID: 551149
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: Norman [Norman Symonds], spelled N- N-O-R-M-A-N, Symonds, S-Y-M-O-N-D-S.
Speaker 1: And tell me about him.
Speaker 2: My father is, it's like I was saying in New York--Bermudians, he, he, my father ended up just coming over with my mother [Barbara Horton Symonds] because my mother had gotten a job at Central State University [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Did, did they meet in Bermuda?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they met in Bermuda. My father was, he was a big time painter, house painter, painted houses and things like that, so that was his trade. And then my mom was able to convince him to come over to Ohio when she came to the states and he got a job on the campus as a painter in the maintenance department and he's still there now. He's been almost there, almost fifty years now. And his trade has been painting. He doesn't have the education that my mother has. I think he's got a sixth grade education, but he's a genuine guy. I mean he taught me a lot. I mean my father is kind of interesting. My mother has all the energy. My father is pretty laid back, you know, so, and I think I've got a little bit of that with my kids [Demetrius Symonds, Karrington Symonds and Curtis Symonds, Jr.] from him. I'm not the kind to get real excited where my wife's [Pat Symonds] got more energy that she'll boil over and I'm just okay, well let's take it day to day and see what happens, you know, and I think that's--mirrors a lot of how my father's attitude was you know. You know, I'm a Leo and you can take me so far and then once I flip, I flip. But it takes a lot to get me to go. And my father is, I'm not sure what his sign is, but he was born in March, but he was born on March 7th, and he just is a very laid back individual. It's hard to get him excited about anything you know, but he's a good man, and I've learned a lot over the years with him.
Speaker 1: Is he about eighty years old or so?
Speaker 2: Yes, he just turned eighty.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you told me what you took from your mother, you're saying from your father you took the stance of being a little laid back?
Speaker 2: Well, not such much laid back, it's just not the right word for it, probably laid back dealing with my kids sometimes because he was pretty laid back with me. But what I took away from my father was his drive, his work ethic. My father, you know, I didn't like working with my father when I was young because he never stopped, you know, I mean I wasn't into painting like he was, so he could paint, I went in for the money. He could paint eight hours, I'm figuring okay we were finished and he's just getting started you know. He's like, "Well, it's not dark yet so why are you ready to go?" And I'm like, "I've been here for eight hours, I'm ready to go." And now I see dealing with my kids and when I'm trying to get things done, you know, where my dad was coming from you know because he spent a lot of time in showing me that you never quit. You continue to work to the best that you can and when you leave your product, make sure your product is the best that you can deliver. And I pride myself on that at work and any job I have because it sticks in my mind most about him is that he was never satisfied with his work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I really like that attitude. And I think that's what I really took away from him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From him.
Story_ID: 551150
Speaker 1: Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have three boys.
Speaker 1: Your brother and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, my sisters, yeah. I have a stepsister, Dianne [Dianne Taylor]. Actually I have two stepsisters, three stepsisters. Here's what happened. My mother's sister passed away when she was younger and my mother [Barbara Horton Symonds] adopted her three daughters. I don't look at them as adopted for me because I'd been around them since I had been young so I look at them as my sisters, and they've always been there for me and I love them as sisters. There's no difference to me in blood at all. So I, when you say siblings I kind of say, you know, except I say it was me, but I, really I think my three sisters are there, because I always wanted sisters and I have 'em now you know, and that's what I love about 'em, they're there for me.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names.
Speaker 2: Evanell [ph.], Marguerite [ph.] and Dianne, Diana.
Speaker 1: And so you all grew up together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. Now two of them are still in Bermuda. They went back to Bermuda. That's Evanell and Diana in Bermuda. Marguerite is in Columbus, Ohio, and I'm here [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 551151
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: With them [Symonds' adopted sisters]?
Speaker 1: No, just in general.
Speaker 2: I think when I was in the sixth grade, I had a heart murmur, and I was a big time athlete. I was pretty good. I was small, but I was pretty good. I was talented and I was told in the summer of my sixth grade year that I couldn't play sports in the summer and I had to slow down because I had a heart murmur that could affect me for the rest of my life. And that was pretty tough because I always liked being out with my friends and playing and now I had to scale back a lot. I had to sit in the house and watch them from outside while they were all having fun and doing different things. I couldn't do a lot of movement at that time because people were scared of my heart. And that was probably a big thing that I remember you know. Everything worked out, but it still stands out a lot to me when I was younger.
Story_ID: 551152
Speaker 1: Now, you moved to Ohio when you were how old?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two years old. So you really don't have any memories of living in Bermuda except for when you went back in the summertime (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was there every summer until I was around fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my family, we spent a lot of time, I mean it's three months. I mean, you know, Bermuda, I keep telling people, as a tourist, you know, you would enjoy it. For me after I'd lived there for a week, it became like living here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know, I get a little bored of it after a while, like, I need a little something different.
Speaker 1: Well tell me some of the things you did during the summer while you were there.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean the majority of the stuff for us was swimming. You know, you just hung out at the beach. That was the big thing because it wasn't a lot to do in Bermuda. It's not like it's basketball, football or anything like that, sports to watch or anything like that, so really, you know, you kind of, you know, you got some great cooking, got a chance to swim a lot, met a lot of family, new family, old family, that kind of thing. But that's really the basics when we were there for the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell me about the neighborhood that you grew up in in Ohio. What part of Ohio?
Speaker 2: It was Wilberforce, Ohio and it was probably, I've never seen the experience that, in my community, that I've seen anywhere else. Because we had the, a community that was, the majority of the kids, our parents taught on the campus because we all grew up on the campus. So we really got to know each other from the older siblings to the younger siblings, and we all looked out, they all looked out for each other, you know, it was just our clan you know, and we had a very open relationship. I could walk into your house, go into the fridge, pick me out something to eat, put on the fryer, skillet it up. Wasn't no big deal, you know. The parents didn't have a problem, you know, disciplining me if they saw me out doing something, you know, they'd bring the switch to me just like they switching, they were switching their own kids. But it was, it was a great nurturing at the time because the elder (unclear), they were so good for us, educated us, you know, on a lot of things on growing up, and what we need to do to get better, you know. And it was some great years there and some great minds of folks in Wilberforce, Ohio at the time. It's sad now, because I was just back there a couple of weeks ago and got an award from my old college, Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], and you know, a lot of the parents, I know all their kids, they're passing away now. So, and the problem with the community is it's not getting refurbished because all the kids are now moving out because no one wants to live down there. It's just nothing to do, it's not really conducive to what you want to do, so no one is really coming back, only if your mom and dad are sick, then you come back, you know, help them out there. That's about it. So the community has really started to go backwards in my mind because they aren't getting any influx of our generation coming back and say, you know what, I'm a live here now, you know. But the community was special. I mean I have this, I have so many friends, older and younger. It's always interesting when you're growing up in life, you know, the older kids even if five or six years older, you know, they don't really associate with you until you get into it now this age. And now, you know, when you're five or six years, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter it was a big thing so I stayed in contact with a lot of my sisters' age friends, my friends, younger kids. It's pretty, it's pretty special, you know, very special.
Story_ID: 551153
Speaker 1: When you think back at that time, what sounds, what smells and what sights come to your mind when you think about Wilberforce [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: The sound is probably just the spirit, you know, I mean everybody supported everybody there, you know, I mean you could holler my name across, two blocks across the street and I'd hear it. You know, it's just like that. And, it was just, it was just special. You know just special. We just had a family of folks that, I can't even describe it more or less. It was just that special to me. Because it was different, you know. The smell, with the cleanliness, it was clean. It was just, it was just precious, you know, and it was something that, you know, you just cherished every day. You woke up ready to go because it wasn't like you had to worry about smog or any kind of other stuff, you know. It was that great fresh air every day. I mean those are the things I think, made the place so special in its own way. What was the last one?
Speaker 1: Sights.
Speaker 2: And the sights was probably I think more the campus of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], Wilberforce, and then the beauty of all black people that were around there. It was just unbelievable, you know. There was a lot of great people who came through those colleges. And I had the opportunity when we first moved to Wilberforce, my mom [Barbara Horton Symonds] was running also the guest house of Central State, and, so a lot of big name actors and concert people would stay there and I got a chance to meet a lot of 'em, you know, which was very special, so, when you look at sights, I would really include some of those persons.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that you met?
Speaker 2: Back in that day, it was [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, Leontyne Price, O.J. [O.J. Simpson] stayed at our house, Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] stayed at our house. I mean Central State attracted unbelievable talent that, that was coming through Ohio, which was pretty special, you know, but it was different.
Story_ID: 551154
Speaker 1: Tell me about your elementary school. What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: It was special (laughter). I was thinking about it when I was filling out your questionnaire today. It was called Cook Elementary School [Lucinda Cook Elementary School, Wilberforce, Ohio], and it was so special because the school was right on the campus [of Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] so that made it, and most of the kids, we were all from the community, you know, and that was great. We had a reunion a while back at Wilberforce [Ohio] with all of us and we all tried to think back about Cook Elementary School, 'cause now Central States' telecommunication department is where it is now. The building is still there but, you know, I just remember that Dr. Cook, the principal, you know she was unbelievable at the time and she was very strict and she got a lot of us straight.
Story_ID: 551155
Speaker 1: So we were talking about Cook Elementary School [Lucinda Cook Elementary School, Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Cook was the principal. Was the school named for her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cook Elementary School.
Speaker 1: And tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Oh, she was special, she was special. She was one of the best educators that I ever met and really look back at really putting my foot in the right place. She knew I had the smarts and she stayed on me. I had a tendency to like to talk a lot, spent a little time in her office. She'd always give me her chats, but she always would tell me that I was special. She would always flip that back at me. And she would say, you know, "When you learn to control a few things you gonna be able to go a long way." And I respected that in the long run because I just remember it was so special, the group of people, educators that I dealt with there who, you know, kept trying to make sure I stayed on the right path, you know. They saw something in me that maybe I didn't see and they made a point to either let my mom [Barbara Horton Symonds] know when I stepped out of line, you know, it was so close to campus, we were right on the campus, and then at that time the department of education for Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] would always run all of their student teachers through this program, through this school. So a lot of the students who knew my mom any time I got out of line they would also go back and tell her. So they had a lot of watchdogs on me but it was, but it was enjoyable. It was a great education.
Speaker 1: So who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of 'em, some of my best friends were Tippy Ingalls [ph.]. He grew up with me there. We used to always, we would, we would--a tandem, the people used to think we were twins at times because we were always together. Jeffrey Vere [ph.] was another close friend of mine. Benny Frye [ph.], another close friend of mine, all grew up in the community. James Beatty [ph.], he was a real good friend of mine. His mother ran a hamburger spot for many years on the campus that we used to call Ma Beatty's, and it was the breakfast spot and the hamburger spot in the evenings. Incredible food. I mean home, down home hand cooked unbelievable food and she had it for many years until she passed away. Danny Jackson [ph.] was another good friend of mine that grew up with me. Ron Johnson was a friend of mine that grew up with me and went to school, when I first went to school, I didn't go--I ended up at Central State, but I went to another college [Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana] beforehand for two years and played basketball there and then I finished up at Central State my last two years. But there was a lot of, there was a lot of friends. I can even--I'd be here all day talking to you about that.
Speaker 1: The students in this school, you said there, it was a very small school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many students about?
Speaker 2: I'm guessing, but maybe about three hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my number might be over.
Story_ID: 551156
Speaker 1: Now you talked about your friends and some of the things that their parents did. You said most of the students, their parents were teachers there [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in the community what other businesses were owned by blacks?
Speaker 2: In the community?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't a lot. It wasn't a lot back then. I mean, a lot of the--if, if their mother or father didn't work on the campus, they worked in a trade somewhere in Xenia [Ohio]. That was the other city right above us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so they had a job, like Tippy's [Tippy Ingalls (ph.)] dad, his mother was a cook on the campus, but his dad was a mechanic at one of the big trucking companies in Xenia for many years, you know. So all of them had some type of trade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, related or they worked for some company. You know a lot of folks worked for, at that time it was big, it was a lot of factories in Dayton, Ohio, and some companies, and some folks worked for some of the factories, you know, in Dayton, and there was a big [U.S.] Air Force base, I'm sorry, that was the other thing. It was an Air Force base and a lot of folks worked there. It was called Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio], which was a big one for the country, and a lot of the people of Wilberforce [Ohio] worked for Wright-Patterson. Probably I'd say about 30 or 40 percent of the community worked for Wright-Patterson.
Story_ID: 551157
Speaker 1: Now back to the teachers at school [Lucinda Cook Elementary School, Wilberforce, Ohio], were there any teachers that you remember besides Dr. Cook that tried to keep you on the right path? Do you remember anybody in particular?
Speaker 2: No, I got to think back just a hot second. She just passed away. Mrs. Gibbs [ph.] and--Mrs. Gibbs and Mrs. Cooper [ph.]. Those were the two that was probably my biggest influentials that, you know, 'cause they were very, they knew their stuff on the education side. They made sure my reading and writing was tight. I wasn't a big reader even though I knew how to read, I just wasn't the one that like to pick up books and read a lot, but they really, those two really stand out that, especially Mrs. Cooper, you know, because she really stayed on me because she knew my mother [Barbara Horton Symonds] very well so she really stayed on me a lot.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student. Grade wise I was doing very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I was an A, B student.
Story_ID: 551158
Speaker 1: What about sports? Did you play sports?
Speaker 2: Sports was my big thing. I was, I was pretty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Was that in elementary school [Lucinda Cook Elementary School, Wilberforce, Ohio] or did you--
Speaker 2: Well elementary school on into mid school on into high school [Xenia High School, Xenia, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Mid school [Warner Junior High School; Warner Middle School, Xenia, Ohio]. Okay.
Speaker 2: But in the elementary days I was a big, I mean, 'cause we grew up in Wilberforce [Ohio], football was our thing, you know, because we played the grassroots football, you know, right there in the backyard and the big guys would make us go upon against them so they beat up on us and stuff. And we all became pretty tough because of it. And I love football. I was a big Jim Brown nut at the time he played with the Cleveland Browns so I idolized him to no tomorrow, and when I was in elementary, you know I prided my game after him. And I was a pretty decent football player in elementary school. Then junior high I got through my heart murmur and I begin to start playing football again. But, it's, it's interesting, you know, now I can, now I can appreciate an athlete, because I sat out a year, I sat out a summer and part of the year, because I didn't play football, I was able to play basketball 'cause (unclear), and something, something happened and yet today I could never tell you, but I just didn't have the, it seemed like I had lost the heart, the strong heart that I had for the game, especially football. I just didn't have it like I had it before, you know. I was ruthless in my younger age, you know, I'd throw my body out there on anybody, but then being away from it, it just became to where I became hesitant on moves that I was making and not wanting to get hit as hard I used to be in the old day. Once you get that mindset in football you're no good, in my opinion.
Speaker 1: Do you think that was because of the heart murmur? Did you think that that interaction would do something to you or make you--
Speaker 2: I mean I think it's, it's not so much, I think the bigger thing was, is losing the feeling for the game somewhat, you know. It's a strange thing to say, you know, 'cause I still loved the game, but I just didn't have the passion and the heart that I had when I was, when I was younger and I don't know how it came about. To this day I think about it a lot, but I just didn't have it, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there something that took its place?
Speaker 2: Well basketball started to, started to grow on me. I was still short for a long time and I began to start liking basketball so I started slowly but surely working on my basketball game, you know. But I had a lot of work to do on that, in that area so, but that began to start taking the place of football as were moving forward and everything.
Story_ID: 551159
Speaker 1: So what junior high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Warner Junior High School [Warner Middle School, Xenia, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Warner?
Speaker 2: Warner. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell me about Warner.
Speaker 2: That was a predominately white school you know. There was a good number of African American kids but it was predominately white. Great education. I had a lot of friends over there and stuff. A lot of good teachers. I've always like about that, but, you know, the one thing I had to work on coming out of Cook Elementary School [Lucinda Cook Elementary School, Wilberforce, Ohio], we was, we were all majority black kids now coming into more of a mixed environment. That began, you had to balance that a little bit. Not that I couldn't, which I was able to do, but it was definitely a new day, you know, and playing the politics. Now I'm beginning to learn the first phase of politics in the sports, you know, because you start learning this, it's not always how good you are, it's, you know, do you have a relationship with the coach? Does your parents know somebody? Whatever. So I saw guys getting really not taken care of because of certain things.
Speaker 1: Certain things like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, circumstances, you know, "My dad's, you know, giving up a few dollars, you know, for the booster club. So, you know, I want to make sure my kid play." You didn't care how good the other kid is, and the coaches would turn their heads and do some of that, you know. So that was my first taste of some of the politics, you know, which wasn't so tasteful at the time, you know, but I was able to cope and I handled my own, held my own, know that, and grew from it, but it was a good education coming out the door.
Speaker 1: Now at Cook were all of your teachers black?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right. And what about at Warner?
Speaker 2: No, it was mixed.
Speaker 1: It was mixed, so you did have some black teachers?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: What about male teachers?
Speaker 2: I had some good male teachers. I can't remember everybody's name.
Speaker 1: But you did have some?
Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And was there any teachers at Warner that you can remember that might have encouraged or influenced you?
Speaker 2: The principal, Mr. West [ph.], at the time was a good principal. And he stayed on me and saw some good things in me and always give me good advice. You know, try to follow my dream and that was big for me.
Speaker 1: And your dream was?
Speaker 2: Well, my dream was to play college basketball, at all costs.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I thought you had lost your passion for football?
Speaker 2: I lost my passion for football, not for basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry, basketball. So you wanted to play college basketball.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Not, not football I had started losing my passion.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But not basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was trying to get that love for basketball where I wanted to work harder to get there.
Speaker 1: Were there any other extracurricular activities that you were a part of?
Speaker 2: No, not really, 'cause I was stuck, I was stuck in sports when I was in middle school and high school [Xenia High School, Xenia, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't--
Speaker 1: So you never took music?
Speaker 2: Well, I did. I played piano for a long time. My mom [Barbara Horton Symonds] had me play piano, you know, and then I picked up the drums from there. And so, yeah, I did play a little bit coming up. I didn't stick with it like I should have, but I did play a little bit.
Speaker 1: So did you take lessons at home, did you go--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had that--Mrs. Perry [ph.] was my piano teacher and we used to go to her house once a week. I kind of dreaded it at first, you know, because it was always cutting into my sports time, you know. But, I'm glad I had a chance, I wish I would have stuck with it 'cause I love the piano, I just wish, wish I had stuck with it.
Story_ID: 551160
Speaker 1: High school, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Xenia High School. X- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Xenia?
Speaker 2: X-E-N-I-A High School.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where was that located?
Speaker 2: Right there in Xenia, Ohio. Right by Wilberforce, Ohio. Probably about a two minute drive.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your experience in high school?
Speaker 2: It was very interesting. It was a good one, a lot of good friends there, lot of good friends. Good educators. I got a lot of time to, I got with the vice principal became a good ally of mine, Mr. Ackerman [ph.] and the principal who came in right about, I think my sophomore year was Mr. Roth [Ronald Roth], R-O-T-H, and you know I developed a great relationship with Mr. Ackerman, he used to be involved in football for many years in high school. He retired as a coach and just became full-time assistant principal. And we always talked sports a lot. He knew how much I loved it, but, you know, Xenia was a very funny area for sports. I mean there was a lot of good African American kids who had come up through the system, but then there was a lot that didn't make it because, you know, this or that. And I was one of them. And when I was coming up in my sophomore and junior year, I tried out for the team and probably--sophomore year I didn't--I thought I was good, but I was right there on the borderline so I get cut, the last one to get cut. Going into my junior year, I really worked my game and I knew my game was better than a lot of the other kids, but he had already had kids sized up from last year and bring kids up, blah, blah, blah, and so I didn't make the cut. So I was pretty upset about it. It was heartbreaking because I had worked hard, you know, I had put my blood sweat and tears into the summer, really trying to get this. And I had just, once he did that, I had made a commitment to myself saying that I am not going to let this man shut me down. I want to prove to him that I could make a college basketball team. So going into my senior year I never tried out. Everybody tried to get me to try. I said I'm not trying out anymore, I'm through. I'm just going to work on my game. And I worked my game really, really good where I got pretty decent, and this friend of mine, Ron Johnson, which I mentioned earlier, he was 6'7" so everybody was trying to recruit him because he was a big, big guy. So I said look, well look, I'm going to tag along with him and maybe I might something out of the rough. And so we made quite a few stops at different schools and then finally we stopped at Saint Joseph University in Indiana [sic. Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana], which is right under, right before Lafayette [Indiana] okay. So I talked to the coach and I said, "Look, just give me an opportunity and I can make this team." So he had us play against some of his guys over there for recruiting purposes and we were just working 'em and I had a good feeling then I could play there. So I say, you know, I'm comfortable. My buddy also signed to come and get a scholarship, I didn't get one. So, we get in camp the first year and my buddy who had a scholarship gets mono [mononucleosis]. So now I'm basically, he got to go home because he's getting pretty sick. So I went there by myself and Indiana, they were pretty cool, but that was education for me. But my basketball game kept improving and it got to the point of my freshman year I was able to move up from JVs [junior varsity] to varsity in midseason and then for the rest of the year I played on varsity, and that was an incredible feeling. To go from not making a team to now be on a Division II team, team. So it was big.
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, just going back a little bit, was there someone who, I know that basketball was your heart, that's what you wanted to do, were you looking for any scholarships beside, you know, you said that you didn't get one, but that was because you just went to that particular school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but had you been trying to get any other kind of scholarship?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean, you know, you, I mean I had, I went to a lot of camps, talked to a lot of coaches so I was sending letters out to different colleges that I wanted to try to, try to--but it was hard because, you know, like I coach a lot of kids now and the numbered game is so large you know.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone there to help you go through the process of trying to get into a college?
Speaker 2: A little bit, that counselor, but not really the machinery I was looking for, you know, I mean today's world which I've learned with my older two sons [Demetrius Symonds and Karrington Symonds], you got to market your kids you know. If you don't market them nobody else will, you know, so that was my take away from it.
Story_ID: 551161
Speaker 1: So this is Saint Joseph's [Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you went to and played for Division II.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: I stayed there two years. And I--
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about the experience, once you got there and--
Speaker 2: The experience was a very, it was a very enlightening experience, because I now, you know, my background was Episcopalian and now I'm going to a Catholic college and it was predominately white. I came in late my freshman year because my sister had graduated from Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] so I missed freshman orientation, so I walk in the door and I had like a 2.4, 2.5 average. I walk in for the first day on campus and the president is speaking to all the freshman. He says, "I want to welcome this class of such, such, such and such. The average GPA [grade point average] is 3.5." I'm looking around like 3.5. Who's getting 3.5 in this place, you know, so that was a real eye opener for me. So now I get in the classroom, you know, and the first day, the professor is saying, "Okay, well you have--tomorrow I want all this book read and then deliver this whole book back. Bring me the book report by tomorrow." I'm like, whoa, I've never really read a book in a day. That, that's real interesting. So that began to be a great education for me and it had me where I had to learn a lot, you know. It also helped me to improve my learning skills because I didn't have good learning skills going into that, and it helped me. It took me a little while to adjust, about a semester to adjust and my coach came to me, I was like at 2.1, 2.2 just barely getting over. He said, "Look, you want to stay here, you got to do, you got to do a 2.0 plus. You know, you got to get these grades up." So I got on the grind the second semester after January and really pulled my grades up. And then I got to getting comfortable. I started understanding the system, you know. Because what a lot of people don't understand in college is that you have a lot of time. It's how you manage your time, you know, I mean we tend to, I was telling them I was speaking at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] the other day and I was telling the kids, you guys got luxury. You hear me speak for an hour and now you fixing to go back to your room and sleep for three hours. I can't go back to sleep. I gotta go to work. I said that's the difference when you get in the real world, you know. But now you got time to take a little break. Now what you do in between that break is a do all end all. You know, if you decide to just go back and fall asleep instead of going into the library taking care of a few things, get ahead of your game, which a lot of kids don't understand that, you know. So, that was then the begin--start turning my heads and start understanding, I got to get ahead of the game a little bit. But the real education was, was that I think more than anything, was a lot of white kids had never dealt with black kids. I mean I dealt with some Jewish kids that said to me openly, "Curtis [HistoryMaker Curtis Symonds], I've never been around a black guy before. You're the first black guy I ever been around." He said, "And I had so much of a different impression of the black community from what I saw on television." I mean their whole contact was television. And you could see where, how the world today is so uneducated because the media has really confused a lot of people's mind on imagery and because of it, people have a subjective thinking of how things are.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, like the first time I went to a, the best experience I ever had was while I was there, this buddy of mine, we're still very close, I haven't seen him in a while. He lives in Indianapolis [Indiana]. His dad was Italian. I mean it was like walking into the Sopranos' house. I mean he told me right off the bat, he said, "Look man, my dad doesn't deal with African--he doesn't deal with blacks." And so his dad comes to pick us up and I'm staying the weekend with him. So his dad comes to pick us up, sends a car to pick us up and never been in a limo before in my life, big stretch limo come driving on the campus, you know, we get in the car, we driving down there, and first night we're having dinner, long table, you know, eight, nine people at the table. I'm sitting in the middle of it. So his dad says, "Okay Curtis, tell me some things about you." So I go on and tell him a little bit about my background. He says, "Danny [ph.] tells me you're a great basketball player and this, da, da, da, da." So we started talking and we getting in great conversation about sports and everything. And for some reason me and his father really hit it off. And, we still are great friends. And, he said to me, Danny was my friend, he said, "Man, my dad has never taken to people like that." He said, "You, you're special." I was like wow, you know, and, you know, I felt very honored to be in this man's house for a weekend. And I got treated fairly. I didn't get treated like everybody's eyes were on me, you know, and just like what's this black guy doing sitting in my house, you know, it never felt like that. I never had that feel and I felt like somebody was welcoming me into their house, which was very interesting, you know coming out of that community, especially when I was already in light of them going into the door. But I like those kind of challenges because, you know, like I said earlier, people just have the wrong impressions about us until they meet us, and then you're able to really give somebody the true background of who you are and what you're all about, you know, white or black.
Story_ID: 551162
Speaker 1: Well, have you had an opposite experience of meeting someone who just like, I just don't want to deal with African Americans?
Speaker 2: Not really for me. I don't know, I think what I got from my mom [Barbara Horton Symonds] is that my warmness to you in a conversation just knocks that, that window down quick, you know. I mean the toughest people who've tried to be there can't stay there with me, you know, because it's just not my aura.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, so I really have not gotten anyone who has really turned me off like that or I've turned them off like that, you know, and I think that's really a part of me that came into through my mom.
Speaker 1: Well, is, has there ever been a time where you can say that you have blatantly been discriminated against or where racism just creeps, you know, crept in, and you had to deal with the situation?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, you know, that, that mirror never changes, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Well I'm specifically talking about in the college arena.
Speaker 2: Oh, in college arena?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I think because at Saint Joe's [Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana] where I would have been, I mean, the only time, no, I take that back, let me give you one experience. I do remember one experience. We were as a team in a little small town somewhere in Indiana and we were playing a game and, we had just finished a game rather, and this was the '70s [1970s] and I walked into a restaurant with the team and my partner, it was just me and him were the only blacks on the team and the lady refuses to feed us, you know. She says, "I don't feed no African Americans in here." We were like wow. And this was the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Right, cause you graduated from high school [Xenia High School, Xenia, Ohio] in '73 [1973] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy- '73 [1973]. Right, exactly. So that was mind blowing for me, you know, and that here it was the '70s [1970s] and then also, probably the other one that was a mind blower was when I was in Indiana to see the true KKK [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. I saw 'em.
Speaker 1: You saw them.
Speaker 2: Oh, I saw 'em.
Speaker 1: What did you see?
Speaker 2: I saw the burning, the flag, you know, and--
Speaker 1: And you were where?
Speaker 2: I was in Indiana at the time. I mean that was a rude, that was a rude awakening, you know, but at the same point in time, you know it's like anything else in today's world, you gotta watch your back at all times, you know. But it was an experience, it was a true experience.
Story_ID: 551163
Speaker 1: Going back to college athletics, there's a lot of talk about the different divisions and whether student athletes should get paid. What are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well I think that number one, the different divisions is, is just a bunch of garbage. I think that, and I'm just, I'm a little prejudice in my thinking, but as an African American, I think most kids should go to a HBCU college [historically black colleges and universities] and get the experience, and understanding the culture, understanding the history, knowing where they came from. They're caught up in this whole mirror that Division I sports is the best way to go because you see the Dukes [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], the Georgetowns [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], all those, it's about education at the end of the day, you know.
Speaker 1: But, but is it truly about education when it comes to how the coaches are recruiting the kids (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, it's a business, it's a business on the athletic side. It's a business on the athletic side.
Speaker 1: Let's stop here then we'll talk more about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 551164
Speaker 1: So you said you did not get a scholarship to go, how did you pay for college [Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana], because we were getting ready to talk about how the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association], yeah, and the whole thing about recruiting students to play and whether they should get paid to play.
Speaker 2: Well, I went on the assumption coming out of high school [Xenia High School, Xenia, Ohio] that if I made the team, based on what the coach had told me, that I would look at getting a scholarship in my second year, so that my mother [Barbara Horton Symonds] and father [Norman Symonds] came out the first year and paid for it for me. And I got a grant, and I got a little scholarship money for some education sides, so that's how I paid that first year. After my freshman year, I came back to the coach and said, "Coach, you know, I'm on varsity, and you got guys on varsity not playing and I'm playing up under them and they getting scholarships, now what do I have to do to get mine, to get a little help here?" And he started kind of heeing and hawing that he already basically committed these dollars to these other guys, and there was no way he could pull the dollars to support me, blah, blah, blah, so that was kind of dejecting a little bit because I took his word that, you know, he was gonna come through and help me out, you know, on the scholarship side, you know, and so in my second year, in my second year, my mother and father paid for it again, but I was a little torn because I, and I made varsity again the second year, but, and I played quite a bit again, but I was just kind of bothered that, you know, he didn't come through like he had said, and then I, and then the light went off and I figured out why, because he was trying, he was getting ready to leave and after my sophomore year, he accepted a new job to Bowling Green college in Ohio [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio]. And so, but he wanted to try to see his seniors through that he had brought through. So I talked to him about transferring with him, going back home, you know, and he was like, no, no, no, we're straight, so I couldn't send my parents through another two years with that, so my thinking was that let me transfer out because I could go to Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and not have to pay a dime because my mother worked there. So instead of trying to keep them, you now, putting money out, I decided to transfer back home in '76 [1976], and I did that, and then I made the team at Central, and played seventy-sev- '77 [1977] to '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 551165
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the experience transferring from one school [Saint Joseph's College, Rensselaer, Indiana] to another.
Speaker 2: It was unbelievable because, you know, I had grown up, I had grown up on the campus, so I became numb to the campus and that's why I wanted to get away from them, at first. But I was so glad at the end of the day that I was able to transfer back because it has made me a better person because of the network of people that I finished, that I got to know my two years at Central [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. The HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] experience, the opportunity to be around my mother [Barbara Horton Symonds], she taught me, you know, as a teacher now, and as a mother. You know, I had to take a couple of her classes because I was in physical education, so, of course, she was riding me the hardest, you know, in the classroom. And that was a great experience, and for a long time I tried to, it was also a kind of cat and mouse game because I tried to hide from a lot of people that that was my mother so they didn't know that I had any kind of advantage 'cause soon as they think that, or know it, then they assume, oh, that's his mother, he's automatically gone get taken care of. So I really tried to keep that away from people for a long time. Then it finally got out after I'd been there for like about four or five months, you know, that who I was, and who my mother was, but it was a great experience all the way around, and one that I think more African American young men and women should experience. The game of athletics now has become to financial and I mean, the end product, you know. I mean most of these guys that are going to D-I [Division I] football programs and basketball, really basketball more than anything, is they all trying to get to the NBA [National Basketball Association], you know, that's their goal. You know if they've been told they're anybody, then they're trying to get paid. And it's a shame because they lose sight of their education. Now a lot of pros I talk to now say, well, you know I don't belittle them at all, if they can make that money, they should make it and run, you know. If somebody is going to throw that kind of stupid money at 'em to play basketball. And they're probably right, you know. But I think that what has happened over the years is that, historically black colleges, because they don't get television exposure like a lot of the other colleges, that doesn't expose them kids to what it's all about and because, you know, you go to a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] here or something, and your facilities aren't the same as Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], facility wise, you're like, "(makes noise) I'm going to Georgetown man, I got a weight room, I got this," well, you know, those are the little showcase things that kids look at.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's the responsibility of the coaches to make these student athletes understand that very few of them are going to go on into a career in the pros?
Speaker 2: No question. I think in today's world that the coaches don't reaffirm that enough, you know, how tough it is, you know, to get to that next level. Or let them know up front as a freshman, you're a diamond in the rough and the only way you get there is you got to commit a lot of time and effort to improve your game to get there. And like I tell kids all the time who are not Division I, if you are good they will find you, okay.
Speaker 1: Simple as that, huh?
Speaker 2: Simple as that.
Story_ID: 551166
Speaker 1: Well, what about the fact that most Division I schools make so much money even in advertising and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --jerseys and whatever and these kids are not getting what they need, you know, there are some stories about having a four year scholarship, which is, that just means books.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They can't afford to do anything else, but yet they can't work (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right.
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I feel bad for these kids because the majority of these kids come out tough, you know, you look at today's numbers and you got 50, 60 percent of the kids come from single parents. So it's tough, you know, and so, you know, when they get on that campus, they're looking for every avenue they can get. So if a booster comes up and say I can buy a suit for you, you never had a suit, what's wrong with that, you know. Why is the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] now suspending a kid because he found out a booster gave him a suit? The kid didn't have a suit. What's wrong about that? Now, I think what the outright is that, you know, you got to control that money side some kind of way because now if you're throwing a ton of money out at a kid, it could make a difference versus that, I mean they're tired of eating jelly sandwiches. If you give a stipend for what they bring in the door you got, you know, the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] puts in 104,000 students every Saturday during football season, cha-ching, cha-ching, cha-ching. What's wrong with giving, you know, the forty guys that play forty dollars to get something to eat? It's gonna last them a day, that evening rather. What's wrong with that? For the amount of money they make at 140,000--at 104,000 faces that come in the door along with concessions, parking, and all that stuff? It's pretty hefty ticket at the end of the day. So, I think that my feeling strongly is that they should create a stipend for these folks, you know, and allow them to live. It's the same thing that me and you go through every day. Just live, you know. I mean these guys are scraping and they're putting on the best of their best for you. They're entertaining you so alumni and others come back. They deserve something on that.
Story_ID: 551167
Speaker 1: So now back to Central [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you decide that your major, what are you going to do with your major once you finish school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that's a really tough part, you know, I think, I was talking to a student yesterday, Friday rather, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], when you come out of college you really aren't sure what you want to do, you know, so now you're in the pond fishing, trying to figure it out. What is the right fit for me, you know? And it takes a minute. For me, it took me a couple of jumps before I finally said, you know what, regardless of whatever I do, I'm going into the telecommunications business. I don't even care what the cost is, I'm going in and I'm gonna make this my career.
Speaker 1: So what did you do first?
Speaker 2: When I came out of college?
Speaker 1: Um-hm?
Speaker 2: I managed a sporting goods store in a little town called Beavercreek, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of the sporting goods store now. But I did that because I was assistant manager and they convinced me to stay around and they made me a full-time manager, so I loved it. It was sports, I could get all the gear I wanted half price, had a little business. It was nice, but I didn't realize it was family owned so it ended up going out of--the wife ended up taking total control of it 'cause she was suing the husband and the whole nine yards. Paxton's Sporting Goods store, that's what it was called, Paxton's Sporting Goods store in Beavercreek, Ohio. And so when it went out of business, I tried to take another route. I came back to my old school for career day one day. They be having at the same time I was leaving and hooked in with State Farm insurance, and try to get in their management program. So I had moved to Columbus like in May or something and got in the management program, but that just wasn't, I just didn't like insurance, just wasn't my cup of tea. Just too much, I can't say it on camera, but it was too much for me, you know. So I got out of it after about three or four months, and then it was, I just about ready to come back, I was in Columbus, Ohio at the time with State Farm, and I was about to come back to Xenia [Ohio] and start student teaching to try to get back into teaching, and a buddy of mine called me that summer in Columbus and said, "Look, why don't you work for me this summer, make some fast cash laying underground cable for Time Warner Cable, Columbus?" I said, "You know what, I have nothing to do for the summer, let's do it." So I, he had a contract job. We laid cable and I started falling in love with cable television so I started reading up more. So after it ended, I did make some decent cash, I came back to Xenia and was getting ready to--I was substitute teaching and ran into my old principal, Mr. Ackerman [ph.], and I said, "Hey look, I really like to get into this cable thing, but I don't know how. Do you have any suggestions?" He said, "Well it's funny you ask me," he said, "you should go contact Janine Cosand [ph.]." I said, "Oh great." Now Janine Cosand make the world small, was my old Cub Scout teacher. So I thought she originally, when he said that, she was like a secretary, I was just going to feed a resume to. I didn't realize she was the regional manager. So I literally ran her down on the street one day and told her that I needed a job and I wanted to get in cable. She said, "Wow, you know, we're looking for an accountant as part of management," but, I said, "Look, I've done all that. I can put together budgets, blah, blah, blah." She gave me my first shot, and history is from there.
Speaker 1: So this was Continental Cable- Cablevision [Continental Cablevision, Inc.; Comcast MO Group, Inc.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Yep.
Story_ID: 551168
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Well what happened was in '79 [1979] I went onboard with her as her regional marketing assistant and she had, we had a regional office in Columbus [Ohio] and Springfield, Ohio. So we had a region of probably about, we managed about four or five different cable systems fell in our region. So it was my job to work with her to make sure things got coordinated to the managers and the regional office. But it was really was also grooming job to, when a manager's job got open, to slot me in to a manager's job. So luckily for me, after being on the job about six or seven months, a manager's job did open up and it couldn't have been a better site. It was in my hometown I grew up in, Xenia, Ohio. So she put me in there as a manager of the cable system, and I was one of the youngest managers in the country, because I was only like twenty-three, twenty-four years old at the time. So that was my first enlightenment of running a cable system, and it was a great, it was a great tutelage because when I came on, when I came in rather, we were in the process of rebuilding the cable system, so I got to learn how to build a cable system which was to me just unbelievable, you know. And I also got a chance to learn how to deal with the politics because at that time franchising was a big thing in cable television, you know, and it was a lot of that flowing in our area so I was involved in a lot of that through Continental Cablevision [Continental Cablevision, Inc.; Comcast MO Group, Inc.] because they were the big cable operator for the whole State of Ohio.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Continental Cablevision.
Speaker 1: Okay, Continental.
Speaker 2: They were based out of Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were one of the big dogs at the time of the '70s [1970s]. So, that gave me a great opportunity so I learned a lot from Janine [Janine Cosand (ph.)], she was one of my first mentors in this industry and really kind of taught me, you know, she was the one that probably gave me my best advice years ago. She said, "Your personality is going to take you a long way in this business." I didn't take it to heart when she first said that, but it has. And I thank her for it a lot, every day, you know, because she is, she was one that really put me, pointed me down the right road. But then after being there for three years and building the cable system and getting things really flowing real wide, I got comfortable, where I'd come to the job, put my feet upon the desk and had everything working like a clock, had great people working for me so, we had gone good grinds, but I had everything totally under control. So then I got itchy then, I wanted to look at what are the other opportunities out there. So I used to have a lot of programmers come see me like ESPN guys, MTV [Music Television; MTV] guys, and I wanted to get in that business. I wanted to get on the programming side. I wanted to learn how that ticked because I already knew the cable operative side. Now I felt that if I just begin to get around the programming side, I could really diversify my profile. So I was telling one buddy of mine from ESPN, he said you should contact this guy in Chicago [Illinois] that's starting, he's involved with his new cable network called Satellite News Channel, and that was the channel back in the day that rivaled CNN. It was just like, it was a twenty-four hour news channel. The difference was we provided a little cable operator with what we call local breaks, okay?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I came to Chicago and got on with Satellite News Channel and then I was there for about three to four months.
Speaker 1: Okay, three to four months?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what year are we in?
Speaker 2: We're in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 551169
Speaker 1: And then, then it was satellite cablevision, I mean satellite television rather, I'm sorry. That's when Ted Turner came in about three months later and bought the network out. And that was a rude awakening, you know, because that was my first real glimpse of Corporate America because we begi- it was funny, the Satellite News Channel was owned by Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company] and ABC, so you would think these two big dogs would not let this happen, you know, and they kept telling us how they weren't going to let it happen, that everything was under control, but we were hearing rumbles in the street, and I remember coming into a cable operator's office in Iowa, just like you walk in the door right here. He had his back to me, his feet up, he was reading Wall Street [The Wall Street Journal], and he said, "Curtis [HistoryMaker Curtis Symonds], did you see Wall Street today?" I'm like, "No, why?" He said, "I think you better read this." So he turns around, he hands it to me. It just says in the caption, "Satellite News Channel just been bought by Ted Turner." So I called our office and everybody is like, in no mood to talk, but it's done. I'm like wow. So that was the beginning of that. And then--
Speaker 2: With that, talking about different systems and different parts of the country now, Ted Turner is in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: --and there's no cable in Atlanta yet.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think it comes in '82 [1982]. In 1982 was when cable--Atlanta first got cable.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it started coming, it was on the outsides of Atlanta, it wasn't so much in the city.
Speaker 2: It wasn't in metro Atlanta at all.
Speaker 1: It was on the outside of Atlanta at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause the big cities didn't start getting wired until the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, that's, that's when that happened, you know. But I was able to luckily spin off from Satellite News Channel and get on with ESPN.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's really where my game became to really start rolling.
Story_ID: 551170
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I was with ESPN, I came on with ESPN back in '82 [1982] as the ad sales consultant, and that responsibility was, it was something new that the cable industry was trying to get going with every cable programmer like at ESPN has to give the cable operator two minutes of local time to sell. So my job was to help the cable operators sell that local time on ESPN, so we created three guys like me to cover the country and I did that for about a year and closed on a lot of systems trying to do this concept, and ended up getting promoted to district affiliate sales manager, which was a big bump, so now, I'm now running the whole Chicago [Illinois] office now, for the Midwest. And that was a great experience, you know, because it raised me up a notch and it also raised my exposure up, you know now that I'm running this, running the office, it begins to start getting my name out there a little bit more. And then what I was trying to do there was now at ESPN begin to try to create my [HistoryMaker] Curtis Symonds brand, because I wanted to grow, and knowing there weren't many African Americans in the business, I was trying to figure out how to get slotted, how to be around the right people, and worked it the best way I could, you know, and I was able to do that. And, I was able to climb up the ladder and get a lot of respect in the industry from them, you know, for speaking and all the other stuff. And then in about '88 [1988], I was hitting the wall at ESPN and a VP [vice president] slot came open in New York [New York]. Well, myself and the current chairman of ESPN, George Bodenheimer were going for the job. Well, that should tell you what happened. He ended up getting the job and I had to end up working for him. Well, we knew that wasn't gonna work, and so, you know, we tried to play through, we tried to work it the best we could, but we knew, you know, smartly that that was not going to work. So it happened to be just a stroke of God, Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] calls me in '88 [1988], says, you know, "Hey, what about, I need a guy to handle my sales, the whole sales for all the country, all fifty states. (Unclear) staff, da da da da." I was like, wow. So I came to see him. We sat down and talked about it and he, you know, I started checking in with buddies of mine in the industry saying what do you think, and everybody thought I was crazy, cause they like, why would you leave ESPN to go to Bob, who can barely pay his bills. That's just lud- that's suicide waiting to happen.
Speaker 1: And tell me who Bob is.
Speaker 2: Bob Johnson.
Speaker 1: I know, but--
Speaker 2: Well, Bob was the founder of BET, Black Entertainment Television, and great man, great vision, and was able to really educate me on why I should come. And he made every point that constantly refer back to A, you know, I'm building a vision here, you want to be part of, you know, because there's not going to be a lot of African American networks around at the end of the day, and to be a part of it, at your age, I was thirty-two at the time, big upside. But my concern was, I was a little, you know, worried, to say the least, then also uplift my family again to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I get the same thing I had at Satellite News Channel but now I'm in D.C. with the cost of living four times Chicago, which I got a shell shock coming out of Ohio with Chicago's cost of living. So I'm saying to myself to Bob, "How real is this? You're not going to walk out on me soon as I sign?" He's like, "No, no, no." So, in less than, I came on with BET in July of '88 [1988] and then we begin to start making some good moves with the network. As you were just mentioning, the cable systems were beginning to start opening up for the big cities, D.C., Atlanta [Georgia], New York, all of them are starting to get fully wired which would mean more cable homes for BET. So we were able to grow this thing quite a bit, and quite rapidly. So we went from in '88 [1988] to 2001, eighteen thousand subscribers up to seventy thousand- 70 million subscribers plus. Not a bad number at the end of the day.
Story_ID: 551171
Speaker 1: Tell me about the initial group of people at BET that worked along with you. Tell me about them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a good group. It really was a great group of people, I mean it was a family, you know. When I first started out there, that was the love of BET. There was six EVPs [executive vice president] with me, Janis Thomas was one. She ran our advertising sales management group. James Ebron, he was EVP of affiliate sales, James--Jeff Lee [HistoryMaker Jefferi Lee] was EVP of programming, and then we had, we had a few of these changed at the end--by the time when I first came on, we had Antonia Duncan who was our CFO. But it was a family, it was a real family, I mean everything that we did we discussed at the table, like going to dinner. Everything we did was discussed at the table. And so you really felt good about decisions being made, right or wrong, you know, because it was always discussed some kind of way. Not always the decisions you all agree upon, you know, but you learn sometimes to swallow your tongue and try to come on the next one, you know, but when we went public in '92 [1992], that's when I begin to start feeling the family was getting ready to get into cousins and uncles, you know, quickly. And we did not have the cohesiveness of the early days in my thinking, like it was.
Speaker 1: What was the vision early on about BET?
Speaker 2: BET was all about diversifying the African American audience. We know they loved, we wanted to hit every angle that the African Americans dealt with, from leisure, to reading, to food, to clothing, to network. So our goal was try to position Black Entertainment Television into every one of those avenues, so we first started out with the magazine side. We had Emerge magazine and we created a new magazine called Young Sisters and Brothers, or YSB, that was our first. Then we got into the clothing line, then we created a clothing line. That was after BET. What else did we do, clothing line, and then we went into the Internet business 'cause Bob [Robert L. Johnson], Bob's like me, you know, I'm very, very simple on the computer. Don't like to use the computer, very, very rare, you know, that he gets back to you on an email, but I had pitched him on, like setting up a meeting with Bill Gates, so finally he did and we started BET.com, oh I take that back, msbet [msbet.com] is what it started out. Now it's BET.com. But that was the other angle. And then he got into the clothing business. We did a little line of clothes for men, and then into the restaurant business. The other side of BET Soundstages. So that's how all of that evolved, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it really just started from videos because I remember BET, I mean BET--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: --was just videos.
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: --and I guess the reason why they used videos because it wasn't very expensive to, to get.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right, right. I mean that was a big part of the gig was the fact that programming, it wasn't cost to programming. All I had to do was have you sit there and just say, "Coming up tonight, [HistoryMaker] Curtis Symonds and the video." So I pay you for an hour. That's it. I got a guy back here inserting the videos every time you come, so I pay two people versus a  full blown production.
Story_ID: 551172
Speaker 1: In '92 [1992] the company goes public. Tell me what that meant for BET [Black Entertainment Television].
Speaker 2: Well, number one, a public company means now you have shareholders where we were basically governing our own destination before then. Once you become a public company, now you, now you have to have public meetings because these individuals or assets or foundations have invested money into BET, so now they are involved. They have a voice, you know. We have shareholder meetings, and they want to know what we're all about, what we're doing, what's our direction, what's the goals? So, when we went public that door opened, and it was a big door, because we had never dealt with that before, and certainly Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] because he never had anybody tell him how to spend his money. Now people were telling him how and when. And so that was a big education for him moving forward, and, you know, he adjusted, in my opinion, all right, but it was kind of a blow to him.
Speaker 1: What about sponsorship? Did they not dictate at all?
Speaker 2: Sponsorship. We had a tough time. That, that, again, it's almost like who I am with women's sports. Educating white America on the power of black American spending, you know. It took us to probably, this is now '07 [2007], it probably took to '98 [1998] before advertisers truly looked to BET as a real viable sponsorship, you know. They would always say, "Ah, you know, I could go get ESPN and still reach the African American home," you know. They didn't really appreciate our direct contact, until we ran a couple of things where it moved dollars. And then all of a sudden, they say, oh, they got a little power now, you know, they can move some things. But we had been preaching that over the last ten to fifteen years, you know. So it was, it's a real hustle. It was a big hustle on them, and GQ public [ph.] never really understood, that's why people, I had to explain to people, "Why do you want video?" I said, "Well, think about this, on a business plan, if you're only getting five hundred dollars a spot, and you got a forty bill- 40 million sub-base, something should tell you that's not working, okay, versus if you were getting two thousand, three thousand a spot against that audience, now, it makes a lot of sense at the end of the day." And that's the one thing, a lot of, again, GQ public didn't understand, and when I finally broke it down to 'em in our meetings, or town hall thing I was having, they were like, "Oh wow, I didn't know that you guys were selling that (unclear)." I'm like, "We have no alternative. We're backed in the corner, okay." So until they begin to understand who we were all about, that was a natural thing for 'em, you know, and now in the new day and age I think they, they've definitely have stepped it up quite a bit, but it should, because it's almost 80 million plus now, so there's no reason for them not to get their due at the end of the day.
Story_ID: 551173
Speaker 1: So tell me what happened after '92 [1992], after you, after the company goes public?
Speaker 2: We begin to form BET2, because Bob [Robert L. Johnson] was basically trying to get some more funding to create this new company which is BET2. Now, he had asked me and a few other EVPs [executive vice president] too, because we all got options, whether or not we wanted to throw in some more options, and that was really the telltale at the end of the day, whether or not that was going to work. Oh, am I leaning up too close, 'cause I know I move around a lot. So, you know, that's when things started to get a little, the world started changing, because money is a terrible thing. Just, it breeds on you, you know, and so we thought we were going another way, he decided he wanted to move into a different way, so things started to unravel at work as really, as kosher as all of us would like to have seen happen, you know, and some of us played along for a while, but at the end of the day, it just wasn't good for everybody.
Speaker 1: You worked with [HistoryMaker] Louis Carr, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know him very well. He was a good man. Louis had been involved, Louis had been in the grind for years, you know. He's done an (unclear) job at BET [Black Entertainment Television] with little help to get off the ground, you know. I remember the day when he first, when I first came on board, Louis probably had been on maybe a year or two at the most and he was working out of a little office in Chicago [Illinois] with hardly no help, you know, and what he's grown today, he's done a good job, you know. He's been, he's been a major player on the success level, because he's been a driving force on the asset side to try to get those dollars.
Story_ID: 551174
Speaker 1: Tell me about the change in demographics for the BET [Black Entertainment Television] audience.
Speaker 2: Demographics?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, I would assume, and this might not be right, that the first group of people who were watching BET were younger because it was videos.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did the age group change (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as different programming--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --became available?
Speaker 2: Yeah. When I came on in '88 [1988], we were really more of a twenty-five on up audience at that time 'cause Donnie [Donnie Simpson] was basically our voice on 'Video Soul,' 'Bobby Jones Gospel' was right behind him, was getting our best ratings, so those two alone were driving that twenty-five plus audience. Then our advertising guys, Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Carr] and them came in and said we can't sell that audience any longer. We gotta go young. And that's when they went from twelve to twenty-four audience and they became more of a heavy push for a lot of the crazy videos that are on there now, you know, because the idea was, let's feed these videos to the young kids and they're going to push their parents to buy more cable television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's really was the mentality going into it, as they put it together, you know. But I think they hurt themselves because I always kept preaching to Bob [Robert L. Johnson] and nothing about it could have been better if we had became a full fledged network. More well rounded, because we were the voice of black America. People looked at BET for everything. (Unclear) would have looked at BET if we had our act together, you know, because they would have respected it. But, what happened was, in my opinion, is that we still can't get away from the Joneses. There was a lot of people jealous of Bob at the time, what he had created, and how he was trying to take it so we couldn't get the real community backing that we really needed 'cause somebody was always trying to stab him in the back one way or the other, you know, and that was a big thing, but if we had had all the entertainers, the actors, the athletes, everybody step up and say, I'm gonna do this for BET, we could have changed the world with that thing.
Story_ID: 551175
Speaker 1: Well, you're talking about how, you know, people were looking at Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson], and this is a black man who is in a business. It's okay to be wealthy if you're an athlete--
Speaker 2: Right. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or a rap, rapper--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or whatever, but in business why is it not acceptable to be wealthy, as a black businessman?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question, Denise [Denise Gines], on that. I think people assume the arrogance. They just assume, you know, that if you got a lot, a bunch of money, you can't be a normal person anymore and that you're a SOB, 'cause now, I call Denise's office and Denise tells me, "Ah, my secretary's gonna handle that." Where years ago, Denise should have just told me, "Hold on, I'll talk to him." So I think, I think that a lot of that fake perception in there because a lot of people misjudge Bob a lot. Bob is not a bad individual. He been around a long time, you know--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You know, I think people misjudge Bob a lot. He's not a bad individual and I worked with him for fourteen years. I mean I got to see all kinds of sides of him. And the one thing I can say about the man is that he's a true man, you know. I mean there's gonna be people who probably would have questioned my opinion of him because, you know, they'll probably say I'm a little one sided because I worked for him, but I seen him outside of work environment. You now, I seen him be a man, be a father, be a husband, you know. I seen all those sides of him. I seen him cry, and I seen all those sides of him, the human sides. The other people haven't been close enough to get there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I think that, you now, just in the mental thinking on your question is just perception more than anything, built in perception, you know. Just like I would say about athletes, people always say, "Aw, such, such, such is this." Like do they really know the person? Anybody sat down and talked to him. All you see is the interview. You didn't like the interview. It didn't go the way you liked. So now you have a perception of that athlete, you know. That kind of thing, you know. So I think that's the thing that just goes with it.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess, this would have been a change in, not only in his life, but also your life and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and everybody had to go, come up the ladder and come up in status.
Speaker 2: You know, Denise, the thing that I still love about BET [Black Entertainment Television] is the people that were there. You can't take that away from them. I saw people that came up with me in '88 [1988] to 2001 is as long as I lasted for fourteen years that are doing good things. Some of them are still at BET, some of them have branched out and are doing some tremendous things in the entertainment community, you know. And that's what it's all about--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to see people grow, you know, and to see people in the early days that were there for the cause. It was all about, it wasn't the money. The money wasn't great. It was about the cause, what we were doing. Everybody felt great about what we were doing. What it meant. If we could just turn that corner and get people to start thinking more about what BET was all about, you know, and we could have done that, you know, if we had changed up a couple of things and gotten away from the videos a little bit.
Speaker 1: What would you have liked to have seen besides videos?
Speaker 2: I think we could have gotten more into documentaries, I think we could have gotten more into the education side, I think we could have, should have gotten more into the sports side, you know. I think those are some of the areas I think would have been strong at the end of the day, you know, and once people saw it, they'd be like wow, you know. I mean look it, the wild thing about it at the end of the day is if you look at the other networks who realize the power of this audience, TNT--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the programming they're dealing with, you know, the movies that they've done, targeted, and they've taken stories that are great stories, and targeted to our audience, you know. Those kinds of things make the difference at the end of the day, you know, which most people don't get, you know, and then we wonder why we don't have any loyalty to our audience, well we're not delivering product that make you want to be loyal to your audience. And that's really where we started to losing. We just said, we got out to this money hungry and said, we're just going to take the videos and just ride it, ride it, ride it, ride it, ride it, but what's happened is now you've made a network despicable, because basically what's happened is that the people like me and you who grew upon on the network, well we can't watch the network no more. It's just not a place for us to return to. It should be, it should be, but it's not there, you know. So we have to go to other avenues to try to get enrichment. And it shouldn't be like that, you know, it shouldn't be like that.
Story_ID: 551176
Speaker 1: Now you said you stayed there until 2001, but before you get to that point, tell me about Action Pay-Per-View and BET International.
Speaker 2: It was all a good, great experience. The first one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were these programs that--
Speaker 2: These were networks.
Speaker 1: Networks, okay.
Speaker 2: These were new networks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What we were, we were looking at trying to do, remember as I said to you earlier in our talk was that we want to reach every avenue that African Americans looked at. Well, movie business was the biggest one, you know. I mean we're 12 percent of the audience out there. I mean 12 percent of the population rather. We represent 40 percent of the buying power at movie theaters. We can shut down opening night. That's how powerful we are. So we figured, Bob [Robert L. Johnson] got on a real hot seat where during the early '90s [1990s], there was a drive called pay-per-view television where you could put up movies and other things and other people would pay to watch these movies, so we thought doing our homework that pay-per-view was hot. We had opportunity to buy a network based out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], that it would make a lot of sense for us to take this network based on the price we were getting, convert it into basically an all-African American pay-per-view network and really work from there, and grab, and get the Hollywood community to buy in and start producing programing for this network. Well, great concept, great idea, but less execution at the end of the day, less execution at the end of the day. So, you know, we did, we had a, we had a great network going and because of my background in dealing with the cable operators, Bob wanted me to run it. So I became the president of Action Pay-Per-View, and that's how I got my title and I ran it for about three or four years, and we were right about, we were right about them. We were gone be the first company to break even and make some money, and then he decides to close the L.A. operation, because it was all based out of L.A. It was easy 'cause the studios were out there and I was doing a lot of back and forth at the time, but then he, as a cost saver, he thought, but it didn't work in our behalf, to bring everything back east, and that's when everything blew the gasket for them. It just messed up. Never could, never was the same.
Speaker 1: Was there ever a thought about getting African Americans to invest in to?
Speaker 2: BET [Black Entertainment Television]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think there was definitely a thought, but (unclear) again, not a lot of thought into it, you know. And I think Bob went to some of the bigger players earlier, you know, like Denzel [Denzel Washington] ended up being on the board but I remember he had a conversation with Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] and a conversation with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, and a few other people, and they weren't interested, which is very shocking, you know. It's very shocking, because if you get a few of those people involved, they could have helped turn the network.
Story_ID: 551177
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your family. When did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married June 8th, 1982.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family.
Speaker 2: I love my family. I have a gorgeous wife for over twenty-five years. I've got three boys.
Speaker 1: What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Pat [Pat Symonds], Patricia, but we call her Pat.
Speaker 1: And where did you meet?
Speaker 2: Well that's kind of funny. We both went to Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. She's a P.E. [physical education] major like me. She actually came out earlier. She came out in '75 [1975]. I met her through her cousin who was one of my close friends, Jeffrey Vere [ph.], I talked about earlier. I had known of her, but I had never really got the chance to really get to meet her, and after I came out in '78 [1978], I was living in Dayton, Ohio. She was there. She was a teacher, she was a teacher. And just started, started a friendship just hanging out, just being friends, and then the friendship went to, a little deeper, and then next thing we know, we getting married.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And you say you have three sons?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are their names and their ages?
Speaker 2: Demetrius Symonds. He's my oldest, he's twenty-five. My middle one Karrington Symonds with a K. And then my youngest one Curtis Symonds, he's a junior [Curtis Symonds, Jr.], he's sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And how are you as a dad (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope- I'm hoping I'm all right, you know. I got two of 'em coming out of college in a month. They both graduate, so that was my goal to get all three of 'em out, so I got two out so far and one to go in college. So I think I've taken the first steps to get there. I wanted to own my own home, I have a home, and so I think I've done the basics, and hopefully, that I've been able to keep my kids out of trouble and do the right thing so I think I've taken the right steps so far to be a good father, but I still have work to do, you know. I don't think there's ever going to be a perfect father.
Story_ID: 551178
Speaker 1: Now going back to BET [Black Entertainment Television], your next position is with BET on Jazz [BET J]. Is that right?
Speaker 2: Right. It was--we created, we had a, we created a channel called, again, another avenue that we felt that wasn't tapped is jazz music. So we did some homework, got a little research group to jump on it and found that jazz was big market out there that wasn't tapped. So we created a jazz channel called BET on Jazz. And so I really became second in command. The guy really running that was Jeff Lee [HistoryMaker Jefferi Lee]. But he, it was kind of a funny setup. Jeff was basically running the domestic side and then we created a international group called BET International and I ran that, and that was really a whole sales group overseas that worked on trying to get BET into foreign countries. You could beat BET on Jazz in a foreign country. And that worked for, we got off to a little shaky start at the beginning, but then we got it rolling and we were able to keep it rolling for another four or five years, you know. Then I had to leave and George was--I'm kind of going numb on this. We had a guy running our international division, was in London [England], who ended up coming back overseas because after a while we just didn't feel we could fund it the way we started out, because it wasn't getting any automatic distribution we thought, and then we didn't do a few things that we could have done to get the channel better, and they all wanted always more local content, over international, where it's more local content. You know, they wanted a snippet or their local jazz flavor along with, you know, the national jazz flavor. So that was a tough thing to try to get Bob [Robert L. Johnson] to buy into, because he was stuck on just producing national stuff and not creating this local buzz and so it was tough for us getting into a lot of markets. We did all right. We got into at least about 4 or 5 million homes coming out and then, right now I'm not sure how many homes we're into now. You know there's a whole different ballgame since I left. But it was a great channel. You know 'cause what we were able to do is just basically downsize some of BET's music videos and put 'em on an international (unclear), it just, like an eight hour block three times a day, you know, so it worked out pretty decent. Amoah, George Amoah was the gentlemen's name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's who ran the channel.
Story_ID: 551179
Speaker 1: So you say you decide to leave after five years, in 2001?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I started to leave, I mean I had fourteen years there with BET [Black Entertainment Television] and I decide to leave in '01 [2001], yes, exactly. I just feel, I got to a point in my career I just had did enough. I couldn't do anymore with BET, you know, I mean I had raised them to the height that I thought they should be. I didn't see myself really with any really potential to grow any further, and so I really wanted to look at maybe jumping off into entrepreneur grounds, see what I could actually do.
Speaker 1: And this is the same time that Viacom [Viacom Inc.] comes in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Viacom had just came in and had made its move as far as taking over BET at the time, so, and you know people thought I left because of that, but that wasn't my real reason. I was, I was at the point in my career where I knew it was time for me to go.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, it wasn't, I did not go on the exact timing I would like to have gone, but it was my time to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: And so, what were your ideas for life after BET?
Speaker 2: That was very interesting, I mean that was, you know, life in general, Denise [Denise Gines], life in general, because now you go from no longer will you get that two week check. After thirty something years of getting that two week check, you know, now it's gone. So, I took a little sabbatical for a minute, you know, and went and tried to rest the mind and then I came back and said, you know, there's a need out here, but in the cable industry that, 'cause I've been around enough to know that there definitely wasn't anyone truly talking to the multicultural audience, and could I work with, develop a company that would target itself to something like that. So I create a company called Symonds Synergy Group, which was a marketing company, with another partner of mine who also worked underneath me at BET by the name of Clint Evans. And Clint became my partner in this company and what we wanted to do was go into the world and start showing people how to give better market to the multicultural community, through video, through the Internet, whatever.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, the company still exists, I mean we still, we still got things going on, a few things popping, but it really got off to a decent start, very decent start, you know, a lot of good things happened with us, so I was real happy with it on that.
Speaker 1: And that was in 2001 when you started the company?
Speaker 2: Yep. Yeah, I was--probably 2002, because that was the latter part of '01 [2001].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then what happens?
Speaker 2: Well then I got recruited actually, I was on the board of this foundation called the T. Howard Foundation, and it was that foundation was there to help women and minority students get paid some of the intern jobs in the summertime, through the communication companies, so I was on the board and, they did not have a president, so a lot of board members were drilling me because they knew I had time. They were like, "Curtis [HistoryMaker Curtis Symonds], why don't you run this thing, you could do it in your sleep." So I kind of, danced about it for a minute, because I was, I was trying to figure out what kind of time commitment I was going to have to put in because I kept telling them that if I do it, I'm still going to run Symonds Synergy Group, you know, and I'd do this, you know, half, half, whatever. So they agreed to let me continue to do Symonds Synergy Group and I agreed to take on this slot, and we were decent--good job, I mean, the idea was to grow the intern base, you know, when I first came on board it was maybe like twenty-five companies doing internships with T. Howard. I got up to like around forty-five companies now, you know, and a lot of us friends of friends in the business, but they wanted to do it. So I did that for like about two years. Almost, this is '07 [2007], yeah, I did this back to '03 [2003], '04 [2004], somewhere in that realm.
Story_ID: 551180
Speaker 1: So you leave BET [Black Entertainment Television], you start your own company [Symonds Synergy Group], and tell me about the next challenge that you take on.
Speaker 2: Well, T. Howard Foundation was one that I thought was a very interesting challenge because it was all about trying to help young people get into the telecommunication business, and women, minorities. And again, it was that mindset from a, coming out of the cable side, the T. Howard Foundation was really started on the satellite side, so now knowing a lot of the cable guys who I knew, they, in the cable industry there was a lot of fighting between satellite and cable, so because the company that--T. Howard was founded underneath a satellite guy, I couldn't really get the cable guys to really want, to really tie into this association, even though what I kept trying to emphasize to them, it was all about the students getting the experience. All I'm trying to do is help these students find an avenue to learn about telecommunication business, but what we found was, was that the people who were really giving them, giving us the jobs, was really what we called the programming side of the companies, were like the ESPNs, the Turners [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.], the BETs, the Lifetimes, the MTVs [Music Television; MTV], et cetera, et cetera, the Weather Channel go on, and I thought it was really a double standard because what I would always say to the cable guys, "I'd say look, even though we work for the programming network, they still handle both areas, cable and satellite, so why can't you Mr. Cable Operator open your doors to a few interns to let 'em come in there through this organization?" But what happened was, there was a couple other organizations that they, the cable industry aligned themself with, and said that they couldn't break their alignment with them and they were also a minority organization, which really the cable industry was really just kind of walking down a fine line and just, you know, in my opinion, just saying the right things, you know. They didn't really act on it like they were saying, you know, and because they have, they have close ties to the organization, they didn't want to look like if they came over and gave me a little business that they were pulling away from this other, other organization. So it was a very interesting experience but the ride with T. Howard was beautiful, you know, I mean we were able to really get a lot of students some exposure in this industry and a lot of students got jobs because of it, full time jobs.
Speaker 1: Who was T. Howard?
Speaker 2: Taylor Howard [H. Taylor Howard] was the gentleman's name, and Taylor was one of the founders in the satellite community. It was founded by him and another guy that was with Turner at the time called Scott Weiss. They both were really behind it, but they decided to name it Taylor Howard, after Taylor. Taylor, unfortunately, while I was in, in, as the president, had a very unfortunate accident, he was, he flew private planes and had his own little private planes and stuff, little propel planes, and unfortunately one day, he was a great pilot, you know, as everything else happens, you know, had a bad wind or whatever it was, and his plane crashed. It killed him. It's really sad, it was a sad day for us and everything, but he was a great man, he was very committed to try to get more minorities in this business, which was great.
Story_ID: 551181
Speaker 1: So what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I always stayed in contact with Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson], Bob Johnson's [Robert L. Johnson] ex-wife now, and we, me and my wife [Pat Symonds] always ate dinner, was eating, we had a like a little once a month type deal with her, with her and her, at that time, fiance, which is now her husband, Judge Newman [William T. Newman], and at one of the dinners she pulled me to the side and tells me about this idea of looking at a WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] franchise, and I just told her that if you decide to do it, with all the basketball that I love, I'd like to be a part of it. So this went on for about six or seven months, maybe a short period, maybe four or five months, she was having her people do due diligence and all the other stuff and she called me one day, I happened to be in Ohio, and said, "Look, you might want to come in town, you'd better be here the next day. They're getting ready to make the announcement that I'm getting ready to take over the Washington Mystics," and so I flew back that night and sure enough, the next morning I went to the press conference and she announced that she was taking over the Washington Mystics. And I thought it was outstanding, you know that this market's a great market for women's basketball, and I thought it was, makes a lot of sense. So then we kept conversation and she kept telling me, "I'm going to have you do something with me, blah, blah, blah," and never in my life did I think she would call me back and say, you know, she did one day, and say I'd like you to run this, and I thought running meaning, I'm a marketing guy, so I figured that she, that I would be just running her marketing area. She said, "No, I'm talking about all, I want you to be the new COO of the Washington Mystics." And that was exciting because for me and my last hurrah, you know, I'm thinking the, right now, of the entrepreneurship. It was very exciting to have this opportunity and now, I always wanted to get in the NBA [National Basketball Association], but this just gives me the opportunity, great opportunity to take a step forward by getting into the WNBA. And it's been a great ride so far, you know. We're in our second season going into season, I actually came in the midseason. I've been with 'em, almost like two and one half year now. I came my first season, I was in midseason and we were on a playoff run that year and we ended missing out by one game. Last year, we had the best record in the history of the franchise. We were 18 and 16 and we made the playoffs and got bumped out in the first round. And this year we have aspirations for bigger and better. We think that we got a good nucleus. I definitely believe we have a great team and the goal in three years is to win a national world championship here, bring one back. So I think we're gonna, we're gonna be close on the ride, you know, and, you know, it's just fun, it's just fun. It's really fun. And it's, it's also a pleasure to work for a boss who's so committed to the operation. I mean she is very, she goes out, you know, she puts her neck on the line to help us get sponsorship. She's in the arena almost at every game, cheering and hugging her girls and supporting her girls in every way possible. She's very public about, you know, her feelings about women's sports and why it needs more attention, you know, and the need to get more men into the gym. So she's a strong advocate for women's sports and I think she's a great, great, you know, ambassador of the sport. And so to have an opportunity to work for someone with that drive, you know, is nonstop. It's contagious, you know, to be, to say the least, you know, so I, it really is, it's been enjoyable, it's been an enjoyable round, I'm looking forward to our season coming up and just seeing how good we do. And, you know, I also, built a gym, gymnasium complex in Chantilly, Virginia, called Hoop Magic, and that's my last piece of my dream that I'm trying to do in giving back because it's sixty-five thousand square feet, it's seven basketball courts in one building, and that's something that me and my wife wanted to do. And so to have an opportunity to run the Mystics and also to own my own gym and be able to give back, it's just a nice marriage.
Story_ID: 551182
Speaker 1: Tell me more about women's basketball. I mean there's always been a stereotype about women who play basketball. Talk to me about that.
Speaker 2: I think it's a sad stereotype in sports today. I think sports has got a real stigma that women cannot play sports that men play, and I think that that's a very unfair and unbiased conversation that more men need to come to the arenas to see exactly the strength of the games and how they are improved, especially in the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association]. I think that women's basketball, as I always preach to anybody that asks me is the purest game of basketball. I think these women play from the time the ball is tipped up to the final buzzer. Whereas in men's game, because of their love for the game, I think the guys really, don't really get into it until more playoff time. And that, then you see more serious basketball, where I think on the women's side, it, you know, it's a short period of time, it's certainly less pay, and, you know, they're trying, they're trying to make the best of it in the three months that they got there, you know. The sad part about it is that a lot of the basketball community and that people are not aware of, is that these girls almost play year round, which is one of the few sports in the history that play almost year round, because the majority of them play overseas in the off, we call it our offseason, you know, that certain kind of their real season because they're playing almost six, seven months, you know, and I think that's kind of unfair to these girls because (unclear) wear and tear on their bodies, you know, and so, somewhere down the road, the sponsorship will grow bigger, we'll get some better television deals and Neal Humphrey [ph.] will be able to keep a lot of his girls from having to go overseas to make the extra dollar. Then we could start paying them better so that, you know, we can get really invested in exactly what these girls are all about moving forward.
Speaker 1: What do you think about the Don Imus statement about these women at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: You know I think that, you know, he's, he's a victim of his culture, you know. I mean, you know, I put it very, in one word, ignorance, you know. I think that he just felt he could make a statement, I mean he's a shock jock. That's what they pay him for. That pay him to drive controversy, you know. Unfortunately, he stepped too far down the line on this one, and that, you know, once you, especially, you know, that's, that's what so amazing about the African American community, they show and they can do it when they put the power behind it. You know, once you get Jef- Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and the reverend, and a few other groups start to really clamoring, you know, what are you going to do next CBS, the first thing they're going to do to quiet that down is, he got to go, I don't care how many years he's got here, you know. Because they know the power of the African American community, and a minority community. That's what I said to you earlier, you know, we're 12 percent of the population, we watch more television than anybody around. We could shut things down. We could make life miserable, you know. But I think that for us as a African American population, it should be a wakeup call, because we have used the words too much, you know, I mean it's like I watched 'Coach Carter' a while back, right before this happened, and I love the statement in the movie when he says, "You know, don't use the N-word anymore, because if someone white called you that, you'll be mad, but you allow--you'll call a brother that and don't think no more about it. Well, white people hear it they think, oh hey, he called him that, it ain't bad."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that's the repercussions of it. The same thing I think the repercussions in the music side. You know a young man was telling me at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that, you know, we shouldn't be blaming the rap, the rap culture on the situation because he's heard a long time ago. Well, yes and no. You know you don't, you know, one guy, a young man explained to me the other day at Howard too, he was saying, "Well, when we would say hoes or bitches, we're not meaning anybody specific." He came out directly and pointed at Rutgers when he said that. So you don't take it that same way. But, it's still, again, the use of the language, you know, that we have let our culture allow us to just constantly use that, and I always say every day, your culture dictates where your thinking is at. If you put an African American kid in a white culture, he gonna be like the white culture. If you put, if you put a Caucasian in a black culture, they gone be like the black culture, because they got to blend, they got to blend. And people try to figure out, "What happened to Niecey [ph.], she used to be like such, such, such." Well, that's the culture, because you can only hold back for so long. You can hold back for so long, but then the culture would make it so difficult that you either break or bend.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and some people broke, but a lot of people bend, at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: That's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I think that, you know, what Imus did was, I mean even try to apologize, it was too late, it was too late.
Story_ID: 551183
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this part of the disrespect or, I guess, well, not disrespect but the unevenness, I guess of, of male basketball versus female basketball, because guys on a college football team would never be spoken about in a derogatory--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I wouldn't say so much, you know, it's like why they fired Jimmy the Greek [Jimmy Snyder], you know, and they fired Jimmy the Greek because he made a statement about black guys having this ultimate body that's, you know, I forget how he phrased it, but he said he phrased it a derogatory way, just saying like the way our culture is, you know, a white person would never be like a black person, you know, as far as athleticism, you know, but he framed it in a way that came out not very well. So I don't think it's male or female, I think it's where people just believe sometimes, Denise [Denise Gines], they can say some things and get away with it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's it, you know, Imus [Don Imus] has been around for thirty something years. Jimmy the Greek was around for a long time, you know, and he makes a crazy statement, you know, and just think that he had made statements probably somewhere down the road, didn't affect him. It's just that this one got on national television. Imus is on, you know, national radio, you know. If he probably would have said it on a local station here, it probably would have blown over. It probably would have been a little repercussion, but it probably would have blown over.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: You know, but the fact that it was national and all of a sudden the Internet world got it out on the street so quick, you know, and it only takes for a second to start the water to run, you know, then the lake blows up. And that's what happens, you know, so I wouldn't phrase it as women, I phrase it as people just feel in the minority community, that there's just certain things that they feel they can say without no one really reacting off of. And it's said every day, it's said, it's said in, in meetings and classrooms and things like that. But it's just like, you know, it all depends on who's going to stand up for it. And if a teacher said that in the classroom, it probably blow over, you know, because a kid can't stand up and say nothing, all they can (unclear), and then they go back and tell their parents. And the parent might send a letter to the principal asking questions, you know, and the principal sit there and say, "Well, no, he heard it the wrong way. That wasn't the way it is," you know.
Story_ID: 551184
Speaker 1: So besides getting more or better sponsorship for, for your team [Washington Mystics], what else is there on the horizon to, to get more people to recognize--
Speaker 2: We just got to do a better job of marketing the business. The business has been marketed on a four month basis, you know. We've got to do as a league and also down to the local franchise, begin this counseling market, WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] on a twelve month basis. That's what we're trying to do here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is begin to keep, you know, even with the Redskins [Washington Redskins] or Nationals [Washington Nationals], United [D.C. United], you know, the Wizards [Washington Wizards], even with all those folks in the market, we got to keep, we got to keep some kind of buzz on the tip of somebody's tongue, you know. The tough part for us, that's what we're trying to work on, is keeping these girls around, keeping some of 'em around to get some offseason work done, cause we get calls for a lot of work, but there's no girls here, other than me and Sheila [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson]. Well, we can only do so much. They want to see players. People like to touch players, you know. They want to be entertained, you know, so I think if we step up in that level and then also get our grassroots really, you know, working hard, and like we got WNBA All-Star weekend here in July this year, in '07 [2007], you know, and we're off to a good start ticket wise right now, but now we got to do, what we want to do this year is raise the level of the game, the environment rather, to another notch. You know last year it was in New York [New York]. It was pretty blah. There is nothing compared to the NBA [National Basketball Association] weekend, you know. And those are the kinds of things you got to, you got to do, you got to create the have to, I gotta be there. That's the mentality we got to create. Same way we got to do about our arenas. I got to be there for a (unclear), yeah, you know, and then we're going to try to do more in this market to attract men, you know. We're going to go out to getting some athletes, entertainers, regular folks to talk about men talking about why other men should be coming in. And begin to try to slowly but surely try to market more. Because once we get ya in there, you gonna love the game. You--I just got to get you out that mentality, like, "Aw that's women's basketball, I don't know if that's going to be all right," that kind of thing, and that's it.
Story_ID: 551185
Speaker 1: Well you talked about two of your dreams being fulfilled, you know, things that you always wanted to do, but when you look back over your life, is there something that you would change, or something that you have not done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: No, not really. I tell you, when I look back at it Denise [Denise Gines], I never thought I'd get this far. I'm looking at a kid out of Wilberforce, Ohio, who cut grass in the summertime, you know, had a little retail job, never thought I could get out of Xenia, Ohio, never thought I'd be on the East Coast, never thought I'd be running a WNBA franchise [Women's National Basketball Association], so, you know, when I look back now Denise, you know, the thing that I really, really appreciate more is that I did make some right moves down the road, because there was a couple of times I could have made the wrong moves, you know, and I mean, growing up, we're all, we were all on the cuff, you know, thinking we're bigger than life, you know, and I could have drifted, but I was able, you know, thank God upstairs, was able to just make some right decisions, at the right times, get around some right people who embraced me and was able to really steer me down the right road, you know, and I think I cherish that more than anything, you know, and so when I really look back, have I left anything on the table, well, you know, you could probably say I did, you know, somewhere down the road, but in my mind right now, no, I haven't. You know, I think that I'm doing the best I can with what I have to work with, you know, and I think that's really my biggest goal, you now, and so I really, I really, when I look back at it, Denise, I really feel I've taken, you know, some good strides, you know, and they just, you know, I always say it every day, I'm just blessed that I'm alive, you know, because I got other folks that I know around my age and others that haven't made it that far, you know. So that, that's where I'm at.
Story_ID: 551186
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for someone entering either telecommunications or sports?
Speaker 2: My advice to 'em is you got to be able to network, you know. You got to learn, you got to learn, what I've learned over my time is that number one, treat people how you want to be treated. Number two, make trust, because that's the biggest thing. People begin to trust you, you begin to build good friendships that they know are sometimes life- lifelong. Number three, you know, you got to be, you've got to be serious about what you do. You know, people will tell you, I mean, one thing I learned from BET [Black Entertainment Television] is I work hard, but I don't work stupid no longer, you know. I worked hard at BET and sometimes I worked stupid. I put long hours in and almost fried myself out working too hard, but then the light that went off on me in midstream with BET is that my family is more important than this work. I could find work, I can't find another family, so I'm not going to put my family down to stay a couple more hours to get things done, no. I've always, I tell my employees every time, every day, hey, it's only so much you can do in a day. It's still gonna be here the next day, regardless. Ain't nobody gonna be mad if you deal with it tomorrow, you know. Maybe two weeks from now they'd be mad (laughter), but not the next day, so my whole thing is that, if you can learn to manage, manage that part of your life, that's key. And that's what I try to work on every day.
Story_ID: 551187
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I want, you know, I just got a legacy award from Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio] the other day, and I said, "Why are you giving me a legacy award, 'cause I'm fifty-two years old, why do I want to get a legacy award," you know, and this particular reason was because I'd given some monies back to the university, blah, blah, blah. When I look at a true legacy, I think, Denise [Denise Gines], is that I wanna be known for a person that instilled good things on the right people. That's really what I want to be known for, you know, I mean, I helped a lot of people get jobs in the telecommunications industry, sports industry, helped kids, just wanna be, and not even known, more appreciated, that again, I did the right thing, you know, I mean those, that's really the key for me, you know. I think people get caught up in legacy, you now. That's not, that's not so much important for me. At the end of the day, you know, did I do the right thing, is the more important thing for me, you know. Did I take the right steps to really articulate exactly what I was trying to get out there and get people to understand who [HistoryMaker] Curtis Symonds is? That's really, if you want to look at legacy, or however you want to put it, that's really it for me.
Story_ID: 551188
Speaker 1: What are your hopes, dreams or desires for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I would hope someday that, you know, that this community, which, you know, will someday understand the power that we have. Being so closely and working with BET [Black Entertainment Television] for fourteen years, and seeing what we did with a small pocket of black folks, and the power that we had with one network, showed me that the strength of video number one is incredible, you now, just the power of television. Number two, the creativity that is, you know, it's embedded in young folks and even, you know, older folks, mid-age, whatever, is incredible. And number three is the fact that, you know, if you really, really understood our buying power and really, really challenged people, but the problem that we deal with in our community is the loyalty level. We can't be loyal. You just can't be loyal, you know. You can't, in today's world if I showed you, you know, a woman's shoe for ten dollars and I said Denise [Denise Gines] you really need to buy this. If somebody came to you for two dollars, but wasn't the same quality, you'd buy the two dollar shoe. The loyalty level is just something that we as this culture will not allow to stay with us, you know. We're always there, we're always there for the deal. We're always there for the quick hustle. We can't stand for somebody to go above us because of XYZ then, you know, then we got issues that we got to deal with. All of that combined into one, keeps us from pulling up together. It's amazing to me when I look at Asians can put seven people in a house and we can barely put two people in a house without somebody complaining. A big house, and they're still complaining, you know. And that's the kind of small thinking that we have, you know. So, if we could ever draw those strings in and get that understanding, this would be a better place, this would be a better place, at the end of the day, you know, and that's our struggle. That's our real struggle, you know, at the end of the day how that shakes out, you know, and it's a tough one, 'cause that's one I don't think we'll ever, in both me and your history, I don't think we'll ever be able to solve, because the next generation that's coming up has got too much give mes. They've been given too much. So to them to get into the hustle, they don't even understand how to hustle, you know, so we almost lost them already. So it's a tough uphill battle, you know, at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to say that we haven't spoken about?
Speaker 2: I just want to thank on camera, Julieanna Richardson and yourself for doing The HistoryMakers. You guys are doing some great strides. So continue the good work.
