Story_ID: 13353
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Paul Brock.  Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Lenny F. Springs, L-E-N-N-Y, F., S-P-R-I-N-G-S.
Speaker 1: Now can I ask you what the F stands for?
Speaker 2: Fitzgerald.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born April 25, 1947, Edgefield County, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now is that the same Edgefield that--oh, I can't think of the woman's name now.  There's a famous case of a woman who was, spent seven years in a attic during slavery.  I think she's from, she was from Edgefield, I think.
Speaker 2: You remember her name?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.  But I will before--.
Speaker 2: No, Ed-, Ed-, Edgefield is, is, is the home of the late [U.S. Senator] Strom Thurmond and his daughter that recently came forward, Essie, Essie Mae [Washington].  But that's, that's where I'm from, Edgefield, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are your--okay, got your date of birth and place of birth.  Can you--and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a banker.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Wachovia Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, with Wachovia.
Speaker 2: Wachovia Charlotte [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: You're a Senior Vice President?
Speaker 2: Senior Vice President with Wachovia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July--what is it?  What's the date?
Speaker 1: Eleventh.
Speaker 2: July 11, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, where in the hell are we?  Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Milwaukee, Wiscon-, I travel a lot.  I'm not trying to be sarcastic.  We're, we're at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] National Convention in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Story_ID: 13354
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: I, I really don't have a favorite food.  Being a Southern boy, I enjoy all soul food, but I really don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, fall.  I like the fall of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I love the beach.  If I had to pick a spot, I would say it's probably Hilton Head, South Carolina.  I love to go to Hilton Head.  It's not far from where I live, and I can go there and, and have a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, not really.  I--my social consciousness always tell me if, if I can do something for the uplift of the total community--When I say the uplift--raise up the community, particularly the African American community, those are disadvantaged, poor, and less fortunate.  If I can do that by, by the work I do, then that speaks for itself.  So, you won't find me quoting individuals or repeating historians.  I try to let my work speak for itself and that's the uplift of the community.
Story_ID: 13355
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is, is Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Morgan, M-O-R-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is also Edgefield, South Carolina.  Her date of birth--I'll have to research that.  I really don't know the year that, that she was born.  But the month is October.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can't take a guess?  You wouldn't have a guess?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I would not want to do injustice to my mom.  My father [Leonard F. Springs, Sr.] would have told me I needed this.  But my mom is approximately seventy-five years old, so, so that she had to, to be born in the late '20s [1920s] or early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1931 (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, somewhere around there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I have learned about my ancestors on my mother's side more than I have on my father's side.  And that's simply because of--we've had family reunions over the last, oh, twenty, twenty-something years on, on the Morgans side.  My, my grandfather, my mother's father, uneducated man, a sharecropper in Edgefield, South Carolina.  My great uncles, his sisters and brothers were all uneducated individuals.  When I say uneducated from a standpoint of a formal education, but lot of wisdom, a lot of knowledge from a standpoint of, of life itself.  And I can remember when I was a, a little boy visiting with them.  My, my grandfather was a tall, handsome man that loved to smoke a cigar--very respected in the community and in the church, Simmon Ridge Baptist Church.  And he was, he was on the deacon board there.  And when I was a little boy I would love to go visit with my grandparents.  My grandmother was Sophie Morgan--very lively, spirited lady.  Small in stature, a little woman, but big in heart, and we called her 'Big Mama'.  And we called her Big Mama simply because she was, she was so small, a small woman in stature but had a big heart and really, really in the community very respected and everybody looked upon her for guidance and leadership.  And that's why they called her Big Mama.  Neither one of those individuals were--had an education.  I, I don't even know if they made it out of the second or third grade, but always inspired all of their grandkids to, to, to move forward and, and try to be somebody in life.  My mother's brothers and sisters--I think my mom had nine or ten brothers and sisters.  And one of her brothers lived in New York and--Uncle William.  He would always come home in the summertime and he also was a tall, good-looking gentleman driving a big fancy car when he would come home.  I had an uncle in Louisville, Kentucky--Uncle Saul.  He was a character--always had something funny to say.  And he lived in Louisville and, and was imbedded in the community in Louisville--very, very respected.  Unfortunately, they both have passed away.  I only have one uncle living on my mom's side right now and that's Uncle James.  He's, in fact, he still lives in Edgefield and he is in his eighties.  So, so I learned quite a bit about my ancestors on, on, on my mom's side simply because of the family reunions we, we have over the years.  And in fact we have a family reunion coming up this year down in New Orleans, Louisiana.  And my aunts, Aunt Amy, Aunt Dee, and Aunt Rose--Aunt Rose is still living but they're, all of them have passed away now.  And, fortunate enough, my mom is still living.  And she was one of the younger ones of, of, of the family.  But, yeah, I think about, you know, Uncle Charlie and all of those folks, so.  And if you go back to, to Edgefield now and talk about the Morgan family, everybody knows Uncle Sonny--that's what they call my grandfather--Uncle Sonny Morgan.  So, the, the old home place is still there.  It has grown up, but we all used to love to visit them way back in the country at the end of a dirt road--a, a little shack.  And that's, that's the old home place.
Story_ID: 13356
Speaker 1: On my father's side is where I, I, I guess I get my civil rights from.
Speaker 2: Now what was your father's full name?  Can you spell his name?
Speaker 1: My father's full name is Leonard Springs, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, S-P-R-I-N-G-S.  My, my grandmother, his mother, was Ella, Ella Springs.
Speaker 2: When, when was your father born?  Do you have a birthdate for him?
Speaker 1: (laughs) You know, dad died about, about three years ago.  And he was seventy-five.  So, he would have been--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1930.
Speaker 1: Yeah, around 1930.  He would have been about seventy-eight years old.  And my father, quite frankly, is my hero.  Again, my, my father was uneducated as it relates to a formal education, but one of the smartest men that I know.
Speaker 2: Now was he from Edgefield, too?  Was he born there?
Speaker 1: He was from, he was from Edgefield County, but he was from a little small town called Johnston, South Carolina, which is one of the little municipalities in, in Edgefield County.  And my mom [Mildred Morgan Springs] is still there.  She still lives on the home place in, in Johnston.  And, you know, we still go there.  And when I was a little boy coming up, oh, I guess I must have been five or six years old and my uncle, Uncle Johnny was local president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And he would always talk about racism and discrimination and talk about the NAACP.  And I remember coming home one, one night.  We had been out and we lived out in the country off of Long King Road in Johnston, South Carolina.  And as we got closer to home there were a lot of cars parked along the road.  And there, there were individuals that lived up the road from me who also were members of NAACP and active in--it was the Ku Klux Klan who had come out to some of my relatives' house and because of they were leading efforts in Edgefield County for African Americans.  And they came out and, and shot into the house that night and burned a cross in the yard.  So, you know, that was my introduction, if you will, to overt racism and overt discrimination and, and, and seeing the Ku Klux Klan in action.  And even before then, though, I would hear Uncle Johnny talk about the NAACP.  And there were a number of times that his home was shot into by, by the Ku Klux Klan and because of, of his fight against racism, his fight against discrimination.  So you're, you're talking back in the '50s [1950s] when this happened.  So I have been aware of, of, of, of racism and aware of discrimination ever since I, I was a, a, a little boy.  And I suppose where I get my involvement, I have to attribute that, I suppose, to, to both sides of my family, but more so on, on my father's side because that, that's where the activism came from.
Story_ID: 13357
Speaker 1: Can you describe the personalities of your parents [Leonard Springs and Mildred Morgan Springs] and tell us who you think you take after?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Oh, I, I guess it's--a lot of it comes from, from my father.  My father was a self-taught tradesman.  My father learned how to lay brick and from that he learned how to read blueprints and eventually became a, a, a builder of, not only residents [sic, residences], but commercial buildings.  And even then my dad had to prove himself as a, as a tradesman, as a craftsman.  And I used to--he used to take me to work with him when--you know, it was my summer job to, to work with him.  And, and I witnessed what he had to put up with from a standpoint of, of being a, a craftsman out there in the workplace and the kinds of insults that he was confronted with.  And he wouldn't back down.  He, he would not back down because he was unafraid, he was unafraid.  And I can remember a, a time that in addition to, to him being a, a, a builder, and we still had a farm, and still own that farm by the, by the way--that I remember a couple of days that our cows had gotten out, gotten out the pasture and had gone over to some property that, that was owned by white folk.  And when we got home we realized that, that the cows were out.  And the owners of the property next to us had the cows.  And my dad would have to go and ask for his cows.  And there were a couple of times the white man would tell my daddy he wasn't gonna give them back.  And my daddy would stand up to him, says, "Yes, those, those are my cows, and I am here to get my cows."  And he was unafraid, undaunted, if you will, to, to challenge white people.  And that was his, his personality.  He did what he had to do as a father, as an individual to, to raise his family.  And so I would say that I, I'm probably more of my father's personality.  My mom is--she's a mom, she's a mother, and six kids.
Speaker 1: So where do you fall in order?
Speaker 2: I'm the second oldest.  I have one sister that, that's older than I am.  And, you know, I look back over the years and, of the six, well, five of us went to college.  And all six of us could've gone if, if we wanted to.  And how they afforded to, to send six kids to college and, you know, that--I don't know.  But, you know, we never suffered from anything, particularly from, from an education standpoint.  So, but my mom was al-, always there.  And I used to watch my mom get up in the morning and get us all ready for school and then go work and scrub floors and, and cook for white folk, come back home and take care of us as a family.  So, she was always a hard worker.  And, you know, this was all before, before integration and, you know, she was a domestic worker, scrubbing floors, washing clothes, cooking for white folk 'cause that's the only job she could get.  But she did it in order to help my father support the family.
Story_ID: 13358
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Neighborhood, wasn't a neighborhood.  It was (laughs), it was out in the country.  We lived at the end of a dirt road.  And the only thing at the end of that dirt road was, was our house.  I mean it was our house and, and, and, and across the field was, was my grandmother's house.  And, you know, I, I tell everybody now that when I was a kid growing up, particularly, when I, when I talk to youth, I tell them, "It's not where you come from, it's, it's where you're going that, that matters in life."  I knew more cows and pigs than I knew people because there, there were no neighbors, absolutely no neighbors.  But, you know, living on a farm, hearing the sound of, of, of farm animals--cows, pigs, horses.  Smelling, you know--when it would rain the, the, the rain would fall on the, on the dirt roads.  It's the smell of, of, of the dirt when it's, when it's getting wet.  Early in the morning the freshness of the, the mildew on the grass and on, on, on the farm.  When it rained, living in a tin roof house and hear that rain raining down on a, on a, on a tin roof.  You know, you just, you don't experience that anymore, but, you know, that was, that was a way of life then.  And, you know, you can't ever forget those, those days in your life.  The sound of, of yelling across the field to, to my grandmother's house, yelling up the road where there was one or two homes, which was half a mile away.  So, you know, yeah, but those were, those were the days.  I can remember when we first got electricity in, in, in the house, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that had to be middle '50s [1950s], I suppose, '54 [1954], somewhere then.  And what I remember about that is that I remember the first, our first utility bill was ten cents, ten cents, first utility bill.  I remember when we first got our first television, a little black-and-white TV.  We were always the first in, in, in our community from a standpoint of, of, of moving forward, I suppose.  And, and I, I suppose that was because of my father [Leonard F. Springs, Sr.] had a job, mom [Mildred Morgan Springs] worked, and, you know, there were many other folk that didn't have what we had.  I mean we were poor, but there were other folk that didn't have what we have.  And everybody would come to our house to watch TV.  And my dad was big on, on boxing.  He would--and I think back then boxing came, came on, on Thursday--Gillette [men's shaving products] I think featured--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They had the 'Friday Night Fights' on--.
Speaker 2: --'Friday Night Fights', yeah, yeah.  So everybody would come and watch, watch the fights and--because then, you know, you had African Americans in, in the boxing game.  And, you know, they, they were our heroes.  We didn't have any African Americans that were on television in, in feature films or feature television shows.  But then you had your--you, you did have boxers.  So, we would, we would watch the boxing matches and, you know, that was entertaining but also it made us feel proud as, as black people, as African Americans.  So, but everybody would come and watch, watch TV.
Story_ID: 13359
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really.  From a standpoint of enjoying, enjoying music, again, we were out in the country.  And all of the spare time we had, particularly me as an individual being on a farm, you didn't have time to listen to music.  You know, after school you came home, you changed your clothes, and you went to the field.  Either you, you picked cotton or chopped cotton, depending on what season it was.  Planting season, you, you planted.  When school started in the fall there were many days that we had to miss school simply because we had to pick cotton.  In the spring of the year--I mentioned six kids.  I have one brother and four sisters.  And, you know, my being the, the oldest brother, it was my responsibility to kind of lead the kids from a standpoint of, of work and chores.  And, you know, I would plow the mule from sunup to sunset, you know, plowing the cotton fields, plowing the cornfields, and doing whatever work had to be done.  So, as far as music is concerned--of course, being in church, I mean church--old, old hymns.  But I, I, I suppose I knew more gospel music than I knew R & B [rhythm and blues] music back, back then.
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a kid growing up?  What kind of personality did you have and how would other people describe it?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I, I think that--I would like to think I always had leadership characteristics when, when I was in school.  I can remember, if, if I wanted to participate in extracurricular activities, which means that it would take place after school, I knew that in order for me to do that--if I was gonna get home, I would have to take upon myself to, to walk home from school.  And we, we lived about almost six miles from, from the city limits.  And I always wanted to be in, in the class play.  I always wanted to participate in something that would require my being in school after school.  And if, if I didn't have any work to do, then I would take advantage of that and, and stay.  But I also knew that in order for me to get from school home, I would have to walk unless somebody would stop and, and, and pick us up.  And there was another--one, one of my good friends was--lived down the road from us two or three miles, John Henry Butler.  And he and I was always competing against each other from a standpoint of academics.  And he was a very smart guy, and we competed.  If he got an A in math, then I had to get an A in math.  If he got a B in science, then I would have to try to get an A to, to beat him.  So, I was always competitive, if you will, from a standpoint of, of academics.  And then after we got to high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, South Carolina], I was involved with, with student government, played on the basketball team.  But, you know, when I got to high school, we, my daddy [Leonard F. Springs, Sr.] got me a car (laughs), so I didn't have to, to make that walk.  We did--I had my first car was a 1953 Ford.
Story_ID: 13360
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Johnston Training School in--Johnston Training School [Johnston, South Carolina], you know--.
Speaker 1: That's Johnston with a T, right?
Speaker 2: J-O-H-N-S-T-O-N.  That's where--when I started the school--well, I should say when I started school, I went to a little one-room school, which was basically up the road from where we lived.  And our teacher would come over from Augusta, Georgia, to, to teach us.  And it was one room and grades one through six.  And I went to that school, I think, till I was third grade, third or fourth grade.  But it, yeah, it was just a, a little one-room school with a potbelly stove, to, to teep, to keep all the kids warm.  And the teacher was Miss Brooks.  Miss Brooks would drive over from Augusta, Georgia, to teach us.  And I think when I was in the fourth grade, we start going to school in the city limits, and it was Johnston Training School.  Yeah, training--and the philosophy then by white folk was you couldn't educate black kids but you could train them--they were trainable.  So we went to, went to Johnston Training School.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a constant we've heard before like--and that--did, did people really catch the significance of that at the time?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I don't think so.  I don't think so simply because the, the awareness of, of African Americans then was not what it is now.  In fact, I don't think I understood it at the time.  And, when, when I was in--at Johnston Training School I, I remember all of, all of my teachers--Miss Moses, Miss Redding, Miss Peterson--all of those teachers I remember instilling in us back then the importance of getting an education.  And I went to that school until I was in the ninth grade and we graduated and I was valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was, I was a, I was a decent student, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not, not, not really.  But I was always good in math, science, reading.  Couldn't write worth two cents, but--then we went to Edgefield County Colored High School [Edgefield, South Carolina], Edgefield County Colored High School was the name of the high school.  And it was a school where coloreds went to high school.  We, we rode right--had to ride right past Edgefield High School, now Strom Thurmond High School, to Edgefield County Colored High School.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1961, I guess?
Speaker 2: I actually graduated from--yeah, '61 [1961], yeah.  I finished high school in '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 13361
Speaker 1: Are there any family stories about [U.S. Senator] Strom Thurmond or any local stories about that--?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, if you look, if you look at Edgefield County, there are a number of governors that came out of South Carolina was from Edgefield County.  Strom Thurmond wasn't the first governor.  There was a governor by the name Ben [Benjamin R.] 'Pitchfork' Tillman.
Speaker 1: Right.  He's a, he's a infamous racist, yeah.
Speaker 2: Intimate racist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's stories about how he would take his pitchfork and just beat, beat his slaves.  But, you know, Strom Thurmond  was during my, my era, my time, and he was a racist.  And, you know, this, this recent disclosure of his African American daughter [Essie Mae Washington]--everybody knew that in the black community.  I mean it wasn't no secret that he, he was the father of a, of a black child.  And nobody knew who it was or didn't know where she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know--.
Speaker 1: But the rumor was that there was just one?  I mean I, sometimes I, I mean when I heard it, I wondered, I said, "Just one of them?"
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's been, been rumored that there's more than one.  Only one has surfaced.  And--but Strom Thurmond--and, and we'll come back to Thurmond at some point during this interview, but--was, was, was there and, you know, he was like God in the white community because of his--you know, he was a state legislator, a governor, United States senator, and ran for President of the United States.
Speaker 1: Was he governor or senator when you, you were coming up in school?
Speaker 2: He was senator then.  He had, he had been governor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was in the United States Senate.
Speaker 1: I thought, I thought so 'cause we're almost the same age and I think he's been a senator for as along as I can remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he, he, he was a U.S. senator at that time.
Speaker 1: He stayed, served in the Senate, what, over fifty years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm, um-hmm, um-hmm.  So his, his, his legacy was, was already there from a standpoint of his legislative days and his governorship days in, in, in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: How did the black community feel about Strom Thurmond?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, (pauses) he had, believe or not, he had friends in the, in the, in the African American community.  There are folk that, that spoke very highly of him.  And I used to hear my father [Leonard F. Springs, Sr.] talk about him and I believe my father's father, which was my grandfather, used to do some work for him from a standpoint of selling him wood.  And I never had any, any direct contact with him until the--my professional life.  When I was a child growing up at, at home, knew of him, his reputation, but never, never met the man until the, I finished high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Johnston, SC] and finished college [Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina] and begun to work.  But if, if you just talk to various individuals around South Carolina, you'll find folk that has nothing but good things to say about him.
Speaker 1: Well, did he have a better reputation than 'Pitchfork Ben' Tillman?
Speaker 2: You know what? (pauses) Probably, probably.  But neither one of them have a good reputation with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is there any kind of stories about this--I mean he's the, he was one of the most powerful senators, I guess, because he served so long and was on so many committees (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, and, and, and my encounter with the, with the Senator came years later.  I, before I became a banker, I worked for an Urban League affiliate.  I was working for the, for the Greenville [South Carolina] Urban League.  I had finished college and gotten out of the [U.S.] Army and, and was working for the Urban League in, in Greenville [South Carolina].  Urban League is a nonprofit organization, as you know, that run programs to, to help poor people.  And we were writing a grant for an education program, I think, and we needed the support, we being the, the Urban League, needed the support of, of the Senator on this grant.  I, I believe he served on the appropriations committee and Senator [Ernest Frederick] 'Fritz' Hollings, which was the Democratic senator, sat on the authorization--one of two, but maybe vice versa.  But we had to visit the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] to support or lobby for support for, for both of, both senators, Senator Fritz Hollings and Senator Strom Thurmond.  And this had to be in the '70s [1970s], I suppose, late '70s [1970s].  And we went to his office, we being myself and some of the other staff members, and, of course, he welcomed us with open arms and said, you know, you know, "What can I do for you boys?"  And we sat and talk with him and at the end of the meeting he said, "Sure, whatever I can do to help."  And he had a photographer lined up.  He wanted to take pictures of, of us meeting with him.  So, we did that.  And, you know, we took pictures shaking hands with him.  And that was my first encounter of meeting, meeting the, the senator.  Well, about three or four months after that I got a call from, from his office.  And, by the way, we did, we did get the grant.  We got a call from his office from one of his aides, and the senator was asking that he be able to use those photos in his campaign literature.  He had to run for that Senate seat that, that fall, and, you know, he was campaigning.  And he wanted to be able to use that, the photos that he had taken of us.  And, of course, he was calling to, to, to get our permission.  And, and, of course, I declined for, for my picture to be used with him in, in his campaign literature.  But, you know, if you, if you go to South Carolina and, and, and talk to folk in South Carolina in the African American community, some spoke very highly of him.  And the fact of the matter is he had African American aides.  He had, in fact, he had a senior aide in South Carolina, so--.
Speaker 1: I think it's Armstrong Williams was a aide of his.
Speaker 2: Armstrong Williams was a, was an aide of his, and Armstrong is from South Carolina.  I believe before Armstrong, though, there was a gentleman by the name of Tom Moss, I think--and I may have the name incorrectly.  But, he was even before, before Armstrong, that, that worked on the Senator's staff there in South Carolina.  He was able to do some things for, for African Americans--in his later years, in his later years.  I don't know if he had a change of heart, a change of mind, but I thought it was politics.  I thought he played politics to the manner where it need to be played in order for him to get reelected.
Story_ID: 13362
Speaker 1: Is it still more black people in South Carolina than white people?
Speaker 2: No, it's--South Carolina is not a predominantly black state.  A very high percentage of African Americans make up the state of South--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's the second highest--I mean, Mississippi is the only state that we have the majority black (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, and, and South Carolina either rank second or third.  I've been, I actually been out of South Carolina now for twenty years.  And, you know, I still go back to visit my mother [Mildred Morgan Springs].  But I am not as involved as I once was in, in South Carolina.
Story_ID: 13363
Speaker 1: What was high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, South Carolina] like?  Did you continue your good grades and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in, in fact I mentioned to you when I finished Johnston Training School [Johnston, South Carolina] I graduated number one and when I finished high school I was in the top ten.  You know, go-, going to high school, getting involved in, in, in sports, athletics--.
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: I played basketball, played basketball and played baseball.  And, you know, going to, to a bigger school, the academic competition was stronger.  But I still maintained a, a, a very good average, honor roll.  Edgefield County Colored High School was in Edgefield, and, yeah, I tell folk that you--I never experienced anything in high school where it was new.  All the buses we used came from the high school--the white high school [Edgefield High School, later Strom Thurmond High School, Johnston, South Carolina].  When they were no longer good enough for the white students, they were passed on to us.  All of our books--all (with emphasis) of our books--I never had a new book because all of our books came from the white high school when they were no longer good enough.  We had books that didn't have book covers on them.  All of our athletic equipment came from the white high school when that equipment was no longer good enough for, for the white athletes to use and, and to wear and, and, to play in.
Speaker 1: Was it out of date, I mean really out of date?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean it was, it was raggedy.  It, it, it was raggedy.  I, I remember very distinctively that I didn't play football but our football team would sometime had different jerseys (laughs)--different colored jerseys on because it, it came over from, from the white high school.  It was very inferior equipment compared to the white high school.
Speaker 1: So whether your--or not--whatever your school colors were, what you wore depended on, was dependent on what you got from the white high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  I mean--.
Speaker 1: So, they weren't, you know, they weren't all the same color (laughs)?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not at all.  I mean, we had a few uniforms that were the school colors but--you know, even the basketball team--you know, we were raggedy from a standpoint (laughs) of our, our basketball jerseys, you know, but simply because it was, it was passed down, passed down.
Speaker 1: Now this is a--South Carolina's a state that doesn't--correct me if I'm wrong, doesn't spend a whole lot of money on education anyway, (pauses) I would guess.
Speaker 2: Well, back then it didn't.  I, I don't know what now because I say I've been away for a number of years.  But still ranked low nationally as it relates to performance by high school students in, in education.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so how they--you know what I'm implying that you're getting the second-hand stuff from a educational system that's already second rate.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  Yeah, getting second-hand equipment, second-hand books, second-hand literature that from a state that really didn't--ranked high anyway.  So, it really, really made us as students third-, fourth-class students in an education system.
Story_ID: 13364
Speaker 1: Were all your teachers black [at Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, SC]?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I never went to an integrated anything--elementary, junior high school, high school, our, our college [Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina].  My sisters--my younger sisters that are much younger than me, were the first to integrate Strom Thurman High School [formerly, Edgefield High School] in Edgefield, South Carolina.  I was off in college at the time, and they were still in, in the junior high and high school.  And they were the first to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you run for class office in high school or did you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I never, I don't think I did.  It's been such a long time ago.  But, no, I, I don't think I ever ran for class officer in, in high school.  When I got off in college I did.  I did run for president the Student Government Association in, in college.  But when I went off to college is when I got involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the, and the College Youth Council and was involved in a number of organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you involved in any civil rights activity in Edgefield?
Speaker 2: No, you know, when, when I was in Edgefield, I I, I wasn't involved in any civil rights activity. In fact, (pauses) never, never--I used to hear my uncles and relatives talk about the NAACP and--but at the time wasn't involved.  But I knew, I knew even then, if I had an opportunity to do something from a standpoint of civil rights and from a standpoint of leadership, from a standpoint of uplifting my community, I knew then that, that, that I would do that.  Keep in mind, though, that living out in the country, living on a farm--and, you know, when--I, I really didn't, didn't, didn't have the time and--but I knew then, if the opportunity ever afforded itself, I was gonna do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, so were there any teachers in high school that really stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, yeah, absolutely--Mr. Wright, who, who taught me chemistry.  Miss Counce (ph.)--what did Miss Counce teach me--economics, I, I believe.  My high school principal, Mr. Dean, my coach--basketball coach, coach Blalock, Mr. Coleman--what did Mr. Cole-, I think Mr. Coleman taught me literature or something.  But, yeah, all those individuals--they were role models.  You know, back then you either be a teacher, preacher--and they, they, they were role models to me.  And I used to look up to those folk.  And they would always take an interest in, in you.  Yeah, I've always said that, you know, "Integration hadn't been all good for African Americans."  And when I was in high school, I had a black coach, black guidance counselor, a black principal, black teachers.  Now, if you look at integration, integration has taken away a lot of that.  I'm not saying integration has been bad, because it has not.  It's all about quality education.  If, if we could have gotten the same kind of quality education in high school at Edgefield County Colored High School as the white kids were getting at Edgefield High School and later Strom Thurman High School with an all-black faculty and staff, then integration would not have mattered because the, the quality of education would have been there.  But integration is about quality education.
Speaker 1: You, you're referring in terms of quality mean the amount of dollars invested in equipment and the facility, in essence.
Speaker 2: Quality.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, rather than the personnel (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The, the same, same resources.  the same resources.
Speaker 1: Say if you have those teachers--if your black teachers had the same resources--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Would've had the same resources, the same pay, the same equipment in the chemistry lab, the same equipment for the choir, the same equipment for the football, basketball team, the same buses, the same copiers, the same typewriters--we didn't have that, we didn't have that.  So, you know, I'm of the opinion that black kids don't have to sit next to a white kid to learn.  It's about the quality of the education.
Story_ID: 13365
Speaker 1: Were the relations really tense in Edgefield [South Carolina] between black and white or were they, you know--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But you know what?  I have to say that I had a couple of white friends.  When, when I would--had mentioned earlier in order to participate in extracurricular activities, to stay after school and to, to walk home--there, there were times that, particularly in, in, in junior high school [Johnston Training School, Johnston, South Carolina] when we were getting ready for the class play and stuff like that, we would walk from the school to uptown and stand on the corner and maybe try to catch a ride or wait till my daddy [Leonard F. Springs, Sr.] came through on the truck.  And we would get on the back of the truck and ride home.  Drugstore was right there on the corner.  Had a soda fountain and all, and, you know, we couldn't go in and sit down at the soda fountain and have a soda or have a milkshake or something.  I don't care if it was raining, how cold it was, we had to stand outside because we weren't allowed inside.  I remember very distinctively that there was a, a young man and--Scotty Butler.  In fact, Scotty is the younger brother of Congressman Derrick Butler [sic, Butler Carson Derrick, Jr.].  Congressman Butler served in the U.S. Congress for, for a number of years.  And Scotty would come out sometime and, and speak to me.  And he knew me simply because his father, 'Old Man Derrick'--well, Butler Derrick, Sr., his father, was the insurance man there in, in Johnston.  So he in-, insured my father's vehicles.  And I used to go in to his father's office with my dad to, to pay the bill.  And we were about the same age--Scotty and I were about the same.  And I remember Scotty would come out sometime and he, he would see us standing out there in the cold and in the rain and he would come out and say, "You want me to go in and buy you a soda?"  And he did that, he did that.  And I will always have respect for him for that because he was the only person that I would recall--the rest of the white kids would look out the window and, and call us the "n" word and--but, you know, he would come out sometime and, and do that.  So, so as far as racial, racial tension, I, I guess it was always there, but not as much as some of the situations that, that exploded in, in, in the late '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 13366
Speaker 1: So when you graduated in 1960 now it--.
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, South Carolina] in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, '64 [1964].  That's right, '64 [1964].  Now that was a big year in Democratic National Convention with Fannie Lou Hamer and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Freedom Summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you watching all that that summer when you were (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  In, in, in fact, was that the year that--what year did [U.S. President John F.] Kennedy get shot?
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].  He was killed the fall before that in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  That was my senior year.  When he, he was killed, yeah, Fannie Lou Hamer--.
Speaker 1: And the summer before that it was the March on Washington in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: --March on Washington and, you know, I was watching all that, that growing up as, as well, and had a very keen interest in, in, in that.  So--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that the first, I think, major exposure to Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] on, in, on television, I mean a major, major speech of his, you know, and that short speech (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, exactly.  It, it, it--exactly, yeah, yeah.  And, and, and I, I recalled watching that and, and, and, and hearing that speech.  And then my social consciousness begun to develop and my awareness around civil rights begun to develop, so (pauses) that was 1964.
Story_ID: 13367
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, South Carolina] graduation.  What happened--did you have any--did you graduate with honors in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  I, we had a huge graduating class.  I think it was like 140--well, huge, big at that time (laughs).  And I think I graduated--I was in the top ten--eight or nine.  I was in the top ten.  Obviously, my grades had slipped somewhat from, from junior high school [Johnston Training School, Johnston, South Carolina], but I still was a, was a, was a good student.  And upon graduation, left and went to Atlantic City, New Jersey, to work that summer to work on the boardwalk 'cause I knew I had to--I didn't want to stay at home and stay on that farm and work because--.
Speaker 1: So this is '64 [1964] you went to Atlantic City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is where--were you there during the [Democratic National] convention?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So you were, you were right there in Atlantic City when the--so you experienced a lot.  Well, keep going.  Tell us this story.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you know, I knew if I stayed at home what was gonna happen that summer--work on the farm, pick peaches.  You know, all through high school we used to pick peaches.  That's why I don't like peaches today (laughs).  We would pick peaches during the day and work in the packing shed at night.  Pick them during the day and then we'd pack them up in crates at night.  And it--that was hard work--hot, and that peach fur would get all over you.  So I said, you know, "When I finish high school, I'm going North," and went up to Atlantic City that summer to work along with some of my other buddies that were, had been to Atlantic City to work in, in, in previous years.  So, when up and worked on the boardwalk, experienced the city life a little bit, and came on back to, to school that fall--started school at Voorhees [College, Denmark, South Carolina] as a freshman.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the convention.  Now this is a historic convention, that convention in '64 [1964].  Did you catch any of that or any of the crowd activity?  I know they had, they discovered the bodies of [Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner, and [James] Chaney that summer and had the placards up at the convention.  Did you see any of that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  Well, you know, I, I, I was--I watched some of it on TV.  Wasn't involved in it because I was, I was working, you know.  Worked at a restaurant busting tables and--but that, that was the summer.  It was a very hot summer.  But then a lot of that really in, in, in my mind made me aware of who I am as an African American--brought back a lot of the, the thoughts from growing up in Edgefield, and, again, I, I think motivated me to, to get involved.  But I was in Atlantic City that, that summer.
Story_ID: 13368
Speaker 1: How did you come to choosing Voorhees College [Denmark, South Carolina]--?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: And tell us something about it, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, when I finished high school [Edgefield County Colored High School, Edgefield, South Carolina], I had planned to go to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] because my sister was South Carolina State.  She finished a year before me.  And she went to South Carolina State, and I would go down and visit her, so I was exposed to college life.  And I always knew I wanted to go to college--unlike a lot of friends.  I think out of my class of 140-something, I think maybe three or four of us went off to college, which is a very low percentage.  It may have been five.  Everybody else went to New York to work or stay at home--got a job in the mill, worked, got married, and had a family.  But I knew that I wanted to go off to college.  Well, quite frankly, I procrastinated and, and didn't, didn't get my application in at South Carolina State on time.  I got accepted, but was late and couldn't get a room in the dorm.  So my second choice was, was Voorhees.  And I chose Voorhees simply because my high school principal, Mr. Dean, had gone to Voorhees.  And he told me about Voorhees as well as--there was another faculty member, I believe.  So, I submitted my application to Voorhees and went to Voorhees.  I had never been on the campus and never been to Denmark, South Carolina, until the day my parents [Leonard Springs and Mildred Morgan Springs] took me down there.  And fell in love with the place.  And at the time Voorhees was a junior college.  And my class was the first four-year graduating class from Voorhees College.  And, and that, that was something intriguing.  That was history to be the first four-year class to graduate, to make that transformation from a junior college to a full four-year liberal arts school.  And stayed there four years--did well.  And I think there were--had a large freshman class.  And, in fact, it was the largest freshman class in the history of, of the college.  And I think it was maybe over 200 freshmans or even more.  And at the time I think we had a graduating class of like forty-five.  And I have been involved with Voorhees ever since I, I went there.  I am now Vice Chair of the Board of Voorhees College.  So I've been involved with the school ever since my freshman year there.
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers there that, or professors that you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, in fact, my business teacher was, was Mr. [William Clayton] Marshall.  Mr. Marshall was just, just a fantastic individual from a standpoint of teaching us.  He made us read at least one newspaper every week.  I mean his thing was current events.  My English professor, Miss Hicks--Miss Hicks was tough, I mean she was tough.  Miss Hicks would tell us that, "Yeah, my class start at 8:00 [A.M.].  If I get to get in class at 7:45 and close the door, you know--," she taught promptness.  My biology teacher--Dr. Albert--and Dr. Albert was, was a man that really instilled in me a, a, a sense of pride, a sense of dignity, a sense of civil rights.  He was involved in the community.  He would do voter registration drives in the community.  He would take me with him--voter registration and voter education--and on election day we would travel throughout the city and the county, too, to get the vote out for various candidates that was, that was running.  I. [Isaiah] DeQuincey Newman at that time was the field secretary for the South Carolina Conference NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And he would come on the campus and organize an NAACP chapter.  I got involved with NAACP then because I. DeQuincey Newman--all these people are dead now, dead and gone--but those are the, the folk that I looked at as, as, as, as, as leaders and looked at as, as, as heroes in the community.  Dr. Potts, Dr. John F. [Foster] Potts, was President of Voorhees.  And Dr. Potts was my mentor.  Dr. Potts took an interest in me.  And after class he would tell me to come by the house, and we would sit down and talk.  He had this beautiful home on, on the campus.  And I would go, and he would let me play pool on the--shoot pool.  And when he had to make trips on the weekend, he would ask me to drive him to various meetings.  And his wife, Mrs. Potts, taught me English and--no, she taught me public speaking.  And they would always tell me, say, "You know, Lenny, you, you can be successful in life."  In fact, in fact, I recall that I would take Dr. Potts to various alumni meetings, and, if I didn't have a, a tuxedo to wear to some of the functions, he would rent me a tuxedo so that I would be dressed appropriately.  So it was those folk in college, my professors and, you know--in college, playing baseball in college and my, my baseball coach, Coach Akins (ph.), and just, just a myriad of individuals that, that I'm standing on their shoulders.  Now that--I can't, I can't forget that.  So, even now when I go back to the campus, I reminisce about, about those days at Voorhees.  And when I was matriculating on, on the campus--course, the campus has changed tremendously now from a standpoint when--yeah, Voorhees is, is, is a rich, rich school from a history--the founder of that college is a black female, Elizabeth Evelyn Wright, who came to Denmark [South Carolina] after finishing Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  A woman--can you imagine a female back then, 1890, establishing a school?  And, you know, she had to withstand arson, she was burned out a couple of times--the school was burned up, but she had vision.  She had vision of, of, of a, of a institution.  So, Voorhees is my alma mater.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now she--I've--now I heard of story from--I can't think of who it was not, but it was a educator in [Washington] D.C. who was telling us about how she raised the money for the school and she, she really gleaned the area for money from (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, and, and, yeah, the school got its name Voorhees because there was a rich white family in New Jersey, the Voorhees family.  She went to them and they were the first family or the first individuals [Ralph Voorhees] to give a large sum of money to the school.  In fact, the Voorhees family is still involved.  One of the grandsons [Dr. Alan M. Voorhees] is on the Board of Trustees now at the college.  So, but she was quite a person.  She died at a very young age, too.  I think she was only about thirty-four [years old] when she passed away.  But she was determined to start that school in Denmark, and the school is doing well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you graduated in what, '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Story_ID: 13369
Speaker 1: What did you do next?
Speaker 2: Oh, believe it or not, within two months I was in the [U.S.] Army.  Graduated [Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina, 1964], the Vietnam War was hot, and immediately after graduation I signed a, a contract to teach school because, yeah, if you was a schoolteacher, you could possibly get a deferment.  That didn't work.  I got my greeting letter from 'Uncle Sam'.  I appealed that to the draft board in Edgefield County [South Carolina].  I went to them and says, "Hey, you know, I'm gonna teach and, quite frankly, I was gonna teach mental retarded kids in Aiken County."  Well, I went to an all white draft board sitting there in Edgefield County.  So they said, "No, you're going, you're going to the Army."  So, went in the Army and took basic training at Fort Jackson in Columbia [South Carolina] and went, took my AIT [advanced individual training] there and down to Fort Benning [Georgia] and from there to Vietnam.  I was infantry (laughs).
Speaker 1: So you didn't go in OCS [Officer Candidate School] or anything or--?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't.  In fact, in fact, you know, I, I hated the Army with a passion to tell you the truth.  Here I am just out of college and, you know, trying to start a new life, and, you know, I get drafted to go to the Army.  In fact, I qualified for flight school and turned it down because, you know, if you, if you would have accepted flight school, flight school was like eight or nine months.  They would teach you how to fly these helicopters.  And then you had to guarantee the Army another sixteen months or maybe twenty-four months.  So you add all that up, I says, "No, that's too long to be in the Army."  So, I, I, I declined it.  So as a result of that I end up infantry, a foot soldier in Vietnam.  And I'd tell you a lot of stories about Vietnam if you want to here those, but--.
Speaker 1: Well, what's--is there any particularly good, I mean, you know--.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's no good stories.  I mean, you know, you're out there on the frontline fighting, and--.
Speaker 1: So you were in the midst of a lot of real fighting.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  My, my, my MOS [military occupational specialty] was 11-bravo [11B].  I mean that's, that's infantry.  I, I humped the M-60 machine gun.  I was with the 1st Air Calvary Division, and, you know, we were out there.  We were airmobile.  I mean, they would drop us in to, to hot zones where, where they needed help.  So, and got out and you put all that behind me.
Story_ID: 13370
Speaker 1: My first job was when I left, I left Edgefield [South Carolina] and I got--and moved to Greenville, South Carolina.  My first job was a guidance counselor with the school system.  In Greenville integration had just come into being.  And got a job and, and did that for a year and then took a job with Urban League.  And when I moved to Greenville, I met a gentleman by the name of Dr. William F. Gibson.  Dr. Gibson was a true leader in the community from a civil rights standpoint.  I was watching TV one day, and he was on television talking about education in Greenville County.  And I said, "I like that man.  I gotta find out who he is."  So I, I called him.  He invited me by his office.  And he and I became best of friend--best of friends.  Dr. Gibson later became--we started an organization called Black Council for Progress, the BCP, the Black Council for Progress.  And our theme was "United we stand, divided we fall."  And the BCP was really the organization in Greenville, South Carolina that was leading the charge for freedom, justice, and equality for, for the black community.  We realized then that if we were going to become individuals that would have to garner more respect in the community, we would have get with an organization.  So, we literally got involved with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Dr. Gibson became President of the Greenville branch.  I became Vice President.  Dr. Gibson then became President of South Carolina State Conference NAACP.  I became vice president of South Carolina State Conference NAACP.  Dr. Gibson became Chairman of the Board of the national NAACP.  So our careers from a standpoint of civil rights--we worked hand in hand.  But the Black Council for Progress was where we got our start from a standpoint of, of, of civil rights.  And from that point on--you're talking '69 [1969], I've been involved.  But even before that back to my college days [at Voorhees College, Denmark, South Carolina] and being involved in NAACP in, in college.  And the rest is history.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, it is (laughs).  But, so, you said that you was at Urban League first, before you got in--you were a member then of NAACP when you were working for Urban League?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I, I, I worked for the Urban League but was involved with NAACP.  In fact, I had an opportunity to, to become President and CEO [chief executive officer] at the Urban League and didn't get the job because, you know, the word was that, you know, me being involved with NAACP, running Urban League--that would give me too much strength in the community.  And as a result of that they brought somebody else in new.  It was their loss.  But I left the Urban League at--and then took a job for the Greenville Chamber of Commerce and then got into banking and been there ever since.
Speaker 2: Now did you ever project that this path would take you to banking?
Speaker 1: Well, absolutely not, absolutely not.  You know, and, and doing all of that, my involvement in the community, the community was pushing me to run for a public office.  In fact, my nickname was 'Senator'.  I was an un-elected senator (laughs) because everybody referred to me as the Senator.  And, and that was because they knew--they being the community, knew that there was a problem, I, I was gonna be all over it.  So, my friends gave me the nickname 'The Senator'.  I really thought I was gonna have a, a political career, to be honest with you.  A lot of individuals was pushing me to, to run for a public office.  I had no interest in local politics.  I, yeah, I said, "Yeah, if I'm gonna be an elected official, I was gonna have to be either in the [U.S.] House of Representatives or serve as a [South Carolina] state senator."  And at the time reapportionment single-member districts was taking place.  So, you know, I would have had a shot.  A lot of folk had encouraged me to run for Mayor of Greenville.  But, you know, as--I had to make a decision as to whether or not I wanted to be an elected official or try to pursue a career.  There's nothing worse than a poor politician.  So I, I made a conscious decision--and it was a tough decision because when I got into banking, I had to make a decision as to whether or not I was going to pursue a corporate career and, and have to relocate, or stay in South Carolina and remain involved in the community and probably eventually run for a public office.  I made a real tough decision to pursue a career in corporate America.  And that doesn't mean that I forgot about my community involvement and, and, and, and social issues because I, I never forgot that and will never, ever forget that.  But what I had to give up was an opportunity to, to be a politician, to run for public office.  And I left Greenville and moved to Atlanta [Georgia], got involved in, in the community in Atlanta and, you know, got involved there.  And, quite frankly, had I stayed in Atlanta, I may have eventually ran for public office there because the, the 'Atlanta Journal-Constitution' printed an article several years ago and mentions several possible names for, for future mayor of Atlanta, and my name was one of the names that was mentioned.  But, you know, again, I had to relocate so--but, I don't regret it.  I, I don't regret it at all.  I still think that you can still do good in your community without being an elected official by still continuing your path in civil rights.  So, I've been involved with NAACP from a national perspective actually coming on the national Board [of Trustees], oh, I think it was '88 [1988], '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 13371
Speaker 1: How did you involve, I mean, become a banker?  I mean, how was it--?
Speaker 2: Well, believe it or not, when I left the [Greenville, South Carolina] Urban League--and the reason I left the Urban League was simply because--it was during the [President Ronald] Reagan administration.  All programs were being cut.  The Urban League staff went from forty-something to like twenty-something in just a matter of months because Reagan came in with his axe, just cutting programs--social programs.  I said, "This getting a little old."  And I said, "You know, I've done well in, in the public sector.  I've always wanted to try my hand in the private sector."  Took the job with the Chamber of Commerce.  It was a special project.  And one day the President of the Chamber said to me, say, "You ever thought about getting into banking?"  I said, "No."  He said, "I want you to go over and talk to Sam Hunt."  I did not tell him I knew Sam Hunt or that Sam Hunt, was, was president--well, no, he was Chairman of the Greenville County [South Carolina] Democratic Party.  I was the Executive Committeeman for the party.  I was the first African American to be elected the Executive Committeeman.  The Executive Committeeman was actually the individual that sat on the state committee.  They really set policy, ran--so, I never told him I knew Sam.  So I went over and, and he said, "You never told me you knew Sam."  I said, "You never asked."  So Sam gave me an opportunity.  Sam Hunt was President of at that time Southern Bank [and Trust Company], which was a small bank in--statewide bank.  And couple years later we were acquired by First Union [Corporation].  So that's how my banking career started, quite frankly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so you--was that--now that bank was--did that, was that like purchased by Wachovia [Corporation] or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, at, at the time, you know, interstate banking laws had just passed, which allowed banks to cross state lines to acquire other banks.  First Union came and acquired Southern Bank.  And, and First Union was headquartered in Charlotte [North Carolina] and, you know, we, we just start acquiring banks, just start acquiring banks.  I moved to Atlanta [Georgia], did some work out of, out of Florida, but never established residence in Florida--still work out of Atlanta and got promoted to the corporate office in 1990, '91 [1991] and been there ever since.  Three years ago, First Union and Wachovia merged.  Actually, First Union acquired Wachovia, but given the Wachovia name in the marketplace, we kept the name Wachovia.  So, I've actually been in banking some twenty-four years now from a standpoint of employment.  But, my community involvement has never ceased from a standpoint of, of civil rights, from a standpoint of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and starting, being the Founding President of the 100 Black Men of America [Inc.] in Charlotte.  So, I've always given, tried to give back to the community.
Speaker 1: And now is your job at the bank associated with civil rights in any way?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, not at all.  I--one of the things I used to do for the bank is, is community relations.  So that allowed me an avenue, an opportunity to be involved in the commu-, and the bank realized that my being out front made them look good as well from a standpoint of, of being a good corporate citizen.  And I also know by the same token that has probably hindered my promotability, if you will, in the banking career because I have never been one to be strictly a corporate person.  If it's not right, I'm gonna say it's not right.  If it's injustice, I'm gonna say it's injustice.  And from a standpoint of corporate America, sometime you have to conform to corporate America if you want to be successful.  Well, I know that my outspokenness, if you will, has been somewhat problematic for Lenny Springs [Jr.] as it relates to, to his career.  But that's me.  I have to get up in the morning and, and, and look at myself in the mirror and know that I have done and I have said what's right.  And that doesn't sit well sometime in corporate America.  But that's--.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of something that might have happened that you can tell us about that, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, a, a lot of times what I used to do is community reinvestment.  I don't know if you understand the Community Reinvestment Act of, that was actually passed in 1977 that basically says a financial institution should lend to the communities that they serve.  The, the, the act was created back because of redlining--banks not lending money in certain communities and certain zip codes.  Banks, insurance companies would basically redline a community if certain zip codes exist, or charge high interest rates.  And, you know, that, that was wrong.  And I would say that that was wrong, you know, instead of going along with the program, going along with the plan.  It, it was wrong.  It was discrimination from a lending standpoint, plain and simple.
Story_ID: 13372
Speaker 1: All this time that you're involved in the banking industry, now for--what did you actually do in the bank--I mean, what were your jobs as a--?
Speaker 2: I've always been in a role of, of community relations, corporate affairs, community development.  And, and, and now manage our supply development initiatives for, for the corporation.  And, and all of those jobs have lended an opportunity to do something in, in the, in the community, African American community from a standpoint of credit, from a standpoint of vendor relationships, from a standpoint of providing access to capital to the community.  So, I, I would like to think that, for instance here in, in, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] today, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] issued their annual report card as a part of their economic reciprocity initiative.  And they issued their report card on several industries, including the financial service industry.  Wachovia [Corporation] was the top bank from a standpoint of, of that report as it relates to supporting the community.  I would like to think that my efforts, my work had, had something to, to do with that from a standpoint of the bank as it relates to how we look upon the community and serve the community, as it relates to the, the consciousness of, of Wachovia.  So, it's a, it's, it's been something that I believe in.  It has been something that is needed in the, in the community.  You know, the civil rights struggle now has changed from social issues to economic issues.  And we need, we need economic opportunities and economic development in our communities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What projects have excited you most in terms of being able to direct finances towards, or, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what I'm doing now--what I do now is manage our opportunities for the bank to do business with, with people of color and women.  I have a passion for that because when you talk real economic development, you're talking providing an opportunity for an entrepreneur to get a piece of the pie.  So, so I'm--that is exciting me the most.  Certainly, if you look at opportunities for individuals to, to get loans, to buy a house, that, that's great.  But a real opportunity to get a piece of the economic pie from a standpoint of being a vendor, a contractor, an entrepreneur with the bank because that, that's, that's real--if we can create an opportunity for an entrepreneur to walk away with a million or several million dollar contract, then that entrepreneur can go back to his community and spread that wealth from a standpoint of hiring people.  When you hire folk, those individuals are then able to go out and become homeowners, become taxpayers, to become leading citizens in the community.  So, that, that excites me when you start talking about providing that kind of opportunity.  And it--you got to have a passion to do it.  You gotta want to do it.  Because if you don't, it, it's not gonna happen.  And a big, big portion of that is changing the culture within the bank.  I've always said that, "Supplier diversity is the last hurrah of the Civil Rights Movement."  And someone asked me in another interview did I see that as civil rights.  Oh, absolutely, absolutely.  When you start talking about economics.  You know, we had to first gain our rights to public accommodation, gain our rights to, to education, gain our rights to fair housing.  We did that.  We didn't think about how we're gonna pay for all of that.  So when you start talking about economic development--see, see you have to think that [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed in Memphis [Tennessee], and he went to Memphis to deal with the garbage workers--fair pay, equal opportunity.  And, see, if you, if you look at the Civil Rights Movement, I believe that's the direction that Dr. King was getting ready to take the Civil Rights Movement from a standpoint of economics, on a standpoint, standpoint of dollars.  When an individual has money or access to money, that eliminates a lot of problems that he or she will have.  When our community have access to capital, when our community have economic opportunities, that eliminates a lot of the problem that exist in our community.  I understand that.  So to understand what excites me is what I'm doing now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what's the--you think things are getting better?  We're making progress (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, absolutely.  Oh, yeah, yeah, absolutely.  We're not where we should be as a community, as a nation.  But, but we, we're getting there.  We're gonna have to continue with that kind of progress, continue to move forward.  Obstacles are being thrown in our way.  We don't realize what those obstacles are right now because they're not overt as they were when I was a young boy, young lad growing up in Edgefield County [South Carolina].  A racism still exists from an economic standpoint.  It's not as overt, but we gotta be more involved in corporate America.  We gotta be more involved in, in, in the boardrooms.  We gotta be more involved from a standpoint of policy.  So, a racism still exists.  So we gotta continue to, to move forward from a standpoint of really, really, really pushing economic opportunity.
Story_ID: 13373
Speaker 1: Can you tell me how you got involved in ACT-SO [Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics]?  That's, that's a--you have time to talk about that or--?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yeah, yeah, well, you know, when, when I first came on this, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] national board--.
Speaker 1: That's in the early '90s [1990s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was assigned to the ACT-SO Committee and had an opportunity to, to meet Vernon Jarrett.  And Vernon was one of the most brilliant persons I ever known--a historian.  And from a board standpoint, the board established an ACT-SO Committee and asked me to chair that committee.  That gave me an opportunity to work hand-in-glove with folk like Vernon and Paul Brock.  And I knew that if--ACT-SO is one of the best kept secrets in America.  And I, I literally mean that there is no exposure about ACT-SO.  People don't see these kids excelling academically, cultural, technology.  So, I said we gotta do something to expose this program to the world because I saw the talent of these kids.  And nobody was seeing that beyond NAACP.  So, Vernon and I and Paul, we, we set out to, to expose the world, to expose the nation to ACT-SO.  And the way we could only do that was to try to get it on television.  And we sat and met with various affiliates and finally ABC [American Broadcasting Company] agreed to, to do a pilot if we produce it (laughs), edit it, and get it ready.  So we did that--Vernon, myself, Paul.  We did that and took it back to ABC.  And they liked it.  And I think the first show is a thirty-minute pilot.  And after that ABC actually came to the convention and filmed ACT-SO.  In fact, the last public appearance on TV that Arthur Ashe [professional tennis player] did was at ACT-SO, and he died shortly thereafter.  But that's how I got involved in ACT-SO, by chairing the ACT-SO Committee in my early days on the Board of Directors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Paul alluded to a certain confrontation with ABC.  You want to discuss that with us?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, not, not really a confron-.
Speaker 1: You know, the heroic aspect of the (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not, not really a confrontation.  ABC--nobody else would, would give us an opportunity, none of the other networks.  So we went to ABC and, quite frankly, went to the Sports Division.  And I believe Vernon had a contact in the Sports Division and knew somebody.  And we visit their office in New York and, and we kind of went in and said, "Hey, we want, we want to do this."  And, you know, they kind of pushed back.  Said "No, no we want to do this, we want to do--," I was persistent that we do it.  Then they said, "Well, you guys go out, and if you go out and film it, produce it, edit it, and bring it back to us--," so we, we did that.  And, and I must say that they gave us an opportunity to do it.  And that, that's what Paul was talking about, quite frankly.  It was some pretty heated discussions, though, and, and with, with some of their executives in New York.  And after that, I think, for the next two or three years they, they came out and--I think the first time we did it, we was at the national convention in Houston [Texas].  And, and I think we went from Houston to Nashville [Tennessee], Nashville to Indiana si--you know, where-, where the convention, national conventions were, so--.  But the late Vernon Jarrett was really the founder and the brainchild behind, behind ACT-SO.  And the whole concept was an Olympics, Olympics of the mind.  And he, he, he came up with the concept simply because he said, "If we could excel athletically on the football field, on the basketball court, on, on, on the baseball diamond, we could sell--excel academically."  So ACT-SO stands for Academic, Scientific, Technological Olympics.  That's ACT-SO--Academic, Scientific, Technological Olympics, Olympics of the mind in those fields.  And we, we have some brilliant, brilliant students out there that can compete, and they compete with their mind.  They compete with their technology skills.  So, it's, it's really an Olympics of the mind instead of an Olympics athletically.  I mean, these kids win silver, bronze, gold medals, and they stand on the stand just like real athletes do at, at the Olympics.  One, one of the best programs in this nation, in this nation that the NAACP does as it relates to, to our youth and exposing those youth to the nation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and also the scholarship money, too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, absolutely, scholarships, yeah, yeah, absolutely.  If you look at, if you look at many, many of the celebrities that's out there now, they came through ACT-SO.
Speaker 1: Name us a couple just--.
Speaker 2: John Singleton, the--,
Speaker 1: The TV, I believe the--,
Speaker 2: --TV, the producer--,
Speaker 1: --filming--film director.
Speaker 2: Film director came through ACT-SO.  One of the African American Miss Americas came through ACT-SO.  Roy Hargrove, the jazz musician, came through ACT-SO.  There are many, many others.  I'm just talking about the ones that came through during, during my era that, that have come through--.
Speaker 1: Jada Pinkett Smith [actress].
Speaker 2: --came through ACT-SO.
Speaker 1: And Jada Pinkett Smith is--.
Speaker 2: Jada Pinkett Smith came through ACT-SO.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it's an opportunity for--and you don't have to be--who do you have to be to participate?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And, you know, these kids are just, just brilliant kids.  And what ACT-SO does is expose them, well, expose their talent to the world.  Yeah, I was talking to a friend of mine just this past week, Sheila Frazier.  Sheila was one of the stars in the movie 'Shaft'.  Shelia was, Shelia was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And it was 'Superfly', yeah.
Speaker 2: Super-, Shaft, Shu-, not 'Shaft', 'Superfly', 'Superfly'.  Sheila was one of the judges that came out to judge ACT-SO competition.  And just like she gives her time, there are many other celebrities that come out and, and, and judge the competition.
Story_ID: 13374
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: We don't become complacent.  We don't become satisfied.  That we can continue to, to unite and speak with, with one voice.  And I know that that will never, ever be a, a singular civil rights leaders--and, you know, the days of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] are gone--and that we'll never have a Martin Luther King.  So we should never say that we're gonna have one leader to, to lead us all.  And, and I say that to white folk as well, "You all don't have one leader.  And [U.S. President] George [W.] Bush ain't leading most of you all, if you really want to know the truth."  But my concern is that we, we realize that racism is still alive.  It is not as overt as it once was.  We realize that we still are not playing on an equal playing field as it relates to economics, as it relates to education, as it relates to the, the justice system.  We cannot afford to, to go to sleep now simply because we have made some gains.  And we have made gains.  But those gains are, are, are not enough.  They are minute.  They are minute compared to where we should be.  So my concern is that.  And we keep our eyes on the prize.  My concern that the younger generation that's coming up that they understand that they are where they are simply because of individuals that have come along before them.  And they don't become complacent as it relates to their place in life and their place in society.  They must understand that they're standing on somebody else's shoulders, and they must continue that struggle so somebody can stand on, on their shoulders.  So tho-, those, those are my, my concerns that exist now.  I see a lot of apathy, if you will, in our community.  See, there are two things that controls this nation that we live in--is politics and money, politics and money.  And both of them are synonymous of each other.  So we, we can't become complacent politically.  We can't become complacent economically.  We can't become complacent educationally because problems still, still exist.  We gotta keep folk motivated because, you know, the struggle continues, the struggles continue.  And, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is needed more today than it was needed in 1909 when, when the organization was first formed because the same problems, the same mission, the same mission that was applicable then is applicable now.  So, we must continue to fight.
Story_ID: 13375
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Yeah, there, there are some things I, I would, I would do differently, I, I suppose, nothing too, too major.  I think that one of the things I would do differently is I would try to work harder from a standpoint of giving back to the community.  Not that I haven't worked hard, I've worked, but I, I, I would, I would try to give a little bit more, I suppose.  From, from a career standpoint, I guess I would do a lot of thing different from, from a career standpoint.  I didn't have one--any mentors to, to mentor me, so I, I made mistakes.  I made mistakes personally and, you know, you, you live and you learn as it relates to your personal life.  And I guess the other thing that I would do differently--I would, I would certainly try to spend more time with family (pauses) yeah, family, friends, and faith.  I would certainly, if I had to go back and do some things differently, give more time to the church.  So, yeah, I guess we all would, if we had to go back and change some things, we all would do some things differently.  None of us are perfect, so, yeah, there are a few things I would do differently.
Story_ID: 13376
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a legacy.  Yeah, how do you determine or how do you define legacy?  I'm never one to judge myself.  I, I try not to suffer from the me-ism or the I-ism--me, myself, and I.  I've never, never, ever done that.  If, if I had a legacy, the legacy would be that I gave back to the community, attempt to give back to the community.  I attempted to, to be a force for the voiceless and a face for the faceless.  And if someone want to say that about Lenny Springs, then, then that, that's fine.  I, I will never say that, "I did this, I did that."  I, I think your legacy is what other people say about you and what the community say about you, what your family says about you, what your friend says about you.  So, I don't consider myself of, of having a legacy at, at, at this point in my life.
Story_ID: 13377
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  I mean, we haven't, we haven't asked about your family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my immediate family--I have four sisters and they're all doing well in life.  I have one brother--all doing well in life.  My mother [Mildred Morgan Springs] is, is still living and, obviously, getting on up in the age.  And, you know, I try to spend as much time with her as I possibly can.
Speaker 1: Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters.  I have a daughter, Val, that is grown and doing well.  And then I have a, a younger daughter, Elise, who is, will be twelve this year.  I, I am divorced.  I was married for about seven years.  And my latest daughter, Elise, is a love child whom--obviously, I am not married, but, you know, she is, she's a blessing to me.  And she's the love of my life.  She is the love of my life.  And although her mother and I are not married, she knows that we love her.  There's not a day that pass that we don't talk.  And there's not a day that pass that I don't tell her I love her because she needs to know that she's, she's loved.  And she, she knows that she's loved, and she tells me that she loves me.  And, and that's important because, you know, kids don't hear the word "I love you" enough.  I have a young man that I've been mentoring for the last three or four years that I look upon him as a son to me.  I got him through the mentoring with 100 Black Men [of America, Inc., Charlotte, North Carolina]--Jamar.  Jamar is a sophomore at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and he's like a son to me, and I'm proud of him.  I'm proud of his accomplishments thus far.  He's an honor roll student at the University of Michigan, and he'll be the starting cornerback, or the starting free safety, well, strong safety this year on the football team.  And I probably spend as much time with Jamar as I do with my own kids.  And I love Jamar.  Jamar know I love him.  And he's the son that I never had, I suppose.  So, so that's basically it.  I have, I have great friends, great friends that have been supportive of me over the years.  And one of the reasons I'm sitting in this chair today doing this interview is because of Paul Brock, who has been a great friend of mine over the years.  So, you know, family, friends, and faith.
Story_ID: 13378
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always said that, you know, when I die--and we all gonna cross that bridge one day.  We, we are gonna die that--.  If there's nothing written on my tombstone would be the fact that Lenny Springs in, in quotation, "He tried."  I'm a always try.  And I would like to be remembered as someone that, that tried.  I don't care what it is--I tried.  I may fail, but I'm a fail trying.  So if there's something that someone want to remember is the fact that I tried to make a difference in somebody's life.  I tried to make a difference in the African American community.  I tried to be an uplift for the community and, and, and to the community.  I may fail, but I'm a try.  I, I've always tried in life.  I've always tried to, to confront a challenge.  So, if I am to be remembered, be remembered because I tried.
