Story_ID: 652421
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Johnny W. Shaw [HistoryMaker Johnny Shaw], and that is spelled J-O-H-N-N-Y, W, of course, S-H-A-W.
Speaker 1: And what does the W stand for?
Speaker 2: Wilson.  I have--my middle name is my father's first name [Wilson Shaw, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth 1/5/42 [January 5, 1942]; that's the first month of 1942--yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Laconia, Tennessee, a little community outside of Somerville, Tennessee; it's somewhere about halfway between Bolivar and Somerville, and--rural area.  Born in a--on the farm; my dad was a sharecropper, and that's where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: At this point you mean?
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Yes, I am a pastor first and foremost; I've been a pastor for thirty-four years at one church.  I'm also a businessperson; I own and operate two radio stations [WBOL Radio and WOJG Radio] in Bolivar, Tennessee, and I'm also a state representative.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's the name of the church?
Speaker 2: St. John Missionary Baptist Church [Stanton, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right now; and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  It is April 24th, 1914--2014.  Today's date?
Speaker 1: I think it's the 23rd.
Speaker 2: It may be the 23rd; I may be off.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I have the 23rd.
Speaker 1: Twenty-third, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twenty-third, yes.
Speaker 1: Twenty fourteen [2014] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sorry about that, 2014, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: So we all agree with that, though?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Legislative Plaza in Nashville, Tennessee.  This is where I work about half--well actually, all year long, but session lasts about three or four months out of the year; just finished session last week here.  This is one of our committee rooms that we're now sitting in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 652422
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Okay.  You want me to answer that now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, pasta.
Speaker 1: Okay; a favorite color.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Probably the State of Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Good answer (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: The last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite phrase that, God cannot get you through it 'til he gets you to it.
Story_ID: 652423
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history; I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name, Wilner Jones [Wilner Jones Shaw].  To my knowledge, she was born in Fayette County, Tennessee.  I met her father when I was very young; I don't remember a whole lot about my mom's father but I remember him.  That's about all I remember about my mom.
Speaker 1: Now your mother's name is Wilna?
Speaker 2: Wilner, W-I-L-N-E-R, Wilner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Wilner--
Speaker 2: --Jones.
Speaker 1: Jones.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was--I knew you was gonna ask me something, I got to go back and look.
Speaker 1: Well I can get us close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was 1904; it was August 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had you late--she was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o-four [1904], and she was born in Fayette County (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fayette County, Tennessee, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, here comes the question.  What can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what kind of jobs did they do?
Speaker 2: Her, her dad was a farmer and a hunter, but that's about all I know about my mom; I didn't get to--my grandparents on either side; I didn't get to know a whole lot about 'em because I was very young; they died before I grew up to be very old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did her parents [Emma Jones and John Wesley Jones] own their own land, or were they sharecropping?
Speaker 2: They were sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she--did she grow up in Fayette?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Fayette County, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, she did not.  She--I think she dropped out of school [Love School, Fayette County, Tennessee], I remember, about the fourth grade--yeah.
Speaker 1: So are there any stories about--well, I'm gonna just ask--I always ask this a couple of different ways, but any stories about the ancestors on her side?  Any stories about what life was like as slavery, or emancipation or any of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not any that was really shared in depth; it was basically how hard times were coming up in terms of having to work for the white man, you know, on the farm as sharecroppers, that type thing, but I was too small to get a whole lot of information about the real stories of their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, to your knowledge, did they always--I mean had they lived there a long time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had lived there a long time, to my knowledge--they had.
Speaker 1: There is no other place that they came from or--
Speaker 2: My dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] came from Mississippi now, but he lived where we lived for a long time, but he was brought from Mississippi as a baby.  He really didn't know any of his parents, ancestors, anybody at all.  I saw a picture of his mom [Lizzy Shaw] but I never met her; I never met any of my dad's people.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I'm gonna ask about him in a second.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll, we'll bear that in mind.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652424
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Wilner Jones Shaw] say about growing up?  Did she talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well you know, my mom talked about having a good life growing up; she was al- always in church, faith was very strong.  They looked--didn't have a whole lot to look forward to, but at the same time, they knew what they had, they knew the resources that they had to work with, they knew they had to go to field and work weekdays through Saturday, they'd go to church on Sunday.  School and church was pretty much a contrast with each other to a large degree.  She talked about the fact of being happy as growing up as a young lady.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So she--do you know the name of the church that she attended?
Speaker 2: Travelers Rest Missionary Baptist Church [Somerville, Tennessee].  And of course they called it bush harbors back in the day.
Speaker 1: And the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Love School [Fayette County, Tennessee], L-O-V-E.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind who started that school, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Other than the story would probably be it was built for the black kids to attend because at that time, there was a school for the whites and a school for the blacks, and I'm sure it was just simply built for the black kids to be able to attend.  The name itself, Love, I don't know how that came about, if there was a Mr. or Mrs. Love somewhere that initiated that school to be built or not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the reason I ask 'cause often it's a clue to somebody--the history of that area, so somebody did something, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any--well--you didn't grow up there, so you don't--you may not know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I did grow up--I grew up basically in the same place.  My mom and dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] had lived there years before I was born, and I, I did grow up there.  Matter of fact, I attended that school myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered if there were any Loves living in that area.
Speaker 2: I didn't know of any.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not--that said, I never knew the name behind it; I never knew--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your mother have any aspirations that she, you know, wanted to fulfill growing up that she might not have been able to, or what talents did she have?
Speaker 2: My mom could sing well; she'd sing hymns well.  But I--you know, it was a time when people survived day by day; it was a time when basically all they could do was raise the family and survive.  My mom was the housewife, and of course--I know we're not talking about my dad right now, but he was the sole provider for the house and--the aspirations--it wasn't a whole lot to look forward to doing because they were uneducated, they didn't know a whole lot about what to do, they just were kind of happy to be survivors and to raise their families.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your mother come from a large family, or?
Speaker 2: I understand she did; she had, I believe, four other sisters she talked about, but they were before my time.
Story_ID: 652425
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Wilson Shaw [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] was his full name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was--my mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] was 1904, he must have been like 1906; he was born in, I believe, April of 1906.
Speaker 1: And you said now he was from Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and was brought to--
Speaker 2: To Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now it is obvious that he was a little more involved in the slave trade than even my mom, because he was brought from Mississippi to Tennessee and that's how he and my mom met, somewhere in Tennessee, but I never met any of his people.  I met some people later on in life who we thought were related, but we couldn't actually, you know, validate that.
Speaker 1: What's interesting now, you're not the first person to do this, but to talk about the slave trade in the 20th century--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when it was over in 1865.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I think it kind of speaks to the harshness of the life, right?
Speaker 2: It does, it really does, yeah.  It really does.
Speaker 1: And people still think about that as slave trade when it supposedly was over, you know.
Speaker 2: But in the South, many places, the slave trade went on a while after even it's supposed to have been over by law.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was brought by relatives, or--who brought him, do you know?
Speaker 2: Some of his relatives brought him to Tennessee.  Now how they came, I don't know, but he--his story was he was a baby; he doesn't even remember who that person was that brought him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he have any relatives in--
Speaker 2: He had a half-brother that we met in Tennessee that was supposedly his half-brother, but I don't know whether that half-brother was from Mississippi or was from Tennessee, but we met him and to know him in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: What part of Tennessee did--was your father (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Fayette County, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Fayette County, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it was in a rural part of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, rural, rural West Tennessee.
Story_ID: 652426
Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's upbringing; and, and what, what did he say about growing up and what did people say about it?
Speaker 2: You know, he's strong disciplined; he was brought up strong discipline, brought up--he always talked about he was brought up--taught to work, to work hard, taught to try to please the master--the slave master or the boss, or the straw boss, whichever.  He had a good trade, carpentry, he was good at building houses and built a lot of houses in the day for farm hands and a lot of--I guess these things that you--trailers that haul things, you know, the beds that go on 'em.  He did a lot of things like that during, during his time as a carpenter--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worked basically for nothing, maybe two dollars a day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he a sharecropper as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was sharecropper; always a sharecropper.
Speaker 1: What was the crop that they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cotton and corn and hay mostly, but cotton and corn surely, because he didn't own any cows until maybe later on in life, so it was basically just cotton and corn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about your father [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] that are passed down?
Speaker 2: No, no sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No sir, he did not; my father dropped out even earlier.  My father told me he dropped out of school about the second grade, again, because of the, the, the enormous pressure to, to raise families and to work in the fields; they didn't get to go to school very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did he attend the same school [Love School, Fayette County, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, he did not; I do not even--somewhere, I don't know where my father attended school, but it was not where my mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your father would have been too young to serve in World War I [WWI]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and probably too old to serve in World War II [WWII] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) World II, and he, he never served in the, in the [U.S.] Armed Forces at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did he spend his whole life basically in Fayette County [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: He did, mostly all of his life; basically, his whole life was sharecropping.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 652427
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Wilner Jones Shaw and Wilson Shaw, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: There is not because my parents didn't talk much about how they met or what life was for them before we came along.  I'm not proud to say this, but I, I think my parents, from what I know, lived together for quite some time before they ever legally married because there again, it was a time when it was not easy to get married, it was not easy to do what people normally do today, so people kind of just hooked up and started a family.  And I recall, based upon what I found out, my parents didn't get mad- married, that is, until after I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were saying that that wasn't unusual in that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not unusual in that day at all; no, it was not.
Story_ID: 652428
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents--now, now both of them were, stayed alive while you were growing up, right?  They were--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And, so when you think about their per- personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, the work ethic, how they look, how they walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I, I think I take more after my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] because I was just a--I, I was spoiled by both because I was the youngest, but I, I always wanted to be like my dad.  I remember walking in the fields behind him and I wanted to walk in his footsteps; I wanted to--you know, I just wanted to be like my dad.  I didn't know exactly what my dad was like other than a hard worker, but I just wanted to be like him.  My mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] did most of the nourishing me and, and, and you know, and treating me like the baby I was, but it was my dad who I really wanted to be, but of course my mom was always special.  You know, mom's always special but it was dad who I just really wanted to imitate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now--well, can you describe your parents' personalities, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my dad was funny; he, he would take a little toddy on weekend--a little drink, and, you know, when he'd get a little spirit in him, he was funny; he would tell funny jokes and say funny things and talk a little bit about how he was treated the week prior on the job, and what some of the people would have said to him and how he took it and responded to it--those type things.  They were, they were truly, I believe, in love with each other because, you know, they, they stayed together and they were happy together and, you know we, we didn't know we were poor; we really never--I--when the last recession hit--I've been in a recession all my life, you know?  It wasn't like a recession for me because we've always lived under those conditions until I got older and moved out and started on my own, so any progress at all was good for us; anything was better than where we were because we never knew we were poor.  We had to stand in line to wait--to see if we could get food for the winter from one crop to another.  We never cleared up, you know.  You worked in the fields and you, you, you borrowed money on your crop, but at the end of the year, you almost came out; you never came out.  You would--thirty dollars less or forty dollars less or one hundred dollars less, but then you had to stand in line, and I would watch my dad do that--stand in line to get financed for another year, and sometime he wouldn't know whether or not he was gonna get money for Christmas for us until Christmas Eve, you know, things like that.  It, it was, it was--times were so different then, and I remember those times quite well where he didn't know where the next meal was gonna come from until the guy that he sharecropped with finally said, "Well, I'm gonna let you slide; we gonna put you on for another year," you know.  "And we gonna put you past your present debt onto your new debt."  And it was always that way with my dad; that, that's the way my dad worked and grew up; instilled in all of us to work hard, and I, I admire him.  I don't think I could be the man my dad was today even if I tried, 'cause I don't, I don't know how he survived through that.
Story_ID: 652429
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of historians today suspect that the sharecropper system was not fair.
Speaker 2: Well of course it was not fair (laughter); that's no suspect--no suspicion to it; it was not fair. You know, but it was what we had; it was all we had.  It was what we had to live for and by.  You know, we would get a pair of shoes, a Sunday pair of shoes we'd call 'em, for the weekend to wear to church, and you had a pair that you would wear weekdays, and if the weather was warm, for much of the time, you wore no shoes, you know; you survived, you know.  And we were just one of those families who grew up that way, and I think the success of my life whatever it's been, it's been that because of where I started from, and when I look at myself today, all I can say is halleluiah from where I came from--yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean a system where--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the owner of the land--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is setting the prices--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --setting the pay--
Speaker 2: Yes, they set the pace, all the way.
Speaker 1: --and at the end of the year you always, no matter how hard you work, you always owe money.
Speaker 2: You always owed money.  You never got outta debt; you'd get close, but never out.  And that thirty bucks [dollars], with the interest, could grow back to hundred or two hundred, or whatever.  You never saw the books; you never had a chance to go over the books.  They told you what was on the books.  You don't know how many times you paid for a sack of Irish potatoes, a country ham or whatever, 'cause we basically raised our own meat, you know.  We had hogs and all of that, but I mean you never knew what you paid for anything you got.  We don't know how many times we paid for a pair of shoes--the same pair; we don't know that because you didn't get to look at the books.  That was not your choice.
Speaker 1: So this is sharecropping in the South, though?
Speaker 2: Yes, and this is basically--this is basically the way sharecropping was ran, I mean you know; people may tell you a little bit of a different story but they will tell you these were things that you didn't have privy to.  If they told you you owed a thousand dollars, you owed it even if you didn't owe but two hundred.  That's the way it was.
Speaker 1: And did you ever hear any stories of someone who disputed that?
Speaker 2: I never did, and I'm afraid you won't hear many because people were afraid to dispute that.  I mean that could cost you anything short of, and, your life; you know, you just didn't do that because you were in a situation--in fact that's why my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] finally moved off of that farm [in Fayette County, Tennessee], is because finally he decided to exercise his rights to vote.  I was eighteen years old, and he decided, "Well I can't do anything else, but I can exercise my right to vote."  And when he did that, they said, "You gotta go."
Story_ID: 652430
Speaker 1: And I don't know if you know of the history of Tent City in Tennessee?  My dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] missed going to Tent City about yea (gesture) much.  From Friday evening to Monday morning, he met a gentleman that gave him a place to stay and to work on his farm so that he didn't have to wind up going and moving his family into Tent City which were nothing but literally tents, and you lived without a floor--on the ground, and that's where all the people that exercised their rights to vote in Fayette County [Tennessee] had to move to.  They couldn't get groceries, they couldn't get gasoline; they couldn't get anything because they were punished for exercising their rights to vote.
Speaker 2: Now where was Tent City?
Speaker 1: It was in Somerville, Tennessee; I can take you to the spot right now.  In fact, I'm working to try to get--it's a monument there, but I'm working to try to get a larger monument there in that area for, for commemoration of what Tent City really was about.
Speaker 2: So Tent City basically came into being because black people voted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Voted, yes--
Speaker 2: --and were kicked off the land.
Speaker 1: --were kicked off the land; and my dad was one of those persons--yes.
Speaker 2: I guess the only good thing is that they--now that they erased their debt, but that they still owed, even though they were kicked off the land.
Speaker 1: Well no, they, they pretty well--because they had already paid in so much, they kind of let the debts go at that point in time, I mean you know--you done paid the man five, six times over so I mean (laughter)--
Speaker 2: This is fairness, but we're talking about what the other side is saying, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, right.  But I--but, but I'm sure they did erase those debts at that point in time because, like I said, you'd already paid 'em, so I'm sure that was--they were well pleased to do that.
Speaker 2: You know there are lots of people we've interviewed in Chicago [Illinois], Indianapolis [Indiana] or Cleveland [Ohio] that had relatives in Tennessee or Mississippi or Alabama who actually, you know, took off for the North at some point.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was that considered in your family or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was.  My brothers and sisters, they all left later on because, you know, we worked in the fields, and I was probably the last one to leave, but my brothers and sisters moved out to St. Louis [Missouri], Chicago, and places like that because, you know, they were tired of living on the farm; they knew life was better.  General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] was hiring in the cities and other companies at that time; manufacturing was big as you know, and people moved all for better jobs and better living.  And course some of those same people now are looking at moving back to the South because things are different; but yes, they left for that very reason.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 652431
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings (background noise), your brothers and sisters.  Can you name them all, tell us something about what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --they're doing, and place yourself in the order where, you know.
Speaker 2: I, I can.  I will start with the oldest and come down.  The oldest one was Willie Harvey [ph.].  Willie was--Willie made his career in the [U.S.] Army for the most part; course he's deceased now, but Willie was--he was big, he was a Army man; he was big on the Army.  He, he made a good living by going to the Army because, again, during that period of time, that was kind of a stepping stone.  Now Willie was not raised in the house with us because Willie was a half-brother from my mom's [Wilner Jones Shaw] side, but I remember him very well.  And then there was my sister Ester Lee [Ester Lee Blockett], who is now deceased.  She lived in St. Louis [Missouri]; she became a housewife and basically that was what she did up until she passed away.  And then there was my brother Eugene [Eugene Blockett], who passed away this year in Chicago [Illinois].  Eugene worked for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] for several years; he did well working for General Motors.  He worked in the department where they built locomotives--somewhere in Chicago there.  And then there was my sister Ovellar [Ovellar Shaw], who now lives in Chicago.  She's a housewife; her husband and her live in Chicago and they do very well; I think they both retired now.  She worked for BellSouth [BellSouth Telecommunications, LLC], which later on became AT&T [AT&T Inc.], for a long time.  And then there was my brother Wilson, Jr. [Wilson Shaw, Jr.].  He lived in Chicago.  He's now deceased.  He worked in manufacturing.  I don't know exactly what he did, but he worked in manufacturing until--fact, he was murdered in Chicago, my brother Wilson was.  And then there was my twins--sister and brother; we called 'em Peggy and Peter.  Now his real name was Tommy Lee [Tommy Lee Shaw].  He passed away in Wisconsin a few years back.  He had his own business; he was--he adopted a lot of kids, and was in that business of adopting kids and running, I guess, what you call like boarding homes or something of that sort, but that's what he did before he passed away.  Now his sister, Dezerie [Dezerie Shaw], lives in Bolivar [Tennessee] where I live, and she is a housewife now, she lives with her, her husband is deceased but she's my baby sister; and of course I am the baby and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you're talking to the baby right now.
Story_ID: 652432
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  My childhood memories are wonderful because I was the baby, I was considered the baby, everybody thought I was the baby and everybody treated me like was a baby.  My sister--my oldest--not oldest sister, but my sister [Ovellar Shaw] in Chicago [Illinois] now, spent a lot of time with me when I was growing up in making sure that I was taken care of and so forth, and everybody would say, "You don't bother the baby; you don't touch the baby."  Of course that spoiled me, naturally (laughter), and I got away with so much.  I got away with things that the rest of the kids couldn't get away with; I got to steal their food and take their cookies.  We all put something back, you know, in our rooms from--my mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] would bake teacakes or what have you, and we'd all get our share, but then we'd get to take one to our own room or whatever and stash it somewhere.  Well I'd go in and get theirs and mine too, you know, "But you can't bother the baby," you know--that type thing.  So I had a good childhood growing up.  I got to go to the gin with my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] every time he took a bail of cotton off.  I would help pick the cotton but when time come to go, I got to go with him, you know.  It was always special treats for me, and I grew up that way and I thought I would probably be spoiled as a man that way, but I, I realized after I became a man I couldn't live that way forever.  But all of my brothers and sisters will tell you that they had to walk by my orders as a child.  I remember when we first got a car--first got our first car, and my dad would let my older brothers have the car, but I had to go to watch to see what they would do, to make sure that they drove the car right, make sure that they didn't stay out too late, and if they kissed the girls, I got a chance to tell dad they kissed the girls and (laughter), you know, it was just--it was, it was a fun time.  I have a scar right now where my brothers decided to get me back one day.  They were pulling me down this, this, this ledge, and they thought, "Well we're gonna throw him off just for the heck of it 'cause he's so spoiled," and they did; and I got a scar from that right now.  But, yeah, great, great childhood, great growing up, enjoyed life well.
Story_ID: 652433
Speaker 1: Describe the house you lived in [in Fayette County, Tennessee], when you grew up.
Speaker 2: You could see through the floor; you could see some cracks in the floor to the ground, which was a pretty decent house, in that time, for families like us, and black families particularly.  If you lived in a house like that, you were living in a pretty decent house, you know.  And by my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] being, being a carpenter, he could do some things to help kind of keep our house a little warmer than the average house, but it was just a regular farm house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was it like one story house, two stories?
Speaker 2: No, it was a one story house, as I recall, but all the brothers slept in one room and all the girls [Ester Lee Blockett, Ovellar Shaw and Dezerie Shaw] slept in one room, and then dad and mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] slept in a room by themselves.  I remember having to sleep in a bed with my two brothers [Wilson Shaw, Jr. and Tommy Lee Shaw], who were older, 'cause my other brothers [Willie Harvey (ph.) and Eugene Blockett] had left home.  But they were older, and sometime they'd almost lay on me all night, you know.  I remember those times, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 652434
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had one TV in the house; everybody had to go to the living room, if, if you will, to watch TV.  That's where the TV was, you know.  Everybody had to watch the same thing.
Speaker 2: Well where did your station come--stations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out of Memphis [Tennessee]; we had maybe two stations; probably two TV stations you could get, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, these were the early days of TV--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and born in '42 [1942], I think TV hits in '48 [1948] or so--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear), and then finally--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So did you get TV when you were what, about ten or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe ten, twelve, somewhere about--yeah.  And I remember, you know--in, in, in, in, in the rural areas, people had to create their own entertainment, too.  Friday nights, somebody would have what they call a house supper, and they'd just serve food and whatever, and everybody go over and sing and--sing some blues, sing some gospel--whatever, at one neighbor's house one Friday night, another neighbor's house another Friday night and whatever; that was our entertainment.  Then we went to what we call to the--to town on Saturday; you'd get to go maybe to Somerville [Tennessee] or to Laconia [Tennessee], which was a community store and a cotton gin, and you'd meet everybody there.  And of course you know, everybody had to--what I call mini casinos; they'd shoot a little dice behind the store while everybody else shop inside, and it was life growing up like that.  And even at churches, some of the churches you would attend, there would be several different activities going on outside and inside, 'cause it's where everybody met, you know--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so of course Sunday was a big day, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Sunday is a big day always, yeah.  Sunday is a big day, yeah, because you went to church.  Kids--moms and kids were in church.  Now dads may be outside telling jokes, having fun, maybe drinking a little corn whiskey or whatever the case may be, but mom and the kids were in church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the name of the church was--was this Travelers Rest?
Speaker 1: Travelers Rest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Travelers Rest Missionary Baptist Church [Somerville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 1: No, sir.  It's been there all my life and before.  I don't know the story behind that name, just other than this community church where somebody in their community probably lived, and they just call it where you travel to.  They just come up with names like that, you know, maybe where people travel to, and they just came up with Travelers Rest; it's where you stop and rest after traveling, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652435
Speaker 1: Did you have radio when you, when you were--early on?  Growing up?
Speaker 2: We did; I, I, I don't remember the year, but we had radio pretty early 'cause we operated off the batteries.  I remember when we used to listen to WLAC radio station [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] off the batteries, you know, and the batteries would last a while, and then you have to go buy some new batteries.  But that was entertainment for us at night; late night radio with John R [John Richbourg], and Hossman Allen [Bill "Hoss" Allen] and all those guys, and I think you probably might remember some of those.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Tell us the significance of WLAC.  Now that's in Gallatin, Tennessee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's in Gallatin, Tennessee.  Well WLAC was the radio station--I think the significance of it was probably the first discovery of radio for many people in rural areas because you gotta understand, most rural people couldn't get any kind of radio, but WLAC was so strong; its signal would get into those rural areas where even some of the local stations wouldn't get to.  And then it was later on when some of the communities in rural West Tennessee as well as across the country, people start building smaller stations in rural areas.  But for a long time, WLAC was kind of like everybody's local radio station.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --Dayton [Ohio] where I grew up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think as far away as Detroit [Michigan], they could hear it.
Speaker 2: --I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: WLAC, you know, all over the South and Midwest, and that's where you'd hear black programming.
Speaker 2: That's it, that's it.  And so the significance, I think, was that it was the first station that many blacks heard that they could identify with, yeah.  And that was the beginning of my influence of radio, listening to WLAC in Nashville [Tennessee]; I mean that was great, man; it was entertainment, you know--something to look forward to.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They had one feature--I know you remember this--is the mail order records (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mail order records, yeah.  You could--when I first purchased my radio station [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee], I went to Gallatin to see if I could purchase some of those old songs to play; unfortunately, I couldn't, but I thought that would be a great opportunity to get started.  But yeah, they had the mail order records where you could order records and--if you had a record player, of course.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Many people would order them as far away as Ohio and Michigan.  I recall they would have a gospel package.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Randy's Record Shop in Gallatin, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They'd have a blues package--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Lightnin' Hopkins, something else (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They'd have a--
Speaker 2: Gospel package--Mahalia Jackson and Rosetta Tharpe [Sister Rosetta Tharpe], and all those people, you know--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then a--I guess they would call it a soul package with, you know, Otis Redding and other people, you know.  Maybe three or four or five records in a package (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: So this is--yeah.  And I did not know until later when they had the television show.  Do you remember the television show?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't.  I don't remember the TV show.
Speaker 1: They had a show actually called 'Night Train.'
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I do remember 'Night Train,' yes I do.  I, I vaguely remember 'Night Train.'  But you know, again, we all kind of had to watch the same thing, so if somebody else was watching something else, you just didn't get 'Night Train.'  I do remember 'Soul Train,' which later came on, you know--yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a big national--but 'Night Train' featured the disc jockeys, and it's the first time I found out that they were actually white, they were not black--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, the--Ironing Board Sam was featured on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: He's quite a character (laughter); a keyboard made out of an ironing board.  But--yeah, that's--any rate, that's, that's a big history in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in black America, the history of WLAC--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: -- and its reach, you know, late at night.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 652436
Speaker 1: A couple things here.  Now were you--did you envision yourself becoming a reverend when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No sir, I did not.  It was--it, it--I remember when I was first called into the ministry.  One of the things they would ask you is to explain your calling, but it's not something you can really vividly explain, other than to tell a man or woman that I know I received a revelation to preach the gospel--Jesus Christ.  I, I remember during that time when, for about a month, I almost drove my wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] crazy, and finally she said to me, "Whatever it is, just get up and go do it 'cause you're driving me crazy."  You know, I'd wake up all times of night and I would just--I'd be--just have a strong desire to read--
Speaker 1: This isn't until much later--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you're married, that you have a calling.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, that I had a call.
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, you didn't have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no; I had no earthly idea that I would be a preacher.  In fact, I had no earthly idea that I would be doing any things that I'm doing today.  But what I will tell you, growing up in the cotton field, I was a dreamer; I dreamed about everything probably but the preaching, you know.  I dreamed that I might be some big politician someday, that I would be some businessman someday, that I would own funeral homes or--whatever I could think of, I just dreamed and I just always held onto the dream.  I didn't know what the results of the dream would be, but I knew I wanted to do something more than what I was doing.  And I--I guess you call it daydreaming because all day long--I guess it's how I got through the day in the cotton field.  I wasn't thinking about the work I was doing, I was dreaming; I was just thinking about something I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you had to start working in the fields?
Speaker 2: About eleven years old--yeah.  I remember my first encounter in the field; I was eleven years old and I, my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] gave me a task, a man's task, at eleven years old.  And I've been working ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652437
Speaker 1: Let me go to school here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You, you started at Love School [Fayette County, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I started at Love School.  I went to fi- what we call first through eighth grade at Love School, and of course went on to Fayette County Training School in Somerville, Tennessee for one year, which was the ninth grade.  But that was the year that my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] was forced off the property to move because he voted; he exercised his right to vote.
Speaker 1: Okay now, I don't wanna move too fast (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Love.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: So what were you like in grade school?  Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: When you say a good student--I think I was a good student, but I don't think my grades were that good.  I was still interested in doing things, but it wasn't so much studying as it was I just wanted to do something, and I'm not really for sure what it was I wanted to do.  I was a C, B student; maybe a C average, but I made some Bs, and--good life in school; played a lot of softball, enjoyed my schoolmates, you know.  Had a good life in school.
Speaker 1: What kind of facility did you have there at Love School?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have any facilities other than it was just a one room school.  We got the desks that the white kids down the road didn't want anymore, and they got new desks and we got their old desks.  And there were names carved in those desks that you can imagine, and a little bit of everything else.  We got the books they didn't want anymore, you know.  So we got the secondhand stuff, but we had good teachers; we had teachers who were really interested in helping us to learn because they could see something in us that we couldn't see ourselves.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: I only had one teacher--two teachers, I'll take it back, through that whole process.  My one favorite teacher was Mrs. Irene McKinnie [ph.]; she was my main teacher, but then she got sick and they sent another lady in to teach in her place for a while.  But I only had two teachers in grade school my whole grade school--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the one room school house.
Speaker 2: One room school house.
Speaker 1: So you'd have like--about how many students in that one room?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was about thirty or forty; maybe, maybe fifty, I don't, I don't remember, but no more than fifty--you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With grades one through eighth?
Speaker 2: One through eighth, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now was your school work interrupted by, you know, agricultural (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes it was, yes it was.  We now--because I was the baby, I got to go, and my oldest sister [Ester Lee Blockett], got to go to school during times--harvest times, but the rest of the brothers and sisters had to stay home, work in the field--yeah.  But it was interrupted; sometime, all of us got interrupted because we had to stay home, work in the field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did the school provide any activities?
Speaker 2: Other than softball, activities kids would, you know, little kids would play--jump rope, simple stuff like that.  But no, there weren't any, any kind of ongoing activities; you kind of created your own, you know.  You went to school, you played soft ball or you jumped rope or you, you ran (laughter), you know, you played marbles.  You created your own activities basically; there was nothing that the school offered other than the learning process.
Story_ID: 652438
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question this way, and I, I should have asked it a little earlier, but I'll ask it now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells?  Oh, gosh, good cooking, you know.  In the South, always good cooking.  Sights, basically just rural; just rural--area.  I mean it wasn't--you saw deer, you saw cows and animals, horses and things like that--tractors.  There was no really sights to really see, I mean you know, in an area like that, other than what you were around every day.  Sounds were basically the same--cars and tractors and those type things.  I mean there were no special sounds to be heard.  You would hear a siren blowing occasionally, like it's noon, it's time for the whistle to blow--something like that--yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was that from a factory or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from a factory or something of that sort, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any trains come through there?
Speaker 2: Train?  Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, trains.  Matter of fact, I remember my first ride on a train--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. How old were you?
Speaker 2: About fifteen; I was fifteen years old.  I learned a great lesson from that, in fact, of pulling the cord for the--let the conductor know you wanna get off the train, and my mom [Wilner Jones Shaw] taught me a great lesson from that.  She said--she wanted to get off; we was getting off the train at the Laconia [Tennessee] where we lived, and she would pull this little rope and I said, "Mom, why are you pulling that?"  She said, "Well that is to let the conductor know you wanna get off the train."  I learned a great lesson from that; sometime you have to pull the cord.  You know, I never forgot that--pull the cord in life and you get off, so--but my first ride was at fifteen.
Speaker 1: So they would let you off where you wanted to get off (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where you wanted to, sure.
Speaker 1: You didn't have to wait until you got to a station to get off?
Speaker 2: No, no; you could (unclear) get off the train wherever you lived, if you pulled the cord and let 'em know in time--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Little small communities like Laconia, but only places like that.  I mean you know, you didn't have to go to the train station, but there were little small communities all along the way where you could get in on, on the train or off the train.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652439
Speaker 1: So now, high school--you went to Fayette County Training School [Somerville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Fayette County Training School, my first year of high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just for the first year?
Speaker 2: Just for the first year.
Speaker 1: Now this is all--both of these are all black schools, right?
Speaker 2: Blacks schools, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so Fayette County Training School (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Training School, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So is this like--so I guess there are more students because it's countywide?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of the students from across the county went to this one high school 'cause you only had one, okay?  And that's where I started high school, and that was only for the ninth grade.  Then, of course, that's when I moved on to Hardeman County [Tennessee] and finished at Allen-White [Allen-White School, Whiteville, Tennessee]--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what happened that you moved to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Again, it was when my dad [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] registered to vote--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: --and he was forced to move off the property so we had to--I had to live with my cousin until school was out that year because I couldn't transfer.  It wasn't easy to transfer from one school to another, so about somewhere middle ways of that year that I was in school, I stayed with my cousin in Fayette County [Tennessee] until I finished that first year and then I moved on home--yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1956 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]?  Okay.  When your father moved?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You would have been like seventeen, is that correct?
Speaker 2: I was eighteen at that time 'cause I was a year behind in school so I was eighteen--yes.
Speaker 1: Well, if you were born in '42 [1942]--
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: --you were in a regular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe I was seventeen; yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --you had graduated in 1960 from high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --but that, in '59 [1959], you would have been seventeen, I'm thinking (unclear), so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're the same age as my brother, that's why I (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 652440
Speaker 1: So the civil rights was the, '56 [1956] was the year of the Montgomery Bus Boycott--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, civil rights activities started heating up around the country and becoming more--our people are more aware of 'em because of the news coverage (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.  Yeah, because civil rights was getting a lot of coverage during that time that they had not been getting.  And I think a lot of the news coverage was what helped civil rights--many cases--yeah.
Speaker 1: I think there are people on the erroneous assumption that nothing was going on before that time, but things were going on but nobody knew about it.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--any rate--so your father [Wilson Shaw, Sr.], you know--in--well, Tennessee was a little bit more liberal than Mississippi 'cause they didn't kill him, they just kicked him off the land, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But people lost their lives trying to vote.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: So--but Tent City, this is remarkable.  I never really heard of this as such before the Tent City near Somerville [Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it's--if you ever get the opportunity to go, I'd be glad to take you there--yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's filled with people who got kicked off of their land as sharecroppers because they--
Speaker 2: That's what Tent City was all about.  The government put up these tents for people to live in because they were kicked off the white man's land for exercising their rights to vote--yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard the story of Fannie Lou Hamer, whose story's been published, that that happened to her when she registered people to vote and voted; she was told to get off the land.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So--but your father ends up relocating to--
Speaker 2: To Hardeman County [Tennessee]--
Speaker 1: Hardeman County.
Speaker 2: --which--Whiteville, Tennessee.  We lived in a little community called Vildo [Tennessee], V-I-L-D-O, right out of Whiteville, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there a significance to the name Whiteville?
Speaker 2: There again, I don't know; it's been Whiteville all my life.  I don't know--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the high school is called Hardeman County--?
Speaker 2: It was called Allen-White high school [Allen-White School, Whiteville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes--in Hardeman County where I live now, but it was Allen-White high school.
Speaker 1: Now this is a black school--
Speaker 2: That's a black school; it's closed now, but it was a black school, yeah.
Speaker 1: So your father was doing farm work, but he was renting land at this point?
Speaker 2: He was sharecropping--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Fayette County [Tennessee], but when he moved into Hardeman County and start to farm was when he started to rent property.  And farming got a little better because his landlord was a, was a African American gentleman who treated him fair about the land, and he bought some equipment and so forth, and began to do pretty well.  And of course that--it was not too many years after that when he expired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did your father pass away?
Speaker 2: My father passed away in nineteen sixty--the beginning of 1962; early 1962.
Speaker 1: Now did he ever talk about his decision to vote?
Speaker 2: He did; he talked about it quite a bit and what price he paid for it, but he always said that he, he would do it again.  And I again, I admired him for that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He's setting a strong example.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 652441
Speaker 1: Allen-White high school [Allen-White School, Whiteville, Tennessee].  Did--so were you able to just go straight through high school without any interruptions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went straight through high school, nine--tenth grade through twelfth grade at Allen-White, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in high school activities at all?
Speaker 2: I was involved in some baseball; I never did play basketball.  Baseball, glee club, sing a little bit.  I was big in agriculture, you know; that was something that was special for African American kids during that time 'cause you got to travel.  My first trip to Nashville, Tennessee was with my ag [agriculture] teacher; he brought me here for a contest to identify tools, you know.  So you know, you got to do some things that when you got in the ag department that you would not normally do otherwise--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you a member of--I know there was a 4-H club or--there was a black organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the same as Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization]--yes.
Speaker 1: It's like Future Farmers but it had another name.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: The black version of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You got to give me a minute to think about it but I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But I--and we were a member; we were a member there--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And was this the group that goes to Nashville?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd go--we'd do--have local contests at home; you'd compete with your own students at home, then the winner at home would get to take a trip to Nashville; you win in Nashville, you get to go to Washington [D.C.] or somewhere like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how are your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Grades in high school was a little better than they were in grade school [Love School, Fayette County, Tennessee], yeah; a little bit better, not much better.  I never did make straight A's because during my last year of high school, I actually finished my dad's crop and went to school at the same time.  I can tell you that I've ridden a---drove a tractor all night long and went to school in the daytime--yeah.  So classmates would help out a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were the only one--you were one of the few left at home, right?
Speaker 2: I was the only one left at home; only one with my mom [Wilner Jones Shaw], yes.
Speaker 1: Was your father [Wilson Shaw, Sr.] sick during this time?
Speaker 2: No, he'd passed on; at that time, he'd died.  But he was sick for a while before he died, but he had passed on by then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause actually, he died early in the year which he had already planned to put in the crop and all.  So then it became my responsibility to do what he would have done and to go to school as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had a tough senior year, I guess.
Speaker 2: I had a tough senior year; sure did--yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you think that period of time changed you?
Speaker 2: I think it changed my whole life because I was able to discover what it meant to work, to provide for a family, and at the same time, it was a period of mourning for me because my dad had just passed away.  It was a life changing experience that I'll never forget, but today I would tell you I guess I would do it all over again if I had to because I think that's what really made a man out of me; I think that's what really just--I became the man that I am today, to know that it, you know, you can do anything you set your mind to if you try hard enough.
Story_ID: 652442
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about your senior year at Allen-White high school [Allen-White School, Whiteville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So in your senior year now, you know, with the lo- loss of your father [Wilson Shaw, Sr.], the hard work on the farm, what were you considering, you know, that you would do after you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: Well I was considering, at that time, that maybe I could take up where my father left off and continue to farm, and I worked hard to pay off all the debt; got it all paid off, and I'm thinking because I proved myself to do that, I could get the financing to continue doing that, but I was unable to get the financing.  It was called the Farmers Home Administration then; it was not rural development [U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of Rural Development].  But they said they didn't see an interest in letting me have the money to continue to farm, so at that point in time was when I had to think about doing something else.  But during the time--while I was doing that, I was thinking that that's what I would continue to do 'cause I always enjoyed working in the dirt, working on the farm; and even now, I enjoy getting out, doing things outdoors; I'm an outdoor person, I love it, you know.  But my bubble was bursted when I found out I couldn't get financing to continue.
Speaker 1: Did they think you were just too young, or--
Speaker 2: You know, I just think it was just a matter of not wanting to do it at the end of the day.  'Cause I'd proved I could do it; I did it.  I, I, I, I, I made a total crop, you know (laughter), by myself; produced it, paid off the debt, so I'd proven myself--yeah.  But, you know, it was probably--would have been an opportunity for me, could have opened some doors for me that probably by now, who knows?  I could own five thousand acres of ground and bigger equipment and be doing what a lot of people do now if they had opened the door, but they didn't, and so at that point, I realized, you know, you got to do something.  So I start looking for public work and immediately found a job.
Story_ID: 652443
Speaker 1: Now this is nineteen sixty what?
Speaker 2: This is 1963 now, getting close to '63 [1963] because one of--and that was one of the reasons why I really thought about marriage so quick.  That was the year that me and my wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] married--was in 1963; it was because at that time, you know, I felt like I needed to do something different, I needed encouragement, and she was a encouragement to me so we got married and I got a public job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say a public job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you work?
Speaker 2: I worked--my first job was Whiteville Auto Parts [Whiteville Auto Parts and Hardware] in Whiteville, Tennessee.  I was the guy who actually kind of cleaned up the old parts of--'cause generators and starters and things like that, I did the--put 'em in what they call a degreasing, cleaned all the grease off of 'em, and then later, I was promoted to actually rebuilding those parts back--back, you know, for starters, generators and alternators for cars--things like that; that was my first job--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're getting like a--I don't think they make 'em like you anymore; the guy who could fix cars, and you can farm, you can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, you know, it was survival; it was whatever you had to do to survive.  And again, I always--I was never satisfied with what I was doing that I wanted to stay there; I always wanted to do more, and I can't even explain to you why I wasn't looking--I didn't--it wasn't like I went to my boss and said, "I wanna make more money."  I said to my boss, "Not only do I wanna clean these parts, I wanna learn how to assemble these parts."  And that's the way I am now: I want, I'm curious to know what's the next piece, what's the next step.
Story_ID: 652444
Speaker 1: Now did you think about college at all at this, you know, when you graduated from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I (laughter), I went to college for about a month and a half.
Speaker 1: That's after, after graduation?
Speaker 2: After graduation from high school [Allen-White School, Whiteville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to what was called the univer- Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] is where I thought I wanted to go; I went, didn't like it; dropped out.
Speaker 1: So you went to Memphis?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to Memphis State Univ- for just a short while; dropped out of school, came back, which I'm not proud of.  Now certainly, this is not something I'm proud of, but my life has just been such a wonderful piece as to how things have worked out for me because I mean I did all of this basically with a twelfth grade education other than going back to school for--seminary school [American Baptist College, Nashville, Tennessee] for preaching, you know--for bible study.  I mean that's basically--other than that, I pretty well educated myself all the way; in whatever I did, that's how I educated myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 652445
Speaker 1: So you're working at, at the Whiteville Auto Parts [Whiteville Auto Parts and Hardware, Whiteville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're now you're assembling parts.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what, what happened next?
Speaker 2: After that, I got another job in mental health working at the very hospital that I got the appropriations for to rebuild, which is Western Mental Health [Western State Psychiatric Hospital; Western Mental Health Institute] in Bolivar, Tennessee.  I worked there for about six years.
Speaker 1: Now what were you doing there?
Speaker 2: I was actually a supervisor over the housekeeping department there where they--we kept the hospital clean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And about what year is this? This is what, '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh; now it's--got married [to Opal Johnson Shaw] in '63 [1963] and worked for--I wanna think now we, we're getting somewhere along about the middle '60s [1960s] now, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], somewhere along there.  Worked there, then went on to work for a developmental center which was basically the same kind of work where I was a program coordinator for securing contracts for disadvantaged people who could do hand jobs of sort--sorting things and things like that; I worked there for a while.  Went on from there to a company called Kilgore corporation [Kilgore Flares Company, LLC, Toone, Tennessee] where they make flares for the [U.S.] Navy--worked there for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 652446
Speaker 1: But in the meantime, I had gotten a part time job working at the radio station, only on weekends.
Speaker 2: Now, now tell us how this, this job came about.
Speaker 1: The radio?
Speaker 2: And this is W- is this WBOL [WBOL Radio]?
Speaker 1: WBOL.  Well, actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Bolivar [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 1: That's WBOL in Bolivar.  I got hired when I first started--I didn't know this until later.  I was hired because I was an African American, and FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had put pressure on southern radio stations and say that, "You got to have at least one black on your staff."  So I got hired part time, became the local deejay; actually became, I guess, very popular in the community because I mean at that point in time, if you worked in radio, it was  big thing; I mean people actually waited outside to get your autograph and, and whatever else.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is 19--what?
Speaker 1: This--we are now in the upper '60s [1960s]; we somewhere about '68 [1968], '69 [1969], somewhere about.  And so I'm working on there weekends but because it became such--the show became so popular they said, "We got to put you on every day."
Speaker 2: Now this a trajectory of--you were telling me before we got started, you said that your gospel group [The Shaw Singers] was on the radio, right? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this was--
Speaker 2: --and the station manager heard you?
Speaker 1: No, this--right, we--what we were doing were, we would--I had this group--we're the little community group, we were singing, so station manager hears our group; I'm doing the announcing for the group, "We're gonna be at Brown's Chapel [Brown's Chapel Missionary Baptist Church, Jackson, Tennessee] this Sunday evening at two o'clock, come and hear us sing."  We had a couple of sponsors and do the sponsorship and that type thing.  "Johnson Mays Appliance Company [ph.], you need your appliances fixed, go by Johnson Mays," you know.  "Washing machine, dryers, et cetera," so forth; that type thing; Modeling Rivers Funeral Home [ph.] burial policies, all of that.  So the station manager hear me making these announcements and decide that I'll make a deejay so he calls me and he hires me and I get ten minutes of training.
Speaker 2: So now what was his name?
Speaker 1: Ralph Clenney.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ralph Clenney in Parsons, Tennessee--lives there now; owns a radio station [WKJQ Radio] in Parsons now.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: Ralph Clenney.  You know I--I think he spells it with a K; he does.  K-L-I-N-N-I-N-G [sic.], something like that, Ralph Clenney.  But anyway, I got hired, so now I'm working on a radio station and I'm a local deejay every evening from three [o'clock] until whatever time the sun go down because this is a daytime station.  I didn't get a chance to play the recorded commercials; everybody wanted me to adlib their commercials because I was ringing the cash registers.  "If Johnny said it--," and I mean--and, and, and people in the community was going in saying, "I heard Johnny say, come by and get this and get that."  And people were loving that, so I was doing all of my commercials live.  Everybody else had recorded commercials but me.
Speaker 2: Can you do one for us the way you do one in those days?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Gosh, I don't know.  I'm trying to think what--you know, something like, "The Shirt Shack [ph.] at downtown Bolivar; get 10 percent off this afternoon.  Go by and tell Vance [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Johnny Shaw sent you; they've got hot styles," or blah, blah, blah, you know--I don't know, I can't do that anymore, but (laughter) that kind of stuff (laughter).  And that's how I started in radio, and that's when I was gonna share with you--I decided that I wanted to do production and I knew I had to be good; I knew I had to be real good with it, so I grabbed this Maxwell's Big Star [Bolivar, Tennessee] commercial and I go in the production room and I record it.  I never heard it on the air; never heard it, so I asked the station manager.  By now, my station manager is a different guy; it's not Ralph Clenney, it's a different guy.  And I said, "I did the Maxwell's Big Star commercial and I never heard it; what happened to it?"  He said, "Oh, by the way, I forgot to tell you they don't want blacks' voice on their commercial."  And I said to him, I said, "Well in that case, someday I'll just own their radio station."  Kind of just said it as a response, went on, and it was years later that he walked in and said to me, "You said you wanted to own a radio station; we got one for sale, you wanna buy it?"  And I said, "Sure."
Speaker 2: Now let's--I'm gonna breeze past all this time, but you were on the air for how many years?
Speaker 1: I was on the air, gosh, for twenty something years there, before I bought.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is 19--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so this would be 1968 until--
Speaker 1: All the way up until--
Speaker 2: --eighty-eight [1988] or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere about '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm, you, you, you're right; you're exactly right.
Story_ID: 652447
Speaker 1: So '68 [1968], now let me just ask a little about '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I know one of the things that happened around the country, and was really--it happened here in Tennessee, was the murder of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in '88 [sic. 1968].  Were you on the air [at WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee] when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was on the air at that time, sure was.  Remember talking about it the best way we knew how, and what we knew 'cause we didn't get a lot of--you know, our news (laughter) department wasn't up to par like some people but yeah, we got news over the wire and we talked about it and--yeah, sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your format was gospel (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was gospel on Sunday and soul Monday through Friday; I was off on Saturdays--block formatting, but I was the only--the first and only black deejay in Hardeman County [Tennessee], okay?  And I mean, you know, everybody knew me because I was a deejay, I was a local deejay, I mean you know, everywhere I went I mean people--they hovered around me; they wanted to know how it all worked.  They wouldn't let people, which was great, they wouldn't let people come visit me in the station, you know, so people didn't really know how it all worked, and they just--it was fascinating to them.  I mean, you know, being a deejay and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you pattern yourself after any deejay that you had heard before?  Did you have a hero?
Speaker 2: I, I, I had heroes but I--just the techniques was what I learned from 'em more than just trying to sound like 'em because my manager, the guy that first hired me, Ralph Clenney, Ralph said something to me, I never forgot it, he said, "John [HistoryMaker Johnny Shaw], don't ever try to be like anybody behind the mic [microphone] 'cause if you do, you're not behind the mic and the person you're trying to be is not behind the mic, so be yourself, be natural."  So I've always been natural, but it was the techniques of how they end phrases and how they, you know, how they used their phrasing and all--phrasings isn't all on air that I learned from and, and I mean, you know, everybody from A.C. "Moohaw" Williams [A.C. Williams] to Bobby O'Jay, who's deceased now [sic.]; Ford Nelson, a guy by the name of Theo "Bless My Bones" Wade, all those guys.  I mean even the guys at WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]; I mean, you know, I--they all had something that peaked my interest, you know.  And so that's kind of how I--but I was always natural 'cause if you don't be natural on the radio, you make a lot of mistakes trying to be like somebody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I learned that technique and, and used it and, and was on air for, for several years doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 652448
Speaker 1: You and your wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] had The Shaw Singers?
Speaker 2: Shaw Singers, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: During that time, my wife at home one day decided to call this record company in Memphis [Tennessee] that said, "If you ever wanted to record a record, call us."  And we called, and guess what we got?  For $450, we got five hundred copies of single record brought to our living room.  The song we thought was gonna be the big hit didn't make it; the flip side, the B side of the song, took off like wildfire, got played on fifty thousand watt station in Memphis, WDIA [WDIA Radio], which covered Arkansas, Mississippi, parts of Alabama, many parts of Tennessee.  And when that record took off, people start calling for The Shaw Singers.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the side you thought was gonna be a hit?
Speaker 2: We thought "I Made a Promise to the Lord" was gonna be the big hit, but the one that hit the flip, bip- flip side was "This Old Life Will Soon Be Over After A While" [sic. "Life Will Soon Be Over"].
Speaker 1: That's a--well, what's the origin of that song?  Is that a gospel song?
Speaker 2: That's a gospel song; both are gospel songs, yeah.  And that's when we start getting calls to appear in different churches and different places in Arkansas and Mississippi and Alabama and all, and we started to--doing some traveling on weekend. I'm deejaying through the week, working through the week and doing--and that's when things began to happen for me and my family.
Speaker 1: Now how does that hymn go?  Can you hum a little bit of it for us?
Speaker 2: (Singing), "Soon one life will be passed, what's done for Christ surely will last, this old life soon be over after a while."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was the hit?
Speaker 2: That was a hit.
Speaker 1: And what was the other one that didn't--
Speaker 2: (Singing), "I made a promise to the Lord, I made a promise to the Lord, yes, I did," yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did this happen like in the early days of WBOL [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee], or did--
Speaker 2: This, this was happening while I was working for WBOL; I was somewhere about, I guess, eight or ten years into WBOL when this was going on, but I had the opportunity of having publicity at home as well as, to some degree, abroad because I was getting played.  Plus, Brother Wade [Theo "Bless My Bones" Wade], one of the main deejays at WDIA, also had a record shop, so we'd put records on consignment in his shop.  Well naturally, he was gonna play it 'cause he wanted to sell 'em, you know.  And that's when things began to really kick and, and go well for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So with $425--
Speaker 2: Four hundred twenty-five dollars, we got five hundred single records.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I think we sold 'em for somewhere from a dollar apiece to maybe somewhere around two dollars apiece at some point in time.  But by then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You barely made, you barely made--
Speaker 2: We barely did, but by the time those five hundred records--they went so fast, and the guy that recorded 'em was so impressed, he called us back to sign a contract for an album.  So we went back and signed a contract to do an album with him and we did the album, and that did very well.  I think the first album ['Yesterday and Today'] sold somewhere in the neighborhood of fifty to sixty thousand copies.  The second album ['Special Prayer'] we did, gosh, I don't know how many thousands of copies it did not sell.  So we did very well in the singing ministry as well as I was in the radio ministry.  Fact, that's where we had--that's where we found revenue to help purchase our first radio station because when the guy came in, said, "If you wanna buy," and I said, "Sure."
Speaker 1: Hm. So--
Speaker 2: --and we bought WBOL.
Story_ID: 652449
Speaker 1: Now you were working--still working at the mental hospital [Western State Psychiatric Hospital; Western Mental Health Institute, Bolivar, Tennessee] at, at (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still working at the mental hospital then, but I didn't work very long before finally I quit working at the mental hospital because, you know, I had this singing ministry and the radio ministry which was, was a decent income at that time, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So were you doing like special appearances?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we did special appearances.
Speaker 1: And concerts, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Sure did.
Speaker 1: All right.  (Unclear) So by--the hit comes out, you know, "This Old Life" [sic. "Life Will Soon Be Over"], you know, as a hit, was in what year?
Speaker 2: That was the first--that was when we did the singles.  It was later on that we did the two albums ['Yesterday and Today' and 'Special Prayer'], but that first song did well for us because--and it was basically--you cannot imagine how much, how well you can do by just appearing in three or four states if you're appearing regularly and you're selling records.  I've known us to sell as high as twelve hundred copies of a record at one event.  So, you know, you could, you could do pretty well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and about what year is it that the single came out that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The single came out in the, in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the single did.  The last album was recorded in the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 652450
Speaker 1: Now you started preaching at St. John Missionary Baptist Church [Stanton, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you were telling us how you were called to, to the ministry and how you felt you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean you know, I--it's, it's just a revelation; I mean all I can tell you is it's like a man saying he's saved.  You just gotta believe he's saved and the life that he lives will dictate whether or not he's saved or not.  And to be called to preach is just a revelation from God that that's what I want you to do.  And I was fortunate that I called--announced my calling to preach in August, July--in July--no, in August; it was in August of 1980, and by November of 1980, I was pastor of the church--that quick.  And part of that was because of my singing career [with The Shaw Singers], because people knew me.  Because I remember when I first got called to the church; I really didn't feel that I was ready to pastor--thought it was too quick.  And so the church said, "If you'll come, we'll grow together."  And you know, that's when the church encouraged me and sent me back to school, you know.  During the time I was pastoring for first four or five years--my pastorialship I took classes in theology.  But I went in, I found out pastorialship--it is about education, but it's more about dedication and obedience than even education because you're led by the Holy Spirit to do that; it's not something that you can do on your own, but it's what God can do through you.
Speaker 1: Okay now, you went to American Bible (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) American Baptist College.
Speaker 1: --Bap- Baptist College--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that near--
Speaker 2: Headquarters is here--
Speaker 1: In Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: --but they had an extension course going on in Jackson [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652451
Speaker 1: As we approach 1987 when you founded Shaw Broadcast [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I mentioned to you when I ca- when--in the beginning of the interview, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] rules that were put in place to encourage white station owners of television and radio stations to sell to you know, minorities, especially African American--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you said you weren't even aware of it.
Speaker 2: I was not even aware of that.  The guy just came in and said, "You said you wanted to buy a radio station? We got one for sale, we need to raise some revenue for our company."  And so we bought WBOL [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee]--yeah.  And bought it and operated it for a little over two years.  We had so much inventory on it because it was a daytime station; we couldn't get it all in, that's how successful we were.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's interesting though, that I think the owners knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He probably knew that.
Speaker 1: --that he could get a tax write off by selling it to an African American.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So even if you didn't know, they more than likely knew--
Speaker 2: I'm sure they did.
Speaker 1: --that's why they offered it to you, I'm sure.  I mean that's one of the reasons.  But you were in good finance--did you have to take out a loan or anything?
Speaker 2: I took out a small loan, but it was no problem at all.  I went to--I had a one page business plan and went to the bank and told the banker to read it and tell me what he thought.  He read it and looked at it and he asked me, "When do you wanna start?"  And I said, "Today."  He said, "Go tell 'em it's yours."  That was when I bought WBOL.  So, yeah, we took out a small loan.  It was a harder task, which we'll talk about later, when we actually built the FM station [WOJG Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652452
Speaker 1: Now you become like the owner of WBOL [WBOL Radio] in Bolivar [Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, now what did you--when did--this is a, a small wattage station, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A local station.
Speaker 2: Small two hundred watt radio station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your format?  Did it continue the same?
Speaker 2: No, I made it all gospel.  When I bought it, it turned to all gospel, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this a decision based on business or on faith?
Speaker 2: It was based on faith at the time; it was based on faith.  I, but I always wanted--because rural areas didn't have full time gospel stations.  They would have station that would play gospel for two hours a day or something, three hours a day, but I wanted--I felt that there was a need, and I felt that I would get a blessing if I would put a full time gospel station on in a rural area, and sure enough, my faith led me right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And were the hours the same?
Speaker 2: The hours were the same.  We were still a daytime station, and we were a standard sign on which is six [o'clock] in the morning, but we were the sunset side off.  Now in the wintertime, that's 4:45; this time of the year, that's eight, so it depends, you know--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) time--a difference.
Speaker 2: A lot of difference, and of course that's why we couldn't get all of our inventory in because we were so successful at this that everybody wanted to be on our station; I mean everybody wanted to advertise on that station 'cause they knew it, it was [HistoryMaker] Johnny Shaw's station, and if Johnny Shaw said it, people were gonna come and ring the cash registers; that's what it was about, you know--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, you know, who were--so how many different shows did you have on?
Speaker 2: I had, had two shows 'cause it was daytime station.  We did--actually, at some points, we would have--we had a lady--at one time we did three, like I did six to ten, then there was a lady on from ten until maybe two, and then another guy who came on worked from two to sign off.  But because he wanted to make more money, I gave him a longer show and some other hours 'cause it was basically just daytime station, and you only needed a couple of personalities, then your weekend personalities, you know; it was basically all you needed--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we--'cause we started with about three employees--myself, my wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] and three others.
Speaker 1: And did you have an engineer, or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but an engineer was not on staff, he was--it was an outsource for an engineer.  You know, we knew a guy that would come and work for us when we needed him; he was not on retainer, anything of that nature, but he just came when we called him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652453
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about some of the dynamics around a radio station.
Speaker 2: I, I think I know what you mean, but when you say dynamics in terms of--?
Speaker 1: Of, you know, what, well what do you have to be concerned about?  What kind of business (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's, it's, it's very attentive; you've got to attend to it every day, it's not something you can loosely do, it's formatted, it's--you're speaking to the public, you've got to always be cognizant of that, got to always make sure your program is good, quality programming, you got to be cautious what you put on the air.  You're in business to make money from commercials but, you know, you got to be careful.  I never did believe in leading people into false advertisement, you know.  So you, you, you just--it's something that you got to tend to every day and make sure that you do it in a professional way.  I always thought you could be professional even with a small radio station.  You could sound like the big time stations, you're just small.  You just don't reach as many people, but you're reaching people, you know.  So it's, it's, it's it was, it was full time job running a radio sta- and you got to be able to do a little bit of everything; everything from going sometimes and turning the transmitter on out in the cow pasture to sweeping the floor, mopping the floor, whatever else you need to do because small stations, you don't get to hire all these different people to do all these different things.  You got to be not only the manager, but the janitor, you know.
Story_ID: 652454
Speaker 1: I was asking off camera about ratings.  In the early days, you didn't have to worry about 'em?
Speaker 2: Didn't have to worry about no ratings.  The people were your ratings when they walked in--say, "I wanna buy it 'cause I heard Johnny [HistoryMaker Johnny Shaw] say it."  That was the rating (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you have a full-time--did you do the sales yourself, you and your wife [Opal Johnson Shaw]?
Speaker 2: I did the sale--when I first--when I first bought the AM station, I decided right away nobody know the product better than me; nobody know the service better than me--about selling a product, actually selling a service--an intangible service.  So here's what I'm gonna do; I'm gonna make myself sales manager, and my wife will be the station manager, okay?  So I went at it, and the same guy that you heard on the radio was the same guy that walked in the business and could actually adlib a commercial right there for the guy, if need be; and that's, that's how we marketed our services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We were discussing off camera too, the reason for WBOL [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee] to be a daytime station.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was because WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee], as we talked about earlier, WLAC was--I don't know, were they fifty or one hundred thousand watts, I'm not for sure; but anyway, everything around them had to die at night so they could become so strong and wouldn't be no interference.  And 'course technology is a little different now in radio, especially when it went to the FMs; they found a way to do it different, but at that time, for them to cover as much ground as they did at night, we were 1560; we were too close to them, and they were 1510, to have a strong output power.  Even in the daytime or at night, we couldn't advertise at all--couldn't be on at all at night, but we could be two hundred and fifty watts in daytime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said during the daytime, their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were only about two hundred and fifty watts, understand; maybe five, something small.  They were very low.  You could just get 'em basically local in daytime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they're 1510 on the dial and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) 1560.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652455
Speaker 1: So sales--you're doing, you're doing the sales--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and now in 1990--now, oh, I didn't ask about this in terms of--now did you do sports?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't.  We never got into sports.  The country station in town, neighboring station, pretty well done sports all the time; they went for the sports market and we went for something else.
Speaker 1: And did you handle news?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did; we've always had news.  We have been fortunate to carry the leading TV station out of Memphis [Tennessee], the NBC station--WMCT [sic. WMC-TV], Channel 5, in Memphis.  They came--they walked in my radio station [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee] one day and I gotta tell you, I never heard of this before, and I thought it was kind of the oddest thing I'd ever heard.  They, they said, "We come in to see if you'd like to carry our five [o'clock] news."  And I said, "What?"  They said, "Yeah, you could help us and we could help you.  You run two donuts a day for us--two thirty second commercials promoting our news; that's how you will pay us for it.  And we're gonna let you simulcast our news at five in the evening, and when we take a break, you go in and take your local breaks."  Well I thought, maybe it's worth a try, but I didn't think much of it.  It was the best, best decision I ever made in radio because you know what?  Every local bank wanna buy that spot because when people hear 'em on the radio, it's like they associate it with TV news.  So when it's--TV station take a break to do its commercials, we go local and do our local commercials; been doing that ever since their AM--even now where we are, we're still doing it.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had good news--yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did you do any, did you do any public service programing?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.  That's required for your license--your FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you do just the local public service (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we did national public services, we did public services across the board.  Whoever would send us public service would get some time--
Speaker 1: Oh, announcements and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, announcements.
Speaker 1: Did you have any talk shows or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not at that time; we do now, but not at that time we didn't.  We just basically played music, had some preaching on there, things like that, but we didn't have any kind of talk shows until later years.
Speaker 1: Did you do any live broadcasts from the church [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we went out to do live broadcasts--remotes we call 'em, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652456
Speaker 1: In 1990--I don't know you--when did you go after the--or have the idea--
Speaker 2: For the FM [WOJG Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the FM station.
Speaker 2: Well, the idea started with me trying to increase my wattage on the AM [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee].  I wasn't getting out far as I wanted to get out, I had to sign off at sunset, had more inventory than I could get on, so I called a consultant engineer that had been recommended to me to ask him how could I get some nighttime broadcasting, how could I get the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] to let me broadcast at night.  And his question to me was, "Why do you wanna put nighttime broadcasting on an AM if you could own an FM?"  And of course he's sitting there looking, because he's got all that information on his computer.  And I said, "Well I never thought of that, I never thought I could."  He said, "You send me $1,250 and I'll let you know; I think it is."  He said, "I think it is, but I'll let you know for sure if there is a frequency--a FM frequency in your area."  Well he already knew, I'm sure he did.  So I sent him $1,250 for him to say, "Yes, it is."  Now, we can apply for it.  And during that time, there was a window period with the FCC.  It's been so long since I applied; I don't know if they still operate--if the rules are still the same, but during the period when you applied for the license, just because you applied didn't mean you were gonna get it because what would happen during the window period, the government would run this ad in the newspaper that would say, "There is a frequency, and FM radio frequency, open in Bolivar, Tennessee; if anyone would like to apply, here's how you apply."  Okay?  So nobody knows who's gonna get it.  I think I'm gonna get it because I'm the guy who's been in radio, so I think I'm gonna get it.  But I also applied in my wife's [Opal Johnson Shaw] name 'cause women had a little more rapport with FCC than men.  So I applied in her name for the license, and sure enough--we had spent somewhere in the neighborhood of over twenty-seven thousand dollars before we knew for sure that that frequency was gonna be ours.  So--but that's when we started.  And then it took a couple of years to build it, you know.  So somewhere from '90 [1990] up until '93 [1993], '94 [1994], somewhere along that line, was before we got started with our FM.  But we got started because we needed that broadcast time to get all of our inventory on, but we also went from three employees, to the first year or two, to thirty employees.
Speaker 1: Why so many?
Speaker 2: Because we had to have around the clock deejays now.  Every four--a deejay is a four hour take, each deejay--so you're broadcasting twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week now.  You need more people out in the field selling as well.  You need a bigger office staff now.  Now, mind you, technology helped us along the way 'cause we're back down to about nine employees now that run our company [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee].  And I never laid anybody off, but here's what I said to them, "If you quit, I don't have to rehire you 'cause technology'll take your place."  Yeah.
Story_ID: 652457
Speaker 1: Now this is a six thousand watt FM?
Speaker 2: Six thousand watt FM, sixty road miles any direction from the tower, you can get us.  Online, we, we stream anywhere in the world.  Matter of fact, I'd like for you to listen to us when you go back to Chicago [Illinois] at wojg.com.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the call letters, what do the call letters stand for?
Speaker 2: Call letters came from--interesting you would ask, I'm glad you asked.  West of the Mississippi is the W sign; I'm sorry, east of the Mississippi.  We live east of the Mississippi River so you always get a W if you live east; FCC [Federal Communications Commission] make that assignment.  You get a K if you live west, but we east, so we got the assignment--the W; the O is for my wife's name, Opal [Opal Johnson Shaw]; the J is for Johnny [HistoryMaker Johnny Shaw], my name; and the G is for gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You create your own call sign; you don't get to create the W; W is automatically there, but you get the last four call signs of your own.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So WOJG [WOJG Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That has a nice little rhythm to it.
Speaker 2: 94.7 FM.  And the seven, we think, is important 'cause it's a perfect number in biblical terms.  'Course that was assigned by the FCC as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652458
Speaker 1: So you start broadcasting in 1992?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so were you right?  Did, did--has the station [WOJG Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee] really cau- caught on?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, it has.  I have had the opportunity--I've had four opportunities to sell it to the biggest broadcast company in the world, Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.].  I refused each time; but they went out, right out of Memphis [Tennessee], and built a carbon copy station of mine after they couldn't buy mine.
Speaker 1: So that means that they can see the potential revenue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The potential revenue; because gospel--slowly but surely, it's gonna be the biggest format in the world in the next--I would say somewhere in the next five to ten years, gospel music is gonna be the biggest format in the whole wide world.  It's catching on fast.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So is this a rising--the fastest rising (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, it's, it's rising fast.  We--in the Jackson, Tennessee, we, we--Jackson, Tennessee is our market.  We are number three overall in Jackson right now, out of seventeen signals, and we're number one in ladies twenty-four to fifty-four [years old], 'cause that's who listen to gospel--females--more females than males.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you wanna know who listen, you go to any church; they singing the songs we play on our radio station.  That's one of our biggest selling points is we partner with the faith community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know since the early '90s [1990s], I guess, there are more and more gospel stars that appear on regular radio stations.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes, sir.  And here, there's a station here in Nashville [Tennessee] that's equivalent to us--same station, 92Q [WQQK Radio].  Every day at noon, they play--I don't know if their format's rap or old school or what, but at noon they play gospel.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah--for an hour; it's a block format, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Winans or the reverend (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Kirk Franklin, yeah, and all that yeah.  And what we do, we play a mixture of all of it; we a traditional gospel station but we play a mixture of traditional as well as contemporary gospel twenty-four hours a day, seven days--unless someone, some guy's preaching.  We still have people who preach, we have talk shows and other things, but we just mix that gospel and it works well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's almost like a mix of hits and dusties on a secular station (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes.  The kind of gospel you and I grew up with, maybe--I'm sure you're a little younger than I am, but the, the traditional gospel music that you would love, but then some Kirk Franklin and some of the more contemporary things like that.  'Cause we try to hold the whole audience, not just one group but, but everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you have like a show that like showcases people like The Blind Boys of Alabama and that, you know, the older groups?
Speaker 2: We don't showcase 'em but we, we, we had at one time.  I wasn't, and I wanna be cautious to say this.  I wasn't that impre- I had [HistoryMaker] Bobby Jones' show ['Bobby Jones Gospel'] on one time, but the revenue was just not there for us, and we, we let it go.  But basically, our deejays do what you would hear on any station; they play all of that mu- I got one guy that's on Sunday nights; he plays nothing but old traditional gospel music--Mahalia Jackson, Five Blind Boys [Five Blind Boys of Mississippi], all of those kind of--the songs that the older people would love and enjoy.  In fact, I enjoy it very much.  Now my, my weekday deejays, the regular guys, they play a mixture of everything--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I was on the Fisk campus [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] yesterday--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and stood in front of a bust of Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: His family I know in Chicago [Illinois], so that's a--you know.
Speaker 2: And we're fortunate--I don't know--you didn't ask me this, but my wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] and I are the only people of color who outright own an FM station in the State of Tennessee.  The others are owned by companies, you know, investors and so forth; but we are the owners of our radio station.
Story_ID: 652459
Speaker 1: Is your station [WOJG Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee], station threatened at all by the, you know, the, the kind of programing that Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] does, where they (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we, we play the same thing.  If you listen to us and listen to them--their gospel station, the only way you could tell the difference is if the deejay say something or if the call sign come on; we sound just alike.  In fact, there is--we have filled in a gap from Memphis [Tennessee] to the Tennessee River, those two stations together, where you can listen to gospel now; playing identically the same kind of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do they overlap in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They overlap and, and, and we overlap, and we get a lot of calls from truck drivers and people who travel all the time that listen, and they'll say, "You know, you guys--between the two of you, you fill that void, you know, where we can get gospel all the way now," you know.  'Course you know, you got XM stations [XM Satellite Radio Holdings Inc.] that play gospel too, but--yeah, we've, we've been able to fill that void.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But they're not a threat to your existence, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no; no, no, no.  No; they, they too big of a company to be a threat to us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 652460
Speaker 1: The stations are doing well and--now, in 1999--'97 [1997], you were appointed co-commissioner of Hardeman County [Tennessee], correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I was appointed by--that's another story that's interesting.  The guy that had the position got appointed to commissioner of mental health, here in Nashville [Tennessee], by the governor [Don Sundquist].  And when he got appointed there, I got appointed to take his place as county commissioner where he was serving, and I served as county commissioner for a year and a half, and that's when I got a call to run for state representative, and my wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] got appointed to take my position as county commissioner--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so your wife is--is she still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's still county commissioner; running for reelection as we speak, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's the county that Bolivar [Tennessee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hardeman County, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's District 1, Position 1 in Hardeman County.
Speaker 1: And--okay.  Had you ever considered, you know, elective office before?
Speaker 2: I had not.  I had not; I got asked both times.  Even as a county commissioner, I was asked would I take the job after Mr. Robinson [ph.] left to come here to be a commissioner, and I decided I would.  I took it and, like I said, did a term and a half and enjoyed it; it was local, it was at home.  We met only--at that time was only meeting like every ninety days or so; we were not meeting regularly, and--but I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652461
Speaker 1: Election to, to the House--now you, this is a campaign.  Now you, you have to run, actually, for--
Speaker 2: For the House of Representatives [Tennessee House of Representatives]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, that came about by a lawsuit that was filed by some concerned citizens, and I don't wanna get into name calling 'cause I'd leave somebody out and they'd be mad at me.  But there was a lawsuit filed that there was not enough representation for the rural, especially African American, community in West Tennessee.  They won the lawsuit; I'm sitting at my radio station one day, I get a call, and this lady says to me, "Whoopee, we won the lawsuit."  And I said, "What lawsuit?"  She told me, she said, "And by the way, we know we don't have to, but we would really like to name our candidate to run for that seat, and we think you would be the perfect person."  And her name was Mrs. Minnie Bowmer [ph.], and I say, "Miss Minnie, I don't have no idea what a state representative does; I have no money to run for state representative, et cetera, et cetera."  She said, "It's nothing to it, it's part time; you can do it."  Said, "Besides, we got your back far as funding--financing you; we got your back."  Said, "Just tell us you'll run."  I said, "I need to do three things; I need to get permission from God, from my family, and from my church [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee]."  I told my family about it, they were so excited they wanted to throw a party.  I knew when I got to church and told my church about it they were gonna say, "Whoa, no," 'cause I presented it this way; I say, "Now look, I'm gonna be gone a lot, okay?  And there'll be times when you'll need me, I'll be in Nashville [Tennessee], and I just want to be honest with you.  I'd love to do this, but if you don't want me to do it, I won't."  And the very person that I thought would be against it stood up and say, "Pastor, if you go and represent us and do this, we will make sure that the church ministry is carried on."  Well, that was my answer from God, from my family, and from them.  So that's where it all started.  And I ran in 2000--1999, actually, was when I ran and won that November, and January--well actually, in November of 1999 I was officially elected as state representative for the eightieth district [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80]; and that's been fourteen years ago and, and here I am.
Story_ID: 652462
Speaker 1: How was your opposition organized?  Were they formidable at all?  Who opposed you, or did you have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The fir- yeah, the first year, I had three ladies to run against me.  Now one of 'em was very strong; one of 'em was a elementary school--I guess elementary, maybe--elementary or high school, I'm not for sure--school teacher.  She was very strong; the other two was basically just tokens in the race, really.  But I found out more about myself that year than I ever knew 'cause they, they really said some pretty bad things (laughter).  I didn't know politics could get so whatever, but it did.  But I think because of my business background and dedication to the church and all the other things--radio people knew me.  It was a pretty easy task for me; I won by a pretty good margin at that time.  And, of course, after the first year, then I had a couple of those ladies to run against me since; I don't know how long it's been; maybe, I don't know, six or seven years ago.  And then I had one really viable candidate that ran against me about three or four years ago, a guy out of Jackson, Tennessee, who gave me a pretty good race, but I still got about 63 percent of the vote at that time.  Other than that, I've just been here [Tennessee House of Representatives] fourteen years doing what I do.
Speaker 1: So is the primary the election that the most is at stake?
Speaker 2: Most of mine was primary because it was Democrats running against me, but I did have one Republican, which took me into the general.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've only had one general opponent in the fourteen years I've been here--you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So the area is--now the district is district--what is it?
Speaker 2: District 80 [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80].
Speaker 1: District 80.
Speaker 2: It's made up of most of Hardeman County [Tennessee] where I live.  Except for twenty-four hundred constituents, I represent everybody in Hardeman County, and I represent about a third of Madison County [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's the county seat of, of, of Madison?
Speaker 2: Madison is Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jackson, Tennessee, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] is? And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Lane College; Lane College is in my district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 652463
Speaker 1: There was a bizarre incident in 2005.  I don't wanna get--well, let me ask you first before--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we get into that.  What were some of the issues you faced, you know, coming in as a state representative [in the Tennessee House of Representatives] from Hardeman [Hardeman County, Tennessee] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The biggest issue was rural versus urban.  Believe it or not, I've always said I think the two words that have torn politics apart is probably Democrat, Republican, but the truth of the matter is, is rural versus urban; it's where you really run into issues, and the first year that I came here as state representative was the year that this state tried to pass a state income tax.  That was the year that they threw rocks and threw--and broke windows out of the capitol [Tennessee State Capitol, Nashville, Tennessee], that was the year that people circled the capitol all day long blowing their horns, and that was the year that all the streets were blocked; you couldn't get out and in hardly without security.  I came in the year when it was just terrible (laughter); everything was happening, you know.  The state income tax didn't pass here, as you know.  It was, it was pretty well torn down by people with money because it was basically gonna equalize how people pay taxes, and that didn't go over very good, but those were some of the issues I've--plus it was urban versus rural; it was people in the urban area who wanted things that people in the rural area didn't want, or needed something different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's been an interesting flight.  What I've done over the years, I've been more interested in taking government back to my district [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80] than passing laws.  I've been able to really successfully take a whole lot of resources back to my district from state government 'cause that's what people need, and I've worked at that.  You know, I shared with you before we went on the interview, I'm getting a 4-H camp, one of the largest 4-H camps in the world that's gonna be created in my district this year and the years to come.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So without like proper representation, these programs and benefits don't get to your county?
Speaker 2: They, they don't get there; they don't get there.  And you know, I've learned over the years that that's exactly what I am--is what they call me--a state representative.  I represent my constituency at the state level for whatever it is they need--education, healthcare issues, whatever they may be, I'm here to open whatever door that needs to be opened, to get the resources that's behind that door for the people I represent.  That's really what I do; and that's what I've tried to do over the last fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, there've been grants and, and all sorts of things that they never would have known about if I hadn't opened those doors for them to, to walk in and get those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now there was a--any other issues?  What's the situation with crime in your district?
Speaker 2: Well crime is, is--I won't say it's minimal, but it's probably about what crime would be wherever.  It's not as bad as it is in the, in the urban areas, but it's slowly getting there.  We're, we're getting more gang activity in rural areas now because they've discovered these are good safe havens for them to be.  Meth [methamphetamine] labs--not proud to tell you, but Tennessee--Indiana's first and Tennessee is second in meth labs in the United States.  So, yeah, there is a lot of crime creeping into rural areas that we haven't had to deal with in times past.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Educational resources--
Speaker 2: Education resources have been pretty good.  You know, change frightens people.  This new commissioner that we have now made a lot of changes, and I'm sure some of 'em for the best, but at the same time, people are frightened of changes when they been doing things a certain way, but I will tell you that our educational system in Tennessee is probably about as solid and as good as you'll find in any other state.  Now some states rate higher than we do, and I don't know exactly what they go by, but I can tell you we got a good group of teachers and educators in this state, as well as, as any other state.
Story_ID: 652464
Speaker 1: Now you were, you were able to bring the Western Mental Health Institute to, to Bolivar [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well it was already there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but to, to build a new building.  We have what we call a modern hospital now, and I don't know if you ever had the opportunity to go into some of the older mental health hospitals; that's exactly what it looked like, was a mental health hospital [Western State Psychiatric Hospital], but our hospital is modern, it's up to date, it's like any other hospital.  Now you wouldn't know you were in a mental hospital unless you asked someone--yeah.  And I think we talked about the guy before me--1900, Samuel McElwee [Samuel A. McElwee]?  He got the first appropriation to build the first hospital there, and we still have the old administration building; it's still there.  And when you look at that building and look at the new building we've got there, you kind of get an idea what it was like and what it's like now 'cause we kept it because it was on the registry--on the national registry [National Register of Historic Places], so it's still there.
Speaker 1: Is it being used for anything?
Speaker 2: It's being used for the administration office--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the hospital now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and all the patients are in the new building.
Story_ID: 652465
Speaker 1: Two thousand five [2005], one of the, one of the stranger incidents, I guess--in the Te- Tennessee state legislature [Tennessee General Assembly] takes place when Representative Stacey Campfield expressed an interest in joining the black caucus of the Tennessee legislators [Tennessee Black Caucus of State Legislators].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was that about?
Speaker 2: You know, you'd have to know Stacey to even imagine, or even create any kind of imagination as to what that is about.  I don't think he had any particular interest in mind other than just wanting to know what we say and do in the black caucus that he don't hear in any other caucus.  He--I think he just wanted to--Stacey likes to stay in the spotlight; he, he's, he likes to make news, he, he likes to be on television, and he'll do anything to be on TV.  And while, at the same time, it was an eye opener for us to remind ourselves, you really can't just be a black caucus anymore because people do have a right to, to join any club or--it's kind of going back saying what we used to face all the time, "You can't come into this club because you're black."  So it was an eye opener for us to say, "You know, we do have to let people in if they really wanna come in."  And I think when we decided, "Okay, we're gonna let you in," was when his interest dropped.  But I think he just wanted to take the challenge to see what he could do in terms of joining the black caucus.
Speaker 1: So he wanted the friction of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, basically was what it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, 'cause it says that he asked to review the bylaws--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a--you know, made a lot of press around here, apparently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it made press, and that's, that's what he was looking for--yeah.  And If I may say, along that line, I think that's probably the backlash that the African American communities are facing now.  Somebody woke up one day and say, "Okay, if African Americans want their rights to go and to do what everybody else do, then how can they expect to have something that we can't participate with them as well?  So let's just kind of reverse this thing and see how it works."  And that's kind of been the trend, if you notice, in later years where people are trying to reverse things to say, "You expect the right of something that nobody else could get."  And I think we do have to be very careful now to make sure that nobody is discriminated against one way or the other.  But if you notice, the churches in the South is more segregated than anything else.
Story_ID: 652466
Speaker 1: Does the black caucus [Tennessee Black Caucus of State Legislators] still exist?
Speaker 2: Yes, it does; yes, it does, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--okay.
Speaker 2: I was chair of the caucus when [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama came here, in this very room, and made his announcement that he was running for, for president, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In this very room?
Speaker 2: Yes, this very room that we're sitting in right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is where president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were meeting in this room and this is where--and--because I was the chair, I had an opportunity to introduce him to the rest of the caucus and he came in to announce to us that he was gonna be running for president.  And to be perfectly honest, I didn't think, at that moment, he would win, but after spending two hours with him, I was convinced he would win.  He's a very impressive man.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were tempted to support Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] early on?
Speaker 2: I was always pretty much for President Obama.  I, you know--I think being the first meant a lot to me; that, you know, maybe there was not enough but being a black man, it meant a lot to me to know that he had the courage to run for president of the United States and--so I was pretty much--not that I was against Hillary Clinton, because I think Hillary is gonna make a great president.  I think it was his time then, and I think it's her time next.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now do you remember what you were doing when you heard he won the election?  Were you in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was not in D.C.  What it was, I was at home watching TV when he won, but I had already got my ticket to go to the inauguration (laughter); that's how sure I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  So--you know.  This is something.  I mean we--everybody discusses this, and they always say they never thought it would happen in a lifetime.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know it, it, it--I didn't think it would ever happen until actually he started the camp- when I heard his message I knew, because his message was not an African American man or black man's message; it was a president's message.  And I--in this very room, I said to him, I said, "I don't want to be treated any different from anybody else. I just want the same opportunity that any other man have in this country, white man, black man, whoever--Indian [Native American], I don't want you to give me nothing special; just give me the same opportunity and I'll get it myself."
Speaker 1: Almost sounds like James Brown (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: "I don't want nobody to give me nothing"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --"open up the door."
Speaker 2: Yeah, just, "Open the door, and I'll get it myself" ['I Don't Want Nobody to Give Me Nothing'], yeah.
Story_ID: 652467
Speaker 1: Tell us about the restaurant [Opal's Family Restaurant, Bolivar, Tennessee].  Now, now this is a--your, your, your wife [Opal Johnson Shaw]--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife--but the restaurant's closed now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The restaurant's been closed for two years this October.  It's a hard business, it was a southern style restaurant, it was home cooking; it was just like grandma used to make it.  She had good following, good customers, good trade and all, but it was a tough business because--and one of the reasons why it was such a tough business, it was hard to find help; even more so, cooks.  The quality of the cooking had to remain the same, so she wound up having to stay there many times all day because someone else who could cook either wouldn't come in or whatever.  And, and it just got to be way too much for her and so she pretty well--we decided, well this October two years ago, we'd close the restaurant.
Speaker 1: Now that's--this is something I've heard before--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from people who open restaurants, the difficulty in finding a proper chef.
Speaker 2: It, it is; it really is.  She finally found a cook who could cook equally as well, but she was not very dependable, you know.  And many times when she would get up and get dressed to go to church [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], she'd have to undress and go to the restaurant to cook 'cause somebody'd call and say, "The cook's not coming in," what have you.  So it just got to be more of a headache than we needed, with all of the other things, you know.  Me being a pastor, running the radio station [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee]--which my son [Tracy Shaw] is the general manager and he runs the station; but then--and being the state rep, it just got to be more than we needed, so we closed the restaurant.
Story_ID: 652468
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you turned the reigns of the station, or, or, or Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC [Bolivar, Tennessee], over to your son [Tracy Shaw]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 2005, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is--you were sixty-five at the time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you thought like trying to do it all was maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trying to do it all, and I realized you can get more done with more men than you can trying to do it all yourself.  And he's done a successfully good job for us.  'Course I will tell you, it's always a challenge to run a family business.  Family businesses are different because, you know, your son feel like you're gonna give him a break (laughter) that other people wouldn't give; but it's--he's done a great job for us--sure have.
Story_ID: 652469
Speaker 1: Twenty twelve [2012] now, you, you, you challenged the House Democratic Caucus [Tennessee House Democratic Caucus] chairman on gun control, I think, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.  And, and I actually ran for the caucus chair; I lost.  That's the only election I ever lost, I lost that one--yeah, but I've had good, good opportunities since I've been here.  I've had the opportunity to serve as secretary of finance--the only African American in the history of the State of Tennessee to serve as secretary of finance, ways and means [Tennessee House Finance, Ways, and Means Committee]; and that was a giant step because--and nobody else have served since then of--nobody of color, and I don't know if that'll ever happen again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the first African American rural rep [representative] in the State of Tennessee was another big issue for me.  I mean, you know, it was, it was an honor, and I felt that I really had to work hard because of that.  I didn't wanna let the people down, so--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was in--what year was this?
Speaker 2: This was back in 2000 when I got elected [to the Tennessee House of Representatives]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --you know, when I first got elected, because Samuel McElwee [Samuel A. McElwee], as I shared with you early.  He was the last African American rural rep since Reconstruction that had served.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652470
Speaker 1: Recently--well in two- 2013, you were di- you were involved in discussing the limits on per, per diems for lawmakers [in the Tennessee General Assembly], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what, what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, somebody came up with the bright idea that lawmakers should not get per diem if they live within, I don't know, like here in Nashville [Tennessee]; they shouldn't get per diem.  And my argument is yes you should because the sacrifice that you make for your family--and you cannot do this and have another job.  I don't know where you gonna find a company--well, maybe some companies will pay you and let you be a legislator because maybe that means something to them.  But from where I come from, you know, if you got to leave your business to come here, you need to at least get your expense for coming.  And so my argument was that that was not a good thing to do, although it did pass.  Local folks who live here in Nashville don't get per diem for being legislators.  Now we get it because we live further out.  If you live over fifty miles, you get it, I think; but I thought everybody should get it--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that'll be revisited at some point, you think?
Speaker 2: It will, but I don't know when.  That's--you know, nobody's comfortable to bring up those kind of issues because news headlines in the evening's gonna be, "Lawmakers Give Themselves a Raise," or what have you, and they don't realize the sacrifice that you have to make leaving your family because out of the last fourteen years, quality time with my family has been far and few because we're here most of the times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652471
Speaker 1: In 2014, you spoke out against the lack of Medicaid expansion--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now Medicaid was actually blocked by legislators here [Tennessee General Assembly]?
Speaker 2: It was blocked by the legislators here, yes.  Matter of fact, the legislators here passed a bill to say that our governor cannot expand Medicaid unless he call us back for special session.  So they got him under the thumbnail and, for whatever reason, he won't expand it.  We've turned down a billion dollars.  We haven't turned down the whole billion, but if we go the first year, for the first three years, Tennessee would have got a billion dollars each year--free money, our money, that we turned down because, for whatever reason, and I don't know what reason it is other than they just don't particularly like--I don't know if they just don't like the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] or what, I mean that's, that's--I don't wanna make the wrong statement against somebody, but that's all I know it could be.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So are Tennessee lawmakers in [U.S.] Congress largely against the Affordable Care Act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010]?
Speaker 2: They are, they are.  Now, all of the Democrats, it's not but twenty-four Democrats here, we are for it, but it's sixty-four, I think, Republicans; they're all against it.  Well, let me back up.  I know one or two that's not against it but they can't speak out to say that they are for it, so they have to vote with their colleagues to say, "We're against it."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that's one of the things--I don't know about other states, but here in Tennessee, one thing about the Republican Party, I guess some--I admire 'em for, they vote lockstep.  Whatever it is that they're voting on, even if they think it's wrong, they will all vote--and they will tell you, "I don't think that's right, but I got to vote that way."
Speaker 1: So you admire the discipline of that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I admire the discipline of it sometimes (laughter), but there are other times that I don't admire the discipline of it because what I like about the Dems is we're free to represent our people; not to vote like the caucus say, but to represent our people.  But sometime I do wish we had that discipline because I mean it--some--in some cases it helps, and some cases it might hurt, you know--yeah.  But now they will tell you in a minute, "I know it's wrong, but I got to vote this way" (laughter).
Speaker 1: That seems sad, but Tennessee is a red state (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a red state, yes.
Speaker 1: --and a Democratic presidential administration means there's gonna be some tension and some things that are not gonna happen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, say it again.
Speaker 1: --I guess because we have a Democratic national--well, president--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, and you got a Republican state, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They just don't cooperate with him.  I mean, you know, and, and--you know, we got excited about putting an African American in the White House, but we forgot to send some folks to help him get some things done.  He can't do it without the help of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and the [U.S.] Senate; he got to have some cooperation.  Same thing here; this governor can't do much without the support of the House [Tennessee House of Representatives] and the Senate [Tennessee Senate]; that's the way it works.
Speaker 1: There's a Republican governor here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Republican governor here, yeah.
Speaker 1: What's his name here?
Speaker 2: Haslam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bill Haslam.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 652472
Speaker 1: What do the fortunes of Tennessee look like to you in the future--in the near future?
Speaker 2: At the rate we're going?  I think we're going backward; we're passing gun laws, we're trying to tear up unions, pretty well have broken down all the unions.  And mind you, I'm a businessman myself so I'm cognizant of the fact that I don't want somebody to come in my business [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee] and tell me, "You got to do A, B, C, D."  But I should be a fair businessman, and I don't think that'll ever happen.  If I treat my employees right, I don't think my employees will need a union--a fair minimum wage, but I ought to pay 'em decent, you know.  Nobody shouldn't have to make me to pay my employees a decent salary 'cause they got to live like I got to live.  But they pretty well destroyed all the unions, they pretty well--they won't expand Medicaid, and I understand over a period of three years we would have created over ninety thousand new healthcare jobs if we had passed it.  Hospitals wouldn't have to close, we losing hospitals, you know.  People are not getting as much healthcare, and they don't even want--they tried to pass a bill to say if you lived in Tennessee, you couldn't even sign up for what they call Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010].  Now that didn't go far because I mean that's, that's not constitutional.  But they tried to actually do that here; so they're serious.
Speaker 1: So do you see this--Tennessee remaining a red state, kind of hunkered down like that?
Speaker 2: No sir, I don't.  I see another year or so, or less, a change coming because I think the Republicans will manage this state so bad 'til people will fire 'em at the polls, and that's where it's got to happen; it's got to happen at the polls.  They'll be looking for somebody to represent 'em, but he got to--first of all, they just got to fail.  You know, if you hire somebody to run your company and they don't do well, they finally fail you'd probably let 'em go; and I think that's what's got to happen in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652473
Speaker 1: Now do you have aspirations for a bigger political office?
Speaker 2: I have had, but you know at this age now, and I don't--I guess this, people--this old phrase says, "Nothing get old but clothes," but you know, I don't know if--I've thought about running for maybe [U.S.] Congress. I personally think I could win, and 'course rightly so, but--but I don't know; at this point, I don't know if I wanna just kind of settle back.  I'm gonna do another term here 'cause I've already won technically, 'cause I'm running unopposed.  But I don't know what after that.  I, I'm probably gonna think about less work and more, more time for myself and for family.  Right now, that's where I am.  I'll let you know (laughter) twelve months from now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what about the broadcasting business?
Speaker 2: I'll always be a part of the broadcast business [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee].  I mean, you know, I won't be there every day, but I'll always be a part of it.  I, I got it fixed so it's family; it'll always be family.  Family can sell to family but family can't sell it to nobody else.  If nobody else is interested, one family member can own it all if he or she buy it from the rest of 'em.  But I want it to always--I made God that promise; if he'd give it to me it would always be a voice for Christ.  That's one of our mottos: we're a voice for Christ and a servant of the people.
Story_ID: 652474
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything you've done to this point in your career, like--is there anything major that you wish you could do over again or would change?
Speaker 2: I don't think so; I think I--everything I've done, I, I--'course naturally there's been a few mistakes I wouldn't make, but everything I've done I think I could do it over; now only thing I might--if I knew what I know now, I probably could do it a little better.  But I don't have any regrets of anything I've done that I would like to do different.  Again, I still have, you know--and that's why I'm reluctant when you asked me about here.  You know, I, I, I just--I like serving people; that's just me; if I'm helping someone, I'm happy.  I'm never happy like I wanna be unless I'm helping to do something; I just wanna do something to help people.  And my aspirations have always been to be the voice for those who perhaps couldn't be a voice for themselves, or to get 'em in doors that they couldn't get in.  I often tell people as a pastor [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], you know, and a state rep [state representative], the two coincide very well because I can get in doors as a state rep [in the Tennessee House of Representatives] that I can't get in doors as being quote unquote Reverend Shaw [HistoryMaker Johnny Shaw], but when I get in that door, I can be Reverend Shaw.
Story_ID: 652475
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today in, in your district [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80] and, and in the country?
Speaker 2: Coming together in terms of respecting each other.  We can be different, we can have differences of opinions, difference of aspirations, but the, the, the plantation syndrome is, is, is, is very much alive in many of us where we hate each other for no apparent reason; we just don't like each other.  But if you can respect me and I can respect you, it's okay for us to have differences of opinion about what we think and what we wanna do, but I think when you--a man--one man respect another, you get a lot done that way 'cause good causes won't die when people respect each other.  And, and I think that's a real problem in the South, in my humble opinion--it's black men and women really giving each other that due respect that they deserve.
Story_ID: 652476
Speaker 1: As a pastor [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], have you ever been a part of a, a movement to, you know, do political activity or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, you know, we, we all--we have an association, and we discuss who we think is best for the people.  Right now, you know, we'll, we'll have a meeting somewhere along the line and we'll say, "We think that we should go back to our prospective churches and say to our people, 'We think that this person is best to serve you, your family and your community.'"  And I think that's something that's important about voting, and one of the things I do, I encourage people not to vote on their emotions.  Don't vote because you like this guy so well or because you hate him so well, but how does he--how does his plan fit in for you, for your family, for your community, for your county and state at large?  Because when you cast a vote, you don't cast a vote just for you; you casting a vote to affect the lives of a lot of people, presently and future, when you cast a vote.  Some people think, this is my right.  It is your right, it's 100 percent; but it, it's not your right unless you think of your neighbor when you vote--that's what makes it your right, in my humble opinion.
Story_ID: 652477
Speaker 1: As a pastor and as a politician in the South, what do you think about the--I mean, I think in recent years--I think in the last twenty years almost, there's been a move--the Republican Party identifies southern Christian men basically, I can't think of any women, to run as candidates, you know, in order to capture what they consider to be a more conservative Christian opinion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Men like Herman Cain, who was very--wildly popular for a while (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  But the thing of it is, there is a separation of church and state.  Anywhere you cut the pie, there's a separation of church and state, and here's a example.  It doesn't matter who you represent as an individual or what you are, what your lifestyle, your morals are.  If you are a productive taxpayer, you deserve from your government what anybody else deserve--same services.  But then there is a Bible and there's a God.  And God says, "Here are the conditions you have to meet to be my representative."  And when you meet God's representative--conditions, you will know how far to go (laughter) with the political piece.  And that's why you have to--you know, there's this thing about, you know, civil unions and all of that, and, and, and I can't argue the point on--of civil unions from the standpoint of a taxpayer because if you, if you've got a job, you work every day, you pay your taxes, if the government offers civil unions, then okay, you have a right to that.  But God said that the union was between a man and a woman.  So here am I as a pastor and I'm in politics as well.  What do I do?  I got to look--now when that bill come up to say, "What do you vote for?"  I can't vote for two people of the same sex to get married because it's not in God's law.  Now they are taxpayers; I'm sure they got ways around cutting corners as to how they can get a loan and what they can do, and I'm not going on there and tell Joe Brown and, and Mary Jones that you--or whoever Joe Brown and John Brown, "You can't be together." That's your business.  I'll tell you what God says, but that's not for me to do.  But my job is to make sure that I make laws that are conducive for the rights and the privileges of the people of the State of Tennessee, and at the same time honor God's law.  And I think it can be done.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Don't you think though that a secular law--I mean a law passed that allows gay marriage--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --would be something, you know--would be different from, you know, you sanctioning a gay marriage in your church [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], you know.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well of course it is, of course it is because in, in, in, in the, in the church, the bylaws say we marry a man and a woman--okay?  But I can vote for people to have their rights if they're taxpayers, but when it get to the church, and I think that's what I'm saying to you, "Don't come as a couple," two people of the same sex, "don't come walking in church as a couple.  It's no place for you to do that."  You might have went to, to, to the mall yesterday as a couple, but today when you come to the church--'cause in God's law, you're not a couple.  And because of the bylaws, I'm not gonna marry you as a couple, I'm gonna tell you the ways of God.  Now if somebody else marry you, that's their business, but I'm still never gonna honor you in this church as a couple; as an individual, yes, but not as a couple.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the--now this is interesting.  Do you think that the church will ever change, or do you think that the church will ever change its position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think some churches will, probably.  But I don't know--well, here's what I say all the time to my youth director at the church.  My youth director will say, "You know, we wanna do this because this is the way to draw young people."  And my question will be, "Did Jesus change his methods to draw people?"  Well, I think not.  Whatever he said was just what he said any way he did it.  So I mean, you know, I don't know if you can draw people to please God by changing methods, letting 'em do things that are uncommon, you know.  They just got to do basically what the Bible says, and I believe if you get that part--I don't care what you're born with, you can be born again.  And I think when you're born again, you'll have the respect for your church, for your community, and for everybody else to know how to deal with your habits until God break 'em; and I think God can break any habit--that's what I believe, if you want it broken.
Story_ID: 652478
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were discussing secular versus Christian rights (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you, you made an analogy about the road out there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean the road is, is taxpayers' dollars.  Some of everybody get to drive on the road, and even the law says that a man ain't supposed to drive drunk, but alcoholics drive on the road; everybody drive on the road because it's taxpayers' money.  And you can't deny one taxpayer of what another taxpayer supposed to have, you know, one way or the other, because they all working, they all paying taxes.  But the church is different and, and, and, and that's where my argument comes in with all these religious people.  Now what's more important--what's more important for me is, is the church or my political role 'cause I can always vote no, if I don't feel comfortable politically on an issue, but the Bible has already laid out the plans for the spiritual role and you can't change that; that was fixed in heaven (laughter), you know.  And it doesn't matter--so no need of me running around trying to make people believe that I'm, I'm your savior because I'm, I'm a pastor and, "Oh, you elect me because I, I'm the guy, I'm religious, I'm saved and I'm--." That don't amount to anything because they are two different entities.  You're dealing with a church--a living organism and an organization; and they're, they are different, so an organization is not a living organism.
Story_ID: 652479
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just--the only problem with that I have, and I think other people watching this might have, is that we know that the church at one time stood in favor of slavery--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know; I mean--well, not the whole church--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but there is significant--the fact that the church in the United States (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but, but who were they?  They were people who were instituting the slavery (laughter); that's who it was.
Speaker 1: It was instituted with a sanction of many church leaders--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Catholic church, Protestant churches.  They said, "Hey, that's fine."  And at a certain point, certain churches like, well--or the Methodist or John Wesley, who came out against other church leaders, you know, supporting the abolitionist position.  And eventually, you know, won the argument, you know, in the secular world, basically, you know.  They used the biblical argument to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, that's what Jesus faced, was slavery; he faced people who had a fix on the law and, you know, he--they said, "If your ark is in the mar, you leave him in there 'til Monday.  Don't get him out on the Sabbath."  Okay?  But Jesus said, "If your ark's in the mar, you get him out."  In other words, they tried to separate grace and mercy.  Grace is every day; you get new mercy every morning, you get God's good graces every day.  So how do you decide one day you don't get it and the other day you do get it?  So yeah, to some degree, a lot of religious organizations still do the same thing--they endorse things that they really need to step back and take a second look at because that's what Jesus fought with the scribes and the Pharisees and the Sadducees and all that; they said, "This is what the law says."  You remember when they brought the woman in adultery to Jesus?  And they said to him, "We caught this woman in adultery.  The Moses--the Mosaic Law says, 'Stone her.' What do you say?"  And the Bible said, Jesus--and nobody ever really--I don't know whether we interpreted right when we said--when he wrote on the ground.  I don't know, but he wrote something on the ground.  And he basically said this: if you qualified to throw the rock, stone 'em; I'm not gonna stop you.  Well you know the end of that story; they all--the oldest to the youngest got up and tipped out--tipped away.  Well, first of all, they didn't bring the guy who was involved in it, it was only the woman.  But secondly, they all tipped away.  And Jesus asks, "Well where is thine accusers now?"  She said, "I have none."  And he said, "Well, neither do I.  Go, and sin no more" [John 8:1-11].  He didn't endorse the sin, but what he said was, "Nobody is qualified to judge you because they are sinners themselves."
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's also the story where--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one person throws a rock and everybody else throws it even though they don't wanna throw it; they throw it because they saw somebody else throw it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that's wrong (laughter); that's true, but that's wrong (laughter).  You don't throw rocks because other people throw 'em or you're not supposed to--yeah.  Because really and truly, when you do research, research is this--and in Jesus' day, Jewish traditions were this--the only way you were qualified to judge another man is if you were free of that sin.
Speaker 1: That's where we--all I'm saying is that we all know it--hypocrisy lives--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and if somebody him 'em with a rock, everybody else would have thrown a rock (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it does--yeah.
Speaker 1: --and things like that would have been the case.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I, I, I just know that we have to be careful when we start to judge.  And even as a pastor [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], I have to be careful when I judge people because my responsibility is to tell people right from wrong.  And what the Bible says is, is that, "Ye shall know the truth, and it makes you free" [John 8:32].  It's the tone in which you present it to people.  Some people don't know how to handle the gospel; they handle it with the wrong tone, you know.  I can shout at you and tell you something and be right, you can take it wrong.  Or I can tell you in a humble--in a respectful way, and you'll accept that.  And so I don't campaign off of, you know, when people ask me things like they say, "Are you pro life?"  Well, I'll ask 'em, "Are you pro food?  Are you pro education?"  Because it takes more than just saving a life. To save a life means to feed a life, give a life something.  So don't ask me to save a child if you wanna starve it to death 'cause it's gonna be more painful then than it is if you just (laughter) don't--you know what I'm saying?  Yeah.  So I think we've taken this religious, this moral thing--look, I guarantee you we've played the field--the devil done played the field on that one like never before.  People just need to be themselves 'cause I work with ninety-nine other legislators here [Tennessee House of Representatives], I worked with thirty-two, thirty-three senators, and we all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.  There's some good people here, don't get me wrong, but nobody is perfect, and we ought to stop playing that game and just represent people--it's what we come here to do.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652480
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on your career again, what do you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: I think--my professional legacy--well, I know my professional legacy is just what I just got through talking about, and that is loving and caring for people.  And what people will tell you--if you could do a survey of my district right now, they would tell you that, "He returned every phone call."  Because to me, every phone call that come in to office 36C [Legislative Plaza, Nashville, Tennessee] is important to the person that made it.  I get answers for people.  Eighty percent of my calls has to do with local folks--school board, city council, county commission--but what I do is--got a list of all of 'em; so when you call, if you got a local issue, I'll let you know, "That's a local issue, and here's who you need to call, and here is the number.  Now if you don't get results, call me back, and I'll call 'em."  But service--I think I am just what I believe I am, and that is a servant of the people; and that's what I want my legacy to be.  I don't want anybody in the eightieth district [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80] to ever say, "He would not call me back," if they made that call and I know they made it.  Now I probably missed a few 'cause I might just missed 'em and didn't know they made 'em, but I certainly didn't mean to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 652481
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family.  Now you, you and your wife [Opal Johnson Shaw] have been together a long time (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We've been together fifty years; our fiftieth wedding anniversary this year.  I have--we have six kids but one's adopted; one's adopted.  We have six kids, great family.  The youngest [Marcus Shaw] is in college right now.  My, my adopted son, he's not in school right now, he's working, the one we adopted, who is actually one of my oldest sons' son.  And of course my son [Tracy Shaw] that works for the--runs the radio station [Shaw's Broadcasting, LLC, Bolivar, Tennessee] for me; and then my oldest son [Reginald Shaw] works for--place called thyssenkrupp [thyssenkrupp AG], where they build elevators; and my daughter is an educator, she works for Metro Nashville [Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools] here as--I'm not for sure exactly what her job title is, but I tease her all the time.  Whatever it is, she don't work much (laughter), but she's an educator.  But I have a great family; my wife and I we still--we go to church all the time [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], but we still sing a little bit; not as much as we used to because we don't have the time.  We try to do family things together and enjoy ourselves and had a big family meal at Easter and just--the kids brought up a lot of memories about their grandma and grandpa and, you know, and things like that, so we just enjoy ourselves.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother live to see you buy the radio station [WBOL Radio, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did; she did, she did, but she died right--recently after that--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I have a habit of going back to the graves, talking to my parents [Wilner Jones Shaw and Wilson Shaw, Sr.] quite often.  Every time I move up the ladder, a stepping stone, I'll go tell 'em about it, you know.  That's just my way of communicating with 'em.
Story_ID: 652482
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we have not discussed before I ask my last question that?
Speaker 2: I think we probably hit on most everything; I, I--right now I can't--I'll probably think of something tomorrow, but today (laughter)--yeah.  I think we pretty well hit on everything.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy; it's a little different and--but sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I will say again, a guy who tried to help anybody he could, who treated everybody right; I don't believe in holding grudges.  If, if I got an issue with you, I will tell you what it is, and if you need to say, "I'm sorry," if you say, "I'm sorry," I'm okay with that.  Just serving people, really; that's how I wanna be remembered.  I don't wanna be remembered as a big successful guy who made it big and owned it all and all that; just a guy who really tried to help people in and everywhere he met them.  I, I take the opportunity to hug my babies in church every Sunday [at St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Stanton, Tennessee], all of 'em because I don't know how many of 'em get that hug at home.  I will literally take the time to hug twenty, twenty little small kids, if I need to, in one Sunday.  Just want 'em to know that I'm there for 'em.  That's how I wanna be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well thank you very much.
Story_ID: 652483
Speaker 1: I am at the civil--National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee where I serve as a board member, and there have the opportunity of meeting the Dalai Lama.  It was a great experience and a very moving experience for me to shake hands with the Dalai Lama.
Speaker 2: Here I am with the former governor of the State of Tennessee and, of course, that is Governor Phil Bredesen, and to the far right is Jimmy Eldridge and of course myself behind the governor there.
Speaker 1: And of course that is me; that's one of the pictures I took for what we call the blue book here in Tennessee [Tennessee Blue Book], and that's just a photo snap of yours truly, [HistoryMaker] Johnny Shaw.
Speaker 2: Here is a picture where I am with Senator Kyle [Sara Kyle], and I'm also with Senator Tate [Reginald Tate], and I'm with another senator from Memphis [Tennessee] there, and another state representative; we were just out taking some photo shots at an event, and we all decided to take a picture together--no special thing other than just a reception.
Speaker 1: Here I am with Leadership Jackson in Jackson, Tennessee.  Most of these people that you see in this picture are my constituents who came up here for a leadership class, and we took pictures with 'em.
Speaker 2: And here is where I'm hosting a Title VI training outreach forum in Bolivar, Tennessee--had some people--my motto has always been, "Take government to the people," and that's when I was bringing government to my district home in Bolivar.
Speaker 1: This was handicap day on the Hill [Disability Day on the Hill], and I was shaking hands with one of my constituents who were here lobbying on handicap day.
Speaker 2: Here again, is me with former governor Bredesen; we were getting ready to present a grant in my district [Tennessee House of Representatives District 80], and I had an opportunity to speak to my constituents and to introduce our governor.
Speaker 1: I was also with two of my chief of police officers here, who had a day on the Hill; they came to sit on the floor with us and I had a chance to visit with the one from Hardeman County [Tennessee] and from Haywood County [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Very precious picture, the oldest serving lieutenant governor in the history of the State of Tennessee, John Wilder [John Shelton Wilder].  Had a chance to take a picture with him, and it's a jewel; I'll always remember that one.
Speaker 1: Here is where I was taking a picture with the 4-H club from my district.  They were here, and we had a chance to--they came by my office, we took a picture together.
Speaker 2: This is another one of the pictures that we took with myself, the former governor and the other representatives and mayors from the area in my district when we gave the grant to the church over there that I talked about a few minutes ago.
Speaker 1: And this is one of the same pictures where we were just out visiting after the ceremony and shaking hands and meeting people.
Speaker 2: As well as that one, some of the constituents--we were just stirring around shaking hands and meeting people in the district.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We should be shooting the certificate and also this is--because this certificate and this check stub is what we got a $250,000 grant for the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee where I serve as a board member.  So we can shoot both the certificate and the check stub.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was the check stub--yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yes.  And that is the check stub.
Speaker 2: This was at the inauguration--first inauguration of our president of the United States, [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama.  I told you I had my ticket, and I was hanging out with some friends that evening afterward, and that's one of the pictures there.
Speaker 1: And that is a picture that I took with--I got a certificate from the speaker of the house and the secretary of state--Speaker Harwell [Beth Harwell] and of course Secretary Tre Hargett, here in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. That's it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you again.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, you're welcome.
