Story_ID: 508185
Speaker 1: Let's get started on this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview.  My name is Cheryl Butler, I'll be conducting the interview today.  Also, joined by Matthew Hickey, who is the videographer.  I'd like you to say your full name and spell it, please.
Speaker 2: Great, I'm [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke.  It's spelled K-U-R-T, S-C-H-M-O-K-E.
Speaker 1: And where were you born and when?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Baltimore, Maryland, December 1, 1949, at University Hospital [University of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland], if you wanna be be real specific (laughter).
Speaker 1: There you go.  And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a lawyer by training, and currently, as we speak, I am the dean of the law school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: All righty.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September 25, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we holding this interview today?
Speaker 2: And this interview is being held in the dean's conference room of the Howard University School of Law [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Story_ID: 508186
Speaker 1: Just a few questions to get your blood pumping.
Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue, bright.  Not after Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or anything like that, (laughter) it just happened to be it, and I tend to it wear a fair amount (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite dessert, not a favorite food.
Speaker 1: What is that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My favorite dessert is cheesecake, and with a close second of pecan pie.  So every diet that I'm on gets ruined because somebody puts one of those in front of me, so that's, yeah, but in terms of other foods, no, I'm pretty easy to please.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I, I--
Speaker 1: Season?
Speaker 2: --like 'em all.  It's one of the reasons that I live in Maryland, because we get nice season changes.  I'm not real big on, big on bitter winter weather, which is why I don't live in Chicago [Illinois], but (laughter) or Minnesota or someplace that I enjoy visiting.  But, no, I, I like the fact that we, I live in a state that has nice changes of seasons and so we get to see the change of the leaves in the, in the fall, and the beauty of the spring.  And I have, live in Baltimore [Maryland], but I have a summer house in Annapolis, Maryland, right on the water, and you get to see the birds of the Chesapeake [Chesapeake Bay] down there, so it's very nice.  It's a great place to live.  That's why they call it the Land of Pleasant Living, and it is.
Speaker 1: It is beautiful up there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Wow, I, you know, in terms of vacations, we haven't--my wife [Patricia Locks Schmoke] and I have not gone back to too many places on repeat visits.  So, we've been to the Bahamas a number of times, but we like to travel all over, we like to pick a new location, so we've been, become world travelers on our vacation.  And, but, you know, if I had to choose right now, if you said you were gonna pay for it (laughter), and where am I gonna go to vacation, I would go to Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hawaii, very good.
Story_ID: 508187
Speaker 1: Wanna get a sense of your family--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) and your roots.  Tell me your parents' names, and when and where they were born.
Speaker 2: My mother is, Irene Bennett Reid--I was gonna give you the whole thing.  Her, actually it's, Irene Vetta Bennett Reid.
Speaker 1: Can you spell?
Speaker 2: V-E-T-T-A,
Speaker 1: And then Bennett?
Speaker 2: B-E-N-N-E-T-T, right--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --so, my mother was born, actually, in a small town in Alabama, but raised in a larger town in Georgia called Albany--New Yorkers call it (pronunciation) Albany, Georgians call it (pronunciation) Albany (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was born in Alabama?
Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama, a real small town in Alabama, that I've never visited, and, but right close to the Georgia border.  And, but moved kind of quickly to Albany--(pronunciation) Albany, Georgia, and that's where she was raised, mostly by her grandmother.  My, my grandmother died when my mother was in elementary school.  And, so, she was raised mostly by her grandmother.
Speaker 1: What year was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1932, January, 20, 1932.
Speaker 1: Did she have a big family?
Speaker 2: Well, she had--my, my grandfather, whose name was Fred Bennett [ph.], Fred Ladelle Bennett, had--this was his second marriage.  So she had several stepsisters, had three stepsisters and one stepbrother, all of whom were raised in Alabama, but then spread out around the country, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Indiana--I'm sorry--Pennsylvania, Indiana, Arkansas, Tennessee.  And, so, when she was raised, she really was raised as an only child, because they, they were much older, and they were all at least ten years older than, than her.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know when your maternal grandfather was born?
Speaker 2: I do not know that date.
Speaker 1: What was your maternal grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: It was, her maiden name was Fannie Ross [Fannie Ross Bennett (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you think they may have been born around the turn of the century, or she may have been born?
Speaker 2: Probably so, yeah, I'd think probably, yeah, 1890s or right at the turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have you heard stories about the generation prior?
Speaker 2: Well, only in dribs and drabs.  I know that my--well, my grandfather died before I was born, so I never met him.  And I've heard from my mother, a lot of stories about the Ross side, a real commitment to education.  And there's apparently, it's a whole bunch of people in that, on the Ross side of our family that went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  That that was their school.  And because I was briefly, for a number of years, a trustee at Tuskegee, and I was asked once to give a commencement address and someone asked, "Well, this guy has no connection with Tuskegee, what, what's he being invited here for?"  And, I looked into my family's background and found aunts, uncles and all these folks on the Ross side that attended and graduated from Tuskegee.  So there was a real strong commitment to, to education on my mother's, mother's side.  And I don't know that much about Mr. Bennett, except that he was a traveling salesman.
Speaker 1: Traveling salesman.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And Fannie, do you know what she did?
Speaker 2: She taught school.  And, a lot of different things, elementary to middle school, and taught music in the schools, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 508188
Speaker 1: What about your dad, what's his name and when was he born?
Speaker 2: Well, he is Murray--or was, I'm sorry.  He just passed away in April, Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr., because I had a brother [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Jr.] in there.  He was born in Raleigh, North Carolina, February 2, 1928, Groundhog Day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There you go.
Speaker 2: That's how we always remembered that birthday.
Speaker 1: What's his profession?
Speaker 2: He was a, he was a chemist.  He was, he's a graduate of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in chemistry and spent most of his professional career working for the United States government as a civilian chemist on [U.S.] Army bases in Maryland; first, the Edgewood Arsenal and the Aberdeen Proving Ground [Aberdeen, Maryland].  He was involved in weapons research and what was called defense shielding.  That's basically trying to protect [U.S.] military assets from the weapons of others.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --he, but he also, and in later years after retirement, spent a great deal of time running the credit union for a church, so he could have been a banker, I'm sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Douglas Memorial Community Church in Baltimore [Maryland]. It was a nondenominational, just community church.
Speaker 1: And, what was your mom's [Irene Bennett Reid] profession?
Speaker 2: She was a social worker.  She, a graduate of Morgan State University [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], actually, attended, attended Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then I intruded in their lives and they, they moved up to Baltimore, where I was born.  And so she finished at Morgan, Morgan State, and then went to work, spent most of her career at the Department of Social Services [Baltimore City Department of Social Services], first called public welfare, and then, social services.  And then, my parents--I don't know if you want this level of detail, but my parents divorced when I was twelve.  And so she then remarried, a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal church who later became a Bishop of the A.M.E. church.  He's Frank Madison Reid, Jr. [Frank M. Reid, Jr.]. So my stepbrother, Frank Madison Reid III [Frank M. Reid III], now has a big megachurch in, in Baltimore [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baltimore, Maryland].  But, bottom line, she, after remarrying, continued some work in social work, but then got very involved as a supervisor of missionary activity in the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 508189
Speaker 1: I wanna take you back to your dad [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] really quickly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to talk about his parents.  Who were they, where were they born, when were they born?
Speaker 2: Now, this one is a bit shrouded in mystery (laughter) because, the reason why I say that is there--we've always tried to figure out how we got the name Schmoke, S-C-H-M-O-K-E, because in the Carolinas there are a lot of people named S-M-O-A-K, Smoak.  And my grandfather was named John, S-M-O-A-K [John Hagan Schmoke].  Family history has it that in Raleigh [North Carolina] there was a white man named John Smoak, and my grandfather, and that they kept getting mail confused and things of that nature, and that my grandfather was visited and said that things have to change here to eliminate this confusion.  And times being what they were back in that part of the cen- of the 20th century, that my grandfather changed his name from S-M-O-A-K to S-C-H-M-O-K-E.  That's the story that my family has been telling me for the last fifty-some years and, and they're sticking with it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, recently, some census records were released that cast a little bit of doubt on that story because we have been able to identify a John Schmoke with the same spelling as mine, S-C-H-M-O-K-E, living in a town called Shellman, Georgia, at the time of the 1910 and 1920 census, and he lists children with the same names as my aunt.  I have an older aunt, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Schmoke Randolph], and then, an Aunt Alice [Alice Schmoke], who died when she was a teenager.  So, there is some suggestion now that maybe the story could be true about the change of the name, but he--it happened long before my father was around.  So, he certainly didn't talk to his father (laughter) or get that, get that story from him, but that's family lore.  And so John, John Schmoke, himself a builder or carpenter, moved around between many cities, as was the case back in those days, wherever the work was he moved, pretty much south of the Mason-Dixon Line, but between Georgia and, and the Carolinas he worked.  And my grandmother, Pearl (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spell her name for us.
Speaker 2: P-E-A-R-L, was her first name.  Pearl Johnson [Pearl Johnson Schmoke], was her maiden name.  And she was not only a homemaker, but she did a lot of work.  I guess we call it day laborer, now, but, you know, worked in the homes of white families, in and around the Raleigh area, and raised, let's see, two girls, three boys, and I told you, the one, other one died when she was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Any stories about her work or her life?
Speaker 2: Well, I--she's--see my--that's, they're very interesting side, my father's side of the family.  The--my grandmother told me that her folks were from Wilmington, North Carolina, and that we had a, a relative there that my father always referred to as Uncle Sterling.  Well, this gentlemen I met and actually had on his official name, Sterling Stanford Regular Raincoat Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, how he got Regular Raincoat, I have no idea, but, I was, was intrigued by that, that somebody could have that as, as their name.  Fortunately, he never ran for office, so he couldn't put that on a bumper sticker or anything like that.  But, our folks, we've got a lot of folks in the Carolinas, some in Georgia left, but most of my father's generation now have passed, passed on with him just dying at age seventy-nine in April.
Speaker 1: Sorry to hear that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yep, yep. Good man.
Story_ID: 508190
Speaker 1: Did they pass down stories about slavery at all, generation to generation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  You know, it's very interesting, my, my father [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] actually did, there was an interview of him, a newspaper interviewed him when I was selected as a Rhodes Scholar, many years ago.  And they talked a little bit about decisions that he and my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] made in raising me.  And they made a conscious decision to downplay discussions of race.  Their--they both had been victims of that, you know.  I had, you know, seen the face of it, but not as much as other people, particularly living in the Deep South during the '60s [1960s] and '50s [1950s], things of that nature.  I mean, my encounters were when we would drive down to see my grandmother [Pearl Johnson Schmoke], and we had to go in the back of restaurants, or the colored signs at bathrooms.  But, for me, I mean, I didn't even think about it 'cause I didn't see that much of it in, in Baltimore [Maryland].  I didn't see my parents not get promoted because of race, but that happened.  I didn't see them get excluded from housing in certain neighborhoods, but it happened.  I didn't even try to go to the big amusement park which was in the, right on the outskirts of our city.  I heard about a little bit, but roller coaster rides weren't my thing, anyway, but it was segregated until the mid-1960s and rather than integrate, they tore it down.
Speaker 1: Which amusement park?
Speaker 2: This was called, Gwynn Oak amusement park [Gwynn Oak Park] in Baltimore.  So all of that is happening around me, but, my father and my mother just decided to, to someway shield me from it, and let me kind of take the world as I was experiencing it, was seeing it, knowing that eventually, I would have my own personal encounter with racism, but that was a decision they made, so-and when our schools, for example, eliminated Negro History Week--this was after the schools, the, the dual systems merged, and a decision in Baltimore was made that Negro History Week, rather than being something positive and affirmative, you know, this was before we got to the Black Power movement, before we got to Black History Month--
Speaker 1: What year are we talking?
Speaker 2: We're talking now 19--let's see, I entered elementary school in 1955, that's kindergarten in '55 (1955)--
Speaker 1: What school is this?
Speaker 2: This is, well, the elementary school was Gwynn Falls Parkway Elementary School [sic. Gwynns Falls Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland].  And, but, this is the Baltimore school system made a decision, well, not the individual school, to eliminate Negro History Week, viewing it as a part of the old dual system.  Negro History Week was a major part of the black school system when it was segregated.  And it was a source of great pride.  Obviously, they brought it back, you know, fifteen years later.  But, so during my, at least during my elementary school days, we didn't have Negro history.  And then, all the way through high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], 'cause it wasn't until I got to college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] that we got the focus again on, on black history.  All that simply to say, my--with my parents not focusing in much on the questions of race, and the school system not focusing on African American history, I pretty much grew up thinking, you know, all things being equal, whatever I wanted to do, I could do.  I mean, there weren't any specific limits on my achievement because of race.  And that was a conscious decision that my father and mother made.
Story_ID: 508191
Speaker 1: Now, later on, you know, when I'm, you know, out of college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and everything, and I start asking about family history, then I start getting just the, the, all the things that they experienced, all the tough situations, and a little bit about, a little bit about our family history.  You know, as I talk I do remember just one time that I was specifically asked--this was middle school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland]--each student was asked to make a presentation about family heritage or something.  And I asked my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] about the slave past, and she told me about getting the family name Ross because of a plantation owner, and that it was a slave name.  And that there were kind of whites in our family, because her, her side of the family is light skinned and my dad [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] was dark skinned.  So--
Speaker 2: So this Ross plantation was where?
Speaker 1: In, somewhere in Georgia.
Speaker 2: So there were the black Ross family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 2: --and the white Ross family?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: And they're related?
Speaker 1: They're related, and the slaves on the, after emancipation, took the Ross name as theirs.  They, they were from the Ross plantation, they became Rosses.  Now, you know, there's clearly some cross breeding that went on there, too, because they, they came out pretty light, on the light side.  So, she did talk, so I did know about that, but, that was a fairly isolated case.
Speaker 2: Did she talk about any relatives ever passing, were they--?
Speaker 1: No, no, not while I was in, in, a youngster, but--
Story_ID: 508192
Speaker 1: When--in college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] I did, because I just met some relatives who were extraordinarily light.  And, my stepfather [Frank M. Reid, Jr.], also had--his grandmother used to glory in telling me stories about passing.  Oh, she loved it.  She was so light, when I first met her I was wondering, you know, "How'd this white lady get in our house?"
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Oh God--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what kind of stories did she tell you?
Speaker 1: I'll remember at some point.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: She would tell stories about going into department stores because in Baltimore [Maryland] in the, in the 1950s, they would let blacks come into the store, but they couldn't try on clothes.  So, she just delighted in going downtown and trying on clothes for herself, for her friends, and listening to the clerks talk about, you know, keeping those black people, or those coloreds as they called them at the time, keeping  'em out, and she would say, "That's--I agree with you. We gotta make sure that we (laughter) don't let 'em in," and just laughing all the time.  And she would just tell stories of going into restaurants, and things, getting food for friends.  And she was just a very, very light.  I just--oh, god, just--she came into my life, you know, while, as I said, while I was in, in college 'cause that's when my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] and stepfather were married.  So I didn't get to sit there and listen to endless stories, but every time I came home from college and we would talk, various vacations, she would give me, regale me with these stories.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 508193
Speaker 1: I'm gonna take you back to your earliest childhood memory in Baltimore [Maryland].  What was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I mean, what context, I mean I, you know?
Speaker 1: Your neighborhood, playing, friends, race relations.  Do you remember holidays in your house?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I was, I played a lot of sports, and I remember being interested in sports.  I'm trying to think of anything that defined being in Baltimore, in particular.  We used to have, there was the McCormick, McCormick spice company [McCormick and Company, Inc.] used to be in the Inner Harbor [Baltimore, Maryland].  If you go to Baltimore's Inner Harbor today, it's this mixture of restaurants, hotels, beautiful, you know, boats down in marinas, and things like that, an aquarium, a science center.  When I grew up, it was a working harbor.  And but, one of the delights that people had was to drive downtown, you go down a big hill and you get to the harbor and you drive past the McCormick spice company, and you just smell the cinnamon and the spice.  And you'd--it was just a real delightful experience that people would do, particularly those of us who didn't have much money, you had to do things that; this was recreation without cost.  So, sleeping out in the park where there was a fountain that changed colors at night, that was a big deal.  Lots of families would do that in the summertime.  No, no worries about crime, just get the blanket and go out there, get a little picnic basket, and stay the night.
Speaker 1: And you would go with your family?
Speaker 2: Go out there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have a big family?
Speaker 2: No, just my father [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.], my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] and myself, you know, but there would be other people around.  But I was just trying to think of, you know, those kinds of the memories--the McCormick thing, the sleeping out in the park and going out to the airport and watching planes land, which many Baltimore families did at the time.
Speaker 1: BWI [Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was called Friendship Airport [Friendship International Airport], before it changed its name to BWI, but, yes, same airport.  It just had a different name at the time.
Story_ID: 508194
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your earliest educational experiences in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: Well, I was very, very fortunate.  I, I went to all, to public schools, but I came into the public school system the year after Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was decided.  And Baltimore, unlike, you know, Baltimore, people don't always think of it as a southern city, but it is forty miles below the Mason-Dixon Line.  So, and it was split in the Civil War, so, I, it--we call it Up South. It was an Up South city, but it decided, the city fathers and mothers, that rather than drag their feet after Brown, they immediately decided to integrate the, the system.  So, the school system went from having the segreg- the two separate, the black and the white, to a unified system by 1955.  I entered kindergarten, and then, went straight through, and just had wonderful experiences.  I had great teachers--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: They, well, white and black.  I had, there was one person, Sarah Taylor [ph.], who was my sixth grade teacher, who unfortunately just passed away.  She was a tall statuesque, authoritarian figure, who, when I met her, her children later, they told me she was a cream puff at home.  But, at, at school, she was, she who must be obeyed.  And, but, she just lifted the spirits of all of us, and just kept telling us we could do better, all of us.  And so, I have, you know, classmates that, some pursued the profession of education, teachers, and the doctors and the lawyers, and others that are blue collar, but they all remember her and what an inspiration she was.  She was just an extraordinary teacher.  And I had a gentleman in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] named John Pence [ph.], who was an English teacher, who was the guy who planted the idea in my mind, he along with a guy named Judge Robert Hammerman [Robert I.H. Hammerman], who was just a good friend, but, both of them together planted the idea, when I was in high school, that I should apply for a Rhodes Scholarship when I was in college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I mean, this--you gotta think about it, I mean that's pretty extraordinary for somebody, one, to think of you being able to achieve something like that, but, then with the foresight to say, "Start thinking about this as a goal," not, "What you're gonna do in your future career?" But here's along the way, some goals, you know.  Young people, you know, need that kind of stuff and you can imagine the difference it would make in your life.  And particularly for me, 'cause by the time I got in high school, my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] were divorced.  And so to have other people out there always looking out for you in this way, and being so encouraging, was pretty extraordinary.
Story_ID: 508195
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you attended which high school?
Speaker 2: It's called, now, Baltimore City College high school [Baltimore, Maryland].  It's the nation's third oldest high school, public high school, started in 1839.  And I just wanna tell you one, one other teacher that had a real impact on me, a guy named George Young [George B. Young], who--George Young was my high school football coach, but he was a, he was a history teacher.  And later on, as the years went by, Young's ability in sports became identified by a bunch of other folks.  He becomes the general manager of the New York Giants football team.  And so, he was general manager of the Giants when they won the Super Bowl.  But, but George Young was just an extraordinary man.  He was a great teacher.  He taught his history classes, in some ways, the same way he taught coaching.  He had the, the screen with the overheads that you put the, you know--
Speaker 1: Transparencies?
Speaker 2: --transparencies down, and coaches would draw plays on that.  Well, he used to do history outlines, and so, students had to learn that way.  But so, then maybe that wasn't the most effective or creative way of teaching history, but it got the job done.  But in sports, the reason why he was so important for me, my junior year in, at Baltimore City College, we won the championship and I was only sixteen at, at the time, and I was the quarterback of the high school football team.  So, we're going, going into my senior year now.  We're at summer practice, and I think Mr. Young could detect that, not only me, but many of my teammates were full of ourselves, that, that, that we basically, we had won this championship, we were about to waltz into the new season.  And he was a little bit worried.  So he comes over to me while I'm warming up and he says, "So Kurt [HistoryMaker Kurt Schmoke], what are you gonna do when you graduate?"  And I say, "Well, you know, I'm going to college, Mr. Young."  And he says, "Where are gonna apply?"  And again, you know, I'm hotshot quarterback and I'd just won the championship, and I said, "Well, you know, Mr. Young I'm thinking about Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] or Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], maybe Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]," and--Mr. Young was a big guy, he was about 6'1, and then huge, like three hundred pounds.  And he comes over, and he puts his arm around me, and he says, "Well, I just wanna tell you something, Kurt."  And I said, "What's that?"  He said, "You're not that good."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, so I could have been crushed, you know, that, that--putty, I mean, you know, you could have scraped me off the ground.  But then, he says, "No, well, understand what I'm saying to you.  It's my view that when you graduate, each year that you graduate, after your graduation from here, football is going to become less and less important in your life.  For other guys it may be important, but for you, it's gonna be less and less important, and the academics are gonna become more and more important.  So, let me give you the schools that I think you ought to apply to."  So, then he gave me this list of Ivies [Ivy League schools] and Little Ivies.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: What was on the list?  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Well, no, he, he didn't--he liked--Yale was on the list, but that was because of a personal connection he had with one of the coaches.  I don't think it was necessarily because he thought I was academically (laughter) gonna achieve that, but, no, but he liked the little, he liked the smaller schools.  He loved Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts].  Those were the, and the College of William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia].  He really liked those schools and that's where he, he, he thought I, I should go.  But it was an interesting, you know, encounter, and I must tell you, I never did apply to Notre Dame or Penn State; though one of my teammates did and was accepted into Notre Dame and went on to play professional football.
Story_ID: 508196
Speaker 1: So what was the football experience like for you in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]?  You were apparently pretty much a star.  You were the quarterback by senior year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, but, you gotta understand, yeah, put that in context.  (Laughter) My school, at that time, this was, you know, the Baby Boom generation now, so there's all these kids all over the place, and so, so many kids flooding the school system, that they have to have shifts in school.  So we went to school 8:00 to 12:00, and then the underclassmen came in 12:30 to 4:30.  But, we had--and it was an all-boys public school, four thousand, all boys.  So when tryouts came for football, eight hundred guys come out for football.  So we had just incredible talent out there.  So, Mr. Young's [George B. Young] decision on selecting the quarterback had more to do with IQ (laughter) than innate football talent.  He wanted to make sure that the guy back there as quarterback understood plays that were, when they would be run-in, could understand signals from him, so he didn't want some guy who was not terribly bright back there.  So, you know, I was in the advanced college prep class and I could run and I could throw a little bit. I get the job.
Story_ID: 508197
Speaker 1: So, you were excelling not only athletically, but academically [at Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was doing well academ- I was, again, I was doing well academically, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about, I mean that must have begun in the home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always, look, I, from my earliest age, I mean, elementary, middle school, my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] were talking about me going away from home to school.  And, you know, you could a got a complex (laughter), you know, you could say, but--, "Why not stay here?"  But, their whole notion was that being away from home was part of the education process.  It was part of being mature.  And so, always had their sights set on me going away from home.  Now, what I didn't realize until much later in life, is that my father's sights were clearly set on Atlanta, Georgia (laughter).
Speaker 1: Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Morehouse College.  So, but mother's was, "Go wherever you want."  But (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, where did your mother go to school?
Speaker 2: Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] first, then Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Morgan, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then she got a master's degree?
Speaker 2: She got a master's degree from University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a master's in social work.  So she, for her it was, you know, "Just go where your interests were and don't worry about where we went."  Again, let's, let's just, you know, move ahead.  And at the time, again, when I was applying to school, which was in 1967, Morehouse was going through a bit of a transition itself.  It was kind of a rough period.  And just to be nice to my dad, I did send in an application, but I never heard from them, I never got a response from them--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --which was one of the things that got him involved in Morehouse alumni work, and he later became national secretary of the alumni association.  He just wanted to make sure that, you know, things like that didn't happen again to other young men.  And I must tell you that, nineteen years later, when my little brother [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Jr.] came along (laughter) to college, he did apply and was accepted and he graduated from Morehouse.  So, my father's world was complete, (laughter) one of his sons did graduate from Morehouse.  But I, I didn't.
Story_ID: 508198
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of reading, and a lot of academic discipline in the home?
Speaker 2: J-, more just encouragement, checks of homework, taking me on trips to things.  My parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.], every year, that was in, from high--middle school, until I started getting real active in, in sports in, in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], so I guess that was four years, there, took me to the UN [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York].  Every year, we would go up to the United Nations.  And they knew I had an interest in politics and that kind of stuff.  And so, you know, other people go to New York [New York] and go to a show.  We went to the UN (laughter), I know, so we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: This was in the '60s [1960s].  This was in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of the political terrain?
Speaker 2: Yep.  This is--a lot of it goes back to, this sixth grade teacher I was telling you about, Mrs. Taylor [Sarah Taylor (ph.)].  She had us debating constantly, and one of things that I remember about her is that we, there would be times where she would tell us we're gonna debate, and she would say, "Kurt [HistoryMaker Kurt Schmoke], your table has the pro position.  Joanne, your table has the con position.  And we'll have this debate on Wednesday."  Wednesday morning, we'd get to class ready to go and she'd say, "I've changed my mind, switch," which is really a great education.  I mean it drove us nuts, but, but in terms of an education technique, you know, learning how to see both sides of the argument, making sure you're prepared, to knowing what the other side--it was just wonderful.  And, and because that year was 1960, there was an election, so that was--show you how old I am now--this was the Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] election, so we were constantly debating the election.  We were also debating what was then a major foreign policy question, should Red China be admitted to the UN? That was a big issue back in the late 1950s and 1960s.  And, I don't remember some of the others, but those two I remember, the presidential issues, and the UN and, and the Red China discussion.  And so, she sparked an interest, you know, I was already interested a little bit in domestic politics, but she kind of broadened the scope of my interest.  And, had a good friend to accompany me on this trip.  This guy is a lawyer down in Mississippi these days.  His name is Victor McTeer, Charles Victor McTeer.  And we would go up with my parents to the UN (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow (laughter), that's amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: What was the, what was the racial breakdown--
Speaker 2: --definition of a nerd (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, yeah, but that's great stuff.  Look what happened later.
Story_ID: 508199
Speaker 1: What was the racial breakdown of your school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of my school?  Oh, it was interesting.  Baltimore [Maryland], unfortunately, is like Chicago [Illinois], a very segregated place, residentially.  And so, as the schools integrated in '55 [1955], but the neighborhoods began to change, so as neighborhoods changed, the schools changed.  So when I entered Gwynns Falls Elementary School [Baltimore, Maryland], that neighborhood had, in less than a year, gone from being about half and half black and white to 90 percent black.  So, my--although the teachers were about half and half, black, white, the student body, by the time I entered elementary school, was almost 90 percent black in the elementary school.  The middle school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland] was very different, because then your region from, all over the west side of town, and that was about just, just the opposite.  It was about 70 percent white.  And then my high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]--understand, I entered in '64 [1964], graduated in '67 [1967], my high school went from 1964 being 70 percent white, 30 percent black, to when I graduated, 70 percent black, 30 percent white.
Speaker 1: Now, why the shift?  Can you explain the migration pattern in the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah, people moved to, out to the county and the county and the city school systems were two separate worlds.  And, so, as the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) White--
Speaker 2: --this was white flight--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --out of the city, into nearby counties.  It was very interesting that the, the bulk of that population that moved in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] moved within five miles of the city limits.  So, our metropolitan area really grew significantly, though the city shrank.
Speaker 1: So it moved from being like the sixth largest city (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, to--
Speaker 1: --in the country to--
Speaker 2: --to the time I was mayor, we were in the teens somewhere, thirteen or fourteen, somewhere in there.  And we did not have the ability to annex.  If we had been able to annex, we would have just reached out and grabbed everything around it, within five and half miles, and it certainly would have made a big difference in terms of the finances, but now I'm getting into being mayor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, there you go, we're gonna get to that.
Story_ID: 508200
Speaker 1: So 1964 you enter high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and you started this debate thing in 1960, at the time of the [presidential] election.  Were you aware (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, in elementary school [Gwynns Falls Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: --well, first of all, were you aware of the civil rights discussions?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh my goodness, I mean, TV brought it right into--the Little Rock Nine was a, you know, a big issue.  So I was, let's see, when that occurred I was seven, I would have been eight in December of that year, and so I watched that.  I remember talking to friends.  I don't recall talking to my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] very much about it, but my mother has a recollection of me telling her I wanted to be mayor of Baltimore [Maryland] when I was eight.  And that was because, this I do have a distinct memory of, following local politics on TV, and we were downtown one day walking on the street, and we got to a corner and I look up and next to me I see a guy who I know is the mayor of Baltimore.  And everybody around is, is not saying any, anything.  I guess maybe he was then out of office, and I just go over to the guy, and I said, "Hi, Mayor McKeldin [Theodore R. McKeldin]." And he looks down and he, and just goes, goes, "Yes, hello young man, how are you?" and shakes my hand and everything, and I say, "It was good to see you."  And my mother, you know, and I-- with that I have a very distinct memory of.  And later on I, you know, I tell her, she says, you know, asked me about what I wanted to be when I grew up and everything, and I told her I wanted to be mayor.  And that was, I was eight.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's amazing.
Speaker 2: I told you I was a kind of nerdy as a kid, but that's (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What can I say?  You know, we didn't have computers, (laughter) we, we had other things (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 508201
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you fueled at all by the racial politics of the time, your political interests?
Speaker 2: I was saddened by it.  I, I, I just, 'cause my personal experiences with white kids was always very positive in, in school, and in sports, so seeing that, then it seemed otherworldly.  And again, my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] weren't telling me, "Hey, this is right around the corner.  This is not, you know, we're experiencing these problems right here."  (Unclear) They weren't telling me any of that, and I wasn't feeling it really.  And the fact that I was in a school that, elementary school [Gwynns Falls Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland] that was almost all black, that, that almost seemed like the way the world was supposed--it didn't trouble me at all.  And then when I went to middle school and it was very integrated, it was like, okay this is the way the world is.  You move away from your neighborhood, 'cause I had to take a bus to middle school, so I'm out of my neighborhood.  I'm in a different part of town, so we bring people from all over town.
Speaker 1: Which middle school was this?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Excuse me, it was called, then, Garrison Junior High School.  It's now, Garrison Middle School [Baltimore, Maryland].  But, you know, I took a bus about forty miles, forty minutes away.  And, so, the fact that I wasn't in my neighborhood, you know, it just, it didn't seem at all odd.  It--I did notice, however, by the time I was in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], this change in the racial makeup.
Story_ID: 508202
Speaker 1: So help me see this contrast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --between the images that you were seeing on TV and the images of your own neighborhood and school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Describe some of the sights, smells and sounds of your Baltimore [Maryland] neighborhood.
Speaker 2: The neighborhood that I grew up in had a, it was on--a bunch of row houses.  It was like five or six blocks on a, a street called Gwynns Falls Parkway, which is a large street, so you couldn't go out and play in the street or anything.  It was a major thoroughfare running east and west, but across the street from us was a park.   It had a stream running through it, a big park.  And then behind us, behind these row house--actually, I call 'em row houses, but they're actually duplexes, 'cause we lived in the bottom apartment and there was another one above us.  But, there's like twenty in a block and then the next block had its twenty.  But what I'm trying to suggest to you is that it was a very busy street, but it was a lot of play area, so you could just run all the time.  So we could, we played football all year long.  We played in the snow, we played in the, you know, when it's sunshiny.  I mean we, and it was just kids.  It was, again, baby boomers, so these guys returning from the war [Korean War] had their kids.   There's just children all over the place.  And, it ends up that for me--I told you my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] were separated when I was ten, divorced when I was twelve, but my three closest friends were in the same position, that their--so we were all being raised, you know, formally by our mothers, but we all had contacts weekly with our fathers.  It was, it was not one of these situations where, "Gosh, you know, who's your daddy?" (Laughter) You know, you, you don't remember who that person is.  We had, all three of us, ongoing contacts with our fathers, but we were living with our mothers.  But we just, we played sports.  That was our thing.  We went to school and played sports.
Speaker 1: Black kids, white kids?
Speaker 2: No.  This was--the neighborhood was all black.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 508203
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And do you remember some of the leaders in the neighborhood, 'cause some of your mentors were white?
Speaker 2: Correct, yeah, but that, that developed later on.  Most, the people who were closest to me in my elementary school grades [at Gwynns Falls Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland], a couple of--I did have a, as I said, a couple of white teachers, like in the third grade, second and third grade, but my, my fourth, fifth and sixth grade teachers were strong black women who were no nonsense and extraordinarily encouraging, but tough.  They were steel magnolias.  And so, so that was the formative, those years, and then around, after school, was all playing with my friends who were African American.  By middle school [Garrison Junior High School; Garrison Middle School, Baltimore, Maryland], now I'm getting the influence of whites as well as blacks.  And the other experience was that, I--although I was raised by my mother [Irene Bennett Reid], I went to church with my father [Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] and the church family was nurturing, supportive, encouraging,  so there, was black pastor church, but the church was--
Speaker 1: This was Douglas Memorial Community Church [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Douglas Memorial Church, and it was all black, one white member, I'm sorry, one white member.
Speaker 1: Who was that, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Adriana Ward, 'cause she was also in the credit union with, with my father.
Speaker 1: Why did, why did she attend your church?
Speaker 2: She was from the Netherlands, and had married an African American professor at Morgan State University [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and they found the church home, one, because of him, and secondly, because of music.  They, my--I didn't tell you, but my father was in the Morehouse choir.  He was in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Glee club [Morehouse College Glee Club].
Speaker 2: --glee club. Then he was on the chorus.  He was in the four member chorus.  So, besides chemistry, music was his life.  And, the, and Mrs. Ward also was on the choir.  So, that, that's how that happened to be.  We had a, almost a hundred percent black church except for Mrs. Ward (laughter).
Story_ID: 508204
Speaker 1: Was there lots of music at home as well?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, it was discord (laughter), discordant notes. Yeah, home was--both my parents [Irene Bennett Reid and Murray Alexander Schmoke, Sr.] are just really gifted people in their own way, and clearly there was love there at some point, but it was pretty tense.  We vacationed separately from the time I was like seven or eight--
Speaker 1: Where did you vacation?
Speaker 2: Well, when I say vacation, we would go to family.  She would take me to see her family.  He would take me to see his.  The most extraordinary trip that I took was with my mother.  We went to Humboldt, Tennessee, where she had relatives.  Excuse me.  And, we, we went down there to stay on a farm for a summer, and I picked tomatoes and learned that the agricultural life was not for me. (Laughter) But, my father didn't come on that.
Speaker 1: And, earlier you were also talking about the images of discrimination, segregation down south.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do any of those standout in your mind, specific images?
Speaker 2: They, they, well, I remember it, I mean, I remember where we couldn't stay, and things like that, and then how we had to drive all the way through going to North Carolina, whereas, when we went to see my uncle in Massachusetts--he was a sergeant in the [U.S.] Air Force--and we could stop and enjoy ourselves, but it was a different kind of, of trip down there.
Story_ID: 508205
Speaker 1: Are there specific moments during the Civil Rights Movement that you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] took me to the March on Washington.  She, I was, it's August of 1963, and she very much wanted to go to the march, but interestingly, she didn't--the reason that she wanted to go was not to hear Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  She wanted to hear Benjamin Mays because he was such a presence, you know, as president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, a man just born with the great voice, and always, everything he said it was something thoughtful, and, so, you know, she wanted to be present and wanted me to go with her.  And so we went and we marched that day.  And, of course, like everybody else, we were just stunned by Dr. King's speech.  And, I can't tell you today who else spoke (laughter), but we were there for all afternoon, so it was speaker after speaker that, that came up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, Marian Anderson--
Speaker 2: --you know, but that was it.  So I remember that experience.
Story_ID: 508206
Speaker 1: The other big experience that I had on the southern stuff was, we had relatives in, of all places, Hope, Arkansas, which years later I got to tell President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] about my relatives down there and an experience that I found kind of interesting.  Now, I went to visit my relatives in Hope by myself.  I was fourteen and I took a bus ride, but my mother [Irene Bennett Reid] didn't want me to take the southern route. She didn't want me to go through Maryland and Virginia and go down that way.  So I ended up going a northern route and dropping down, going up to Illinois--Pennsylvania and then Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, coming down through Missouri and into Arkansas.  And going to visit, to stay with my relatives there, and, there I saw--this was 1964--that time seemed not to have come to some areas of our country.  And it was still incredibly segregated.  We went to a, a, a movie one day, and much to my surprise, they still had the practice of blacks sitting in the balcony, whites coming into the main floor.  And I got to recount this story to Bill Clinton when I was mayor of Baltimore [Maryland] and he was a candidate for president.  He came to Baltimore and I organized a rally for him at my church [Douglas Memorial Community Church, Baltimore, Maryland] and we had, it was--the place was packed.  And, and I said to him, "You know, I, I've wondered, since I found that you were raised or, or at least, spent some time in Hope, Arkansas, if the day that I was down in Hope going to the movie theater, and I was in line on one side of the movie, whether you were in line on the other side and you got to go into the, the main part of the theater.  And we were up in the balcony."  I said, "That would be ironic, in a way, to find out today."  But I said, "He's clearly somebody who's, you know, overcome that particular time in, in our country's history."  But when it was going on for me in 1964, it, it really was a, just a searing memory that every day there was some evidence of the division in our society, and how segregation was really putting down, and keeping people in their place.  So, my, all my relatives now have moved out of, out of Hope, Arkansas, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow.
Story_ID: 508207
Speaker 1: Same time period, you also mentioned the Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy]-Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) debate.  That happened right here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], at the NBC building apparently.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were--do you have images of, of that election cycle (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I remember, I remember actually being somewhat more impressed with Nixon as a, as a person that I could see as president.  That is, I thought I liked Kennedy's energy--this is my recollection now as, from elementary school [Gwynns Falls Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland] because, as I told you, I ended up debating both sides.  I debated why Nixon ought to be president, and why Kennedy ought to be president.  And, substantively, congressman, senator, vice president, I thought added up to a more experienced person than congressman, senator.  And, and he didn't scare me.  I didn't know about his red-baiting, and that didn't come up in the debates, you know, they were a bit more civil than current debate standards.  So, and, and, and this business about Nixon having the, the shadow, the beard, and kind of looking more menacing than Kennedy, that, he looked virile to me (laughter).  I didn't, it didn't strike me as being odd at all.  But, my family were big time Kennedy supporters, so it was clear where their, their votes were going.  But, I just don't remember Nixon as being the off-putting person that, that some came to see him.
Story_ID: 508208
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, your family is strong Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] supporters.  Do you recall the assassination of JFK?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure.  Yeah, I was, by then, November '63 [1963], I was as a ninth grader, I was in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] and in class when our history professor came in and told us about it.  And it was just dead silence in the room.  I mean, nobody, everybody had been caught up, you know, in the magic of the Kennedy, the image of the Kennedy administration.  We were out, all of us out, by that time doing fifty mile walks and all that sort of stuff.  He was encouraging people to get out and be energetic, and all.  We were, you know, thought we were doing the patriotic thing.  So, he was a, you know, a great leader for the beginning of the '60s [1960s], I thought.  But, and it was just shocking that something like that could happen, I mean, it seemed at the time just unreal that, that it could happen in our country.  And so, but, after that I didn't spend a lot of time focusing on President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  He didn't--only because he just didn't exude the same sense of attachment or connection with young people.  He was a, you know, a politician really of a different era, in some ways, even though he was about the same age.  He just was the, a guy that had come up inside, through the insider game, somebody that had not really reached out to the youth of America that much.  So I didn't really follow him, you know, until I got to college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and then Vietnam [Vietnam War] was a big issue.
Story_ID: 508209
Speaker 1: How did you get to college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?  I know you had some strong mentors, you mentioned Judge Hammerman [Robert I.H. Hammerman]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, someone, one of my classmates in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], my particular class that I was in, was overwhelmingly with Jewish.  I was a, kind of a minority in that class, even a--I told you, we were in a huge high school, four thousand all boys, and it had various grade levels and sections, and I was in a class though that only had two blacks in it, and most of the kids were Jewish.  And there was a club, a boys club [Lancers] in town that had been started by a, a juvenile court judge named Robert Hammerman.  It--that club was overwhelmingly Jewish boys, and a, a decision had been made to integrate.  I didn't know about this, that the decision had been made to integrate.  Again, I didn't even, I didn't there, didn't know of the club's existence and I didn't realize that it had been segregated, but I was invited, along with some other guys, to, to join the club.  And I just loved it because it would meet every Friday night at a local elementary school.  We listened to a speaker and then we got to participate in sports.  And the, and the judge was all, constantly writing to speakers all over the country, "If you're here in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area, could you come up to Baltimore [Maryland] and speak to this group of eighty young boys," et cetera.  And we're, I mean we had congress people come in, we had supreme court judges, we had a lot of folks in Maryland, business and education leaders.  I mean, and they would come in and they would talk about something at our level, for maybe twenty minutes, and then let us question them.  And, most of the time, we would question them about, "Well, how'd you get where you are?"  Now, every once in a while--'cause we had some really brilliant guys in there, they would get into policy debates, "You said in the following--."  "I read this in an article--," and I'm sitting back there saying, you know, "Oh, my god, where'd these guys learn all this stuff?"  (Laughter) So, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember some of the speakers?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I mean, we had, yes, many of the Baltimore Colts--what was then the Baltimore, before Colts moved to Indianapolis [Indianapolis Colts] they were in Baltimore, so, we had a number of their players.  We had a number of the, the Orioles [Baltimore Orioles], Brooks Robinson, I know, came to speak there.  We had a Congressman Charles Weltner [Charles L. Weltner], who was from Georgia and he was a very interesting man.  He made a lot of votes in the [U.S.] House of Representatives against his party, trying to buck the lingering segregationist ideas.  And so, he was kind of, progressive Democrat from Georgia and he came up to speak.
Story_ID: 508210
Speaker 1: And the judge [Robert I.H. Hammerman] once invited, and the guy accepted, the head of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] for Maryland.  And he came to speak to us, and brought one of his aides and about why the races ought to be separate and why the Klan's--and it was an extraordinary discussion.  And parents, he--some speakers, he would invite the parents too come to, and others, it was just for us.
Speaker 2: Did you challenge him?  Did people challenge--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  You know, there were more people on him that I didn't have to say a word because, you remember now, he didn't like Jews either (laughter), so there were more than enough people.  But I just thought it was an extraordinary event to be a part of, just sit there and listen to their, somebody real life who actually hates me for just my color.  I mean, this guy didn't know me, but he's automatically classified me, and that was, that's just an example (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, did you--how did you handle that?  Did you just write him off as ignorant or did you internalize it?
Speaker 1: It was, I--it, for me, another learning experience that there really are people out here who, who feel like--this is not fiction, this is not history.  You know, all the incidents that I had where I encountered racism, like, you know, not getting an apartment building that I know it was because of race, or having somebody holler nigger, you know, at me where I was working at a camp up in Maine, of all places.   An experience like in, in Arkansas [Hope, Arkansas] with going into the separate entrances to movies, were learning, they were bitter experiences, and sometimes I'd get a little angry.  I don't know if I had really enough maturity to feel sorry for the person saying it.  I--that would maybe be giving me a bit too much credit.  But, I just, you know, kind of, it just reminded me that this thing we call racism is still there, it's just not dead.  And so, you know, that, that helped give some perspective that was important to know.  You gotta live in a world that you, with your eyes open.
Story_ID: 508211
Speaker 1: And so you graduated high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] in 1967?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you were SGA president?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in that, (laughter) in that group of four thousand boys, we had a student government association and I ran for president.  And it really was one of those situations--I have to explain that for, up to a certain point in my life, I kept thinking about things that I wanted to be rather than what I wanted to do.  That is, you know, I wanted to be the student government president, but I didn't really have much of a platform or things I actually wanted to do.  I just thought, this is something, it was a nice job, and, you know, I, you know, it will certainly look good on the college, you know, resume or whatever, quarterback of the football team, student government president, you know, good grades.  But if somebody said, "Well, what is it you really wanna do as student government president?"  I gave some canned speech about the things that I'd heard the previous president say, you know, "Improve the academic environment, closer relations with Eastern [Eastern High School, Baltimore, Maryland]."  That was a line that always brought cheers because Eastern was the girls high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Girls--
Speaker 2: --across the street.  So when somebody would always say, "Closer relations with--," you know, the double meaning would always capture even the most unsophisticated young man there, so you'd get cheers.  And the first guy to get up there to say it always gets elected, you know, so, (laughter) but I did it and actually had a wonderful experience because of my, the guy that won with me, an Asian Amer- Chinese American guy, named Jimmy Wu [ph.], who later became an official of the U.S. treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], actually had ideas about doing things.  And, so, together we worked on a number of projects that, that helped.
Story_ID: 508212
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You entered Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] then, in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], correct.
Speaker 1: So tell me about your first experiences at Yale.
Speaker 2: Well, Yale, I mean, it was just a wonderful experience.  I mean, and I think they could have written the, the alma mater for my time, I mean, because the alma mater begins, "Bright college years," and I just had a wonderful time.  I got there not only at the suggestion of, you know, Mr. Young [George B. Young] and some other people, but Calvin Hill, who was a football player there who, as we speak in 2007, is known more because of his son, Grant Hill, who is a basketball player, professional basketball player, but most people know Calvin as Grant's father, but he was an outstanding football player, who played for the Dallas Cowboys after leaving Yale, is just an All-American football player.  Anyway, he happened to be from Baltimore [Maryland], born there though he went to high school somewhere else, and he invited me in my senior year in coll- in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] to visit him at Yale, and I still remember the visit.  We, I spent the weekend with him, and one of the things that he did was take me to the Yale Bowl [New Haven, Connecticut], which is, they made--the football stadium there.  And it was in the winter and it was, the whole field was covered with snow and the seats there were painted in this huge bowl-like configuration, blue seats, the white thing, so those are the Yale colors, I thought, "God's blessing me,"  (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Blue, your favorite color (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, He's got a great sense of humor, you know.  "God must be a Yale man."  I, I just--it was just such a wonderful image, and I said, "I've gotta come back here and, and play."  And I, you know, I ended up applying to a lot of other places.  But after that weekend with Calvin and the experience that I had at Yale, I was sold.  So I went there and I went really thinking in the back of my mind what Mr. Young had said, that athletics were gonna play less and less of a role.  So although I, I did play football there as a freshman and a sophomore, my junior year I got injured, terrible knee injury, and, and I stopped playing football.  I did play lacrosse there, but it, it became much less important to my life.
Story_ID: 508213
Speaker 1: Today, if you asked me in terms of extracurricular stuff, what was the most important thing I did at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], it was starting a childcare center.  I, I opened, along with a couple of other undergraduates, we started a childcare center.  It was for, it was designed for, to help the employees, the blue collar employees of Yale.  Later on, we found that it really did help mostly the secretaries and graduate students' children, because the blue collar workers generally were older.  There was a secretarial group.  And, but, anyway, and we named it--got Calvin's [Calvin Hill] permission to name it after him, and so, the Calvin Hill Daycare Center/Kitty-Lustman Kindergarten [Calvin Hill Daycare Center and Kitty Lustman-Findling Kindergarten, New Haven, Connecticut] is still in operation in 2007.  We started this in, in 1969.  We started that daycare center and it's still in operation in New Haven [Connecticut] in a converted firehouse that used to be a little fire station that the city donated to us, and we renovated it, and now it's been built on, so it's a nice, it's really considered one of the best early childhood education centers in the State of Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Where did you get this idea?
Speaker 1: My college roommate and I were talking about some of the problems at the university one day.  And he had come back from working in the dining hall.  We both worked in the dining hall my freshman year, but he continued to work in the dining hall, and I did some other jobs, library assistant, all that kind of stuff.  And, he was telling me this story about a lady in the dining hall who was having terrible childcare problems and that the boss, the manager of the dining hall, was just giving her a lot of grief, wouldn't cut her any slack, wouldn't let her come in a little late, wouldn't let her leave a little early and everything like that.  And I said, "This is, this is just wrong.  We ought to do something about this."  And we went around and asked some administrators at the university, whether, "What was Yale doing about daycare?"  And Yale wasn't doing anything about daycare at the time, and so we decided that we were gonna start a, a daycare center.  Now, we didn't know much about daycare centers.  All that we knew was that there were things called foundations out there that gave money to--and we started writing these letters.  And, I, I think today about some of the letters I wrote, thinking that the longer the word, the more impressed they would be, and I got zero response from, from any foundation.  But along the time that we started with the idea, Yale, by the spring of 1970, was hit with this massive demonstration in New Haven related to the trial of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].  And, demonstrators came in from all over the country and among the things that they needed, and this is amazing, always amazed me, the people brought little children with them to these demonstrations.  So we changed our residential college for the weekend of that demonstration in May of 1970 to a daycare center, and the university, the light bulb went off and said, "We gotta do something here."  And so, they agreed to match dollar for dollar, anything we could raise for the childcare center, and that's, it got going.  We started it in the basement of a church, St. Thomas More church [St. Thomas More Catholic Chapel and Center, New Haven, Connecticut], and then later, in later years moved to the fire station.
Speaker 2: Wow, that's amazing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's still going on--
Speaker 2: --young men, who would think, concerned about childcare?
Speaker 1: Well, that was, I, listen, you, you are now talking to one of your classic nerds, I'm telling you now. So--.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 508214
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me about this trial, this is the Bobby Seale trial?
Speaker 2: That's the Bobby Seale trial.
Speaker 1: A lot of discord in the area about that.  Tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what you remember of the protests or concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunate, you know.  Yale [Yale University] is the largest private employer in New Haven [Connecticut].  Connecticut, at that time, 1970, was one of the richest states in the union, with three of the poorest cities, in Hartford [Connecticut], Bridgeport [Connecticut] and New Haven.  And so, Yale sat right there in New Haven, largest private employer, wealthy endowment, but around it, a couple of poorer communities and segregated neighborhoods.  The Black Panther Party was trying to get a foothold in the community, and they weren't doing that, that great.  And one thing occurred, to shorten the story, a man who the Panthers thought was a snitch, an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informant, was killed.  And he was killed the weekend that the number two man in the Black Panther Party, after Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton], Bobby Seale, was in town to give a talk.  And so, informants connected Seale to the conspiracy to get rid of this man.  And so, I mean even though the evidence was, against him was extraordinarily weak, he's arrested and the trial, federal trial, is gonna occur in New Haven.  Well, that just enraged the activists around the country and they decided to descend upon New Haven.  And they thought there were gonna be over one hundred thousand people, but the demonstration never got to more than about twenty-five thousand.
Speaker 1: Tell me, describe the image to me.
Speaker 2: Well, the image, the federal--Yale sat kind of in the center, almost in the center of the city, maybe two blocks from downtown.  What separated Yale from downtown was a, a, a traditional New England green, two areas of park that ran for about a two block area this way, one block there, so there were two of those blocks.  Courthouse over here, Yale's back here, the greens; three churches in the middle.  And the demonstrators came into the city and wanted to have a massive demonstration on the green in front of the courthouse, and then they wanted to march on Yale as a symbol of kind of establishment capitalism.  And, and there was some real fear around that they might do damage, physical damage to the place, that they would disrupt the city, that there might be, trigger rioting and burning of cities the way, in some other cities, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], but the Yale president was ahead of the game.  He was just a shrewd character.
Speaker 1: And who was the president?
Speaker 2: He was Kingman Brewster [Kingman Brewster, Jr.].  He was one of my great heroes.  And, he was, he just outmaneuvered the, the demonstrators and he had made a public statement expressing his skepticism about the ability of a black revolutionary to get a fair trial.  And that enraged Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and Vice President Agnew [Spiro Agnew], so he was being more attacked by the Washington [D.C.] establishment than he was by the leftist coming in, young revolutionaries out there.  So there were many people who were, young folks who were very supportive of Kingman Brewster.  And he had done planning, along with student groups that, instead of trying to erect a wall against all these demonstrators, essentially, invited 'em in.  And, so the fact that we fed them, and we had blankets for them, the fact that we had set up our residential college as a daycare provider for people, I mean, it just took the sting out of dealing with the establishment.  So, I remember this one guy who was at the time sort of famous named, Jerry Rubin, he was a national leftist.   He was trying to lead a chant on the green in front of the federal courthouse that, excuse my French, but he was trying to say, lead the crowd, and "Fuck Kingman Brewster."  And he was trying to get them to go, "Fuck Kingman Brewster," and he was getting the guy's name wrong, and he kept saying, "Kingston Brewer."  And, but the crowd just knew about Brewster and his leadership, and it just didn't happen.  And so--
Speaker 1: And you were a leader, as well, on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was involved in a lot of planning on that, and, and, as I learned later, was involved in a very significant event that got the faculty of the university to understand that they needed to take some leadership in this, too.
