Story_ID: 377274
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay, Ralph Lenard Simpson [HistoryMaker Ralph Simpson].  R-A-L-P-H, L-E-N-A-R-D, S-I-M-P-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: December 14th, 1963.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Miller Grove High School in Lithonia, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the principal here.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: December 15th, 2006.
Story_ID: 377275
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions just to warm up, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's a combination, black and white (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hot dogs.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--
Speaker 2: Grilled.
Speaker 1: Grilled hot dogs.
Speaker 2: On the grill, hot dogs on the grill.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: South Beach [Miami Beach, Florida], Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: If you don't stand for something, you'll fall for anything.
Story_ID: 377276
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by talking about your family, and let's start on your mother's [Roxie Shannon Simpson] side of the family.  Can you remember your grandmother's mother?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me your grandmother's name on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Roxie Shannon.
Speaker 1: And did you have any interaction with her?
Speaker 2: I most certainly did.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh God, mother of twelve, eight girls, four boys.  She was a disciplinarian.  But the age range between the children was such that the oldest children raised the younger children.  She was--she ruled with an iron fist and, but, you know, obviously she was different and did that, you know, in terms of her disciplining was different with the grandchildren.  But you know, because of the aunts and uncles that were still at the household around the house, those were the ones that raised us.  So she really didn't take any active part in the rearing because her children typically were the ones that would provide us with the guidance and then the nurturing and raising us while we were there.  We spent summers there, I spent a lot of summers at my grandmother's house which, you know, would typically--two, three months during the summer.  I had an aunt that's my age.  I have an uncle that's a year older than I am.  So the fact that they were aunt and uncles, but we were more like peers.  We thought we were cousins until we found out as we got older that--that were actually aunts and I was a nephew--aunt and uncles and I was a nephew, so.  But the older brothers, their older brothers and sisters were the ones that typically, you know, handled, you know, anything it was that we did or we became involved in because my grandmother was, she was nearing her retiring years and didn't really, you know, she was still leading and running things, but she didn't do any disciplining with the grandchildren because, you know, her children typically took care of that.
Speaker 1: Where did your grandmother live?
Speaker 2: Forsyth, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: It had to be around 1943.  I'm pretty sure it was 1943 because my mother's twenty years older than I am, and my mother's mother was--my grandmother is twenty years older than my mother, so it had to be 1943.
Speaker 1: In Forsyth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, 1923.
Speaker 1: Twenty-three [1923].
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-three [1923].
Speaker 1: Three, okay.  Now in Forsyth, Georgia, that's not very far from Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not, it's about--
Speaker 1: --give us--
Speaker 2: --it's about--it's about maybe fifty minutes south of Atlanta, right around the Macon [Georgia] area.
Speaker 1: How much education did your grandmother have?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not certain if she had a high school diploma.  If I had to guess, I would say she didn't have a high school diploma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any other stories you'd like to share about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was a little lady, short, but, you know, had a big voice.  You know, what she said, I mean it carried a lot of weight.  I mean she was no nonsense.  You know, to raise twelve children, you know, she had to be but, you know, she was very respected in the community.  She was recognized and known for the lady that had all those kids.  Not that it was uncommon back then but, you know, in a small city in which they grew up in, having that farm land and animals.  She was known for having those children and all of them, you know, were doing productive and progressive things and positive things, and--and that was something that she was known for.
Speaker 1: Did they live on a farm?  Did they own the land or were they sharecroppers or?
Speaker 2: They owned the land.  They owned the land.  I can remember, you know, feeding the hogs and I can remember her, going out to kill the chickens and the cows and--you know, milking the cows and you know, making butter from scratch.  And no running water, a well.  The outhouses, the tin tubs.  You know, the, all of the fruits from the trees, you know, you had to leave the house in the morning 'cause she wouldn't let, you know, she was cleaning up at that time so you knew by daybreak you were out of the house.  And you know, you ate lunch, you ate pears and peaches from the tree, and you went back in the afternoon and as kids, I mean, that was beautiful just to be outside all day.  And you had your run of the mill with, you know, with all of the different animals there, and those were chores.  And, but I enjoyed doing it, obviously living in the City of Atlanta, so when I had the opportunity to go there, you know, it was something exciting and fun to do.  But they owned the land.
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the one that was always away at work.  He worked for the railroad.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Arthur Shannon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he worked for the railroad?
Speaker 2: He worked for the railroad.  And he worked away from the house, so he--it was in Fort Valley [Georgia] where he typically, you know, would work during the week and come home on the weekends.  But that's where he spent the majority of his time.  So, you know, during the week we didn't really see much of him.  Taller, much taller than she was.  You know, he was intimidating.  You know, you had that fear of, you know, grandpa or granddaddy because, you know, again, you know, he'd been away from the house all week, and by the time he came home on the weekends, you just didn't cross him--you didn't cross him.  And you know, didn't say a whole lot, but again when he said something, you know, it was business, it was serious, it was very serious.
Story_ID: 377277
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go to your father's [Henry Simpson, Jr.] side, and tell me about your grandmother on your father's side?
Speaker 2: The relationship with my grandmother on my father's side which was--it was eight of them.  You know, same, almost identical in term of, you know, the land that they lived on, you know, the horses--
Speaker 1: Where did they live?
Speaker 2: This is Washington, Georgia like down near Athens [Georgia], right below--right below Athens and right up from Augusta [Georgia].  And, you know, I can remember the horses and the chickens and all of that.  What was--what I remember most about it was my father's youngest sisters who were a set of twins, and they took hold to my brother [Henry Simpson III] and I as though, like we were their children, they didn't have children at the time.  So we were like their children.  We were like their sons.  And that's the way we were treated when we were there, we went there for the summers.  We'd alternate summers, you know, one summer we'd go to my mother's [Roxie Shannon Simpson] side of the family, you know, grandparents [Roxie Shannon and Arthur Shannon], and then the other summer we'd go to my father's side.  And, you know, we were treated--there were more things that were available to us because it would be just the two of us.  You know, I didn't have, you know, the other aunts and uncles that were close to us in age on my mother's side as I did when we went to my father's side of the family, so.  You know, and then they didn't have children at the time so, you know, they were all--it was a outpouring of love, you know, just about everything, whether it was going places, whether they had materials or the resources.  So they really poured it out for us.  They looked forward to us coming.  I can remember times when they actually would--took us to school with them once, and we were probably, you know, I had to have been maybe six or seven, seven, eight years of age at that time.
Speaker 1: Tell me your grandmother's name on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Maggie Simpson.
Speaker 1: And how much education do you think she had?
Speaker 2: Wow, I'd be guessing, I don't think she finished high school either.  I don't think she finished high school either.
Speaker 1: And she worked in the home?
Speaker 2: She worked in the home as well.
Speaker 1: Let me just ask about your grandfather on your mother's side.  How much education do you think your grandfather had (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't have a high school diploma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandfather on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Deacon at the church.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Henry Simpson [Henry Simpson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He--God I can't remember the type of work that he did though.  Abo- well what I remember most is that every morning before he went to work, he and my grandmother would sip coffee together, not from a cup but from a bowl.  And I used to always ask for coffee.  I mean I could always--I knew every morning that I woke up that I'd see him or see the two of them sipping coffee in the morning, you know, from that bowl.  And I can remember the color of the bowl, it was green and you could see the permanent coffee stain around it, you know, because that was the one he always drank from.  And I identified that bowl, you know, in the kitchen because that was the bowl that he drank from.  Very hard worker, very respected in the community.  We--he was very, very fond of my brother and I.  He took us a lot of places with him.  You know, we trailed him a lot.  We were his grand- we were his grandboys is what he would say.  You know, he would, you know, from taking us to church with him to just riding around the town, we would always be with him.
Speaker 1: Can you think of any specific time, or can you share a story about any time that you were together with him?
Speaker 2: You know, when he was out doing yard work, we were--we were out there with him, trying to help.  You know, when he was dealing with the horses, you know, we were right out there with him as well.  You know, and especially the times that we went to church.  You know, we didn't attend church as much in at home, but because that was almost like a part of being in the country, you know, it was a given.  You know, there just seemed to be so many different things to do, a lot more children.  And--and we knew that we were going to church, we had to go to church and he made sure that that was going to happen.  So, you know, I--that I remember most.  His involvement in the church, he was a deacon and extremely involved in the church.
Speaker 1: Do you remember or know of either his mother or father or your grandmother's mother or father?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's mother--
Speaker 1: This is on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Right.  My grandfather's, I'm sorry--excuse me.  My grandmother's mother on my father's side lived right up the street, and she had a sister that lived right up the street, I mean, I'm talking a quarter of a mile.  And that's where my great-grandmother stayed, that's where she lived.  And I remember, I mean, I can remember the house that she still lives--my aunt still lives in--or my great aunt actually still lives in that house.  But I remember specifically this chair that she would always be sitting in, that was her chair.  And I knew that every time I went into that house that she would be sitting in that chair, and then she was.  That's what I remember most about her, I can't remember any conversations.  Her last name was Cohen, I can't remember her first name.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-O-H-E-N.
Story_ID: 377278
Speaker 1: So now let's go to your mother.  Tell me about your mother?
Speaker 2: She was born in Forsyth, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name?
Speaker 2: Roxie Simpson [Roxie Shannon Simpson].
Speaker 1: So she was named after her mother [Roxie Shannon]?
Speaker 2: She was.  She was the oldest--she's the first born daughter, not the first born, but the first born daughter.  She's the first girl, I mean she was the first girl, but the second oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay and she was born in Forsyth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Forsyth, Georgia.  Moved to Atlanta [Georgia] after graduating from high school to live with her older brother at the time, and that's when she met my father [Henry Simpson, Jr.].  I mean they got married at nineteen, had my brother [Henry Simpson III] at nineteen and had me at twenty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: So she started early.  Because that wasn't un- you know, that wasn't unheard of back then, but she started early.  I can recall her job and her working at this company called Lovable [The Lovable Co.], and they made bras.  And amazingly enough, she brought home, I guess, a spool of thread that was very, very large, it was white thread, I mean it lasts forever.  I remember this from the apartment complex that we lived that I grew up in my early years to the house that I grew up in.  About two weeks ago I saw that same spool that's been around for, I mean well over thirty years.  And there's--probably has just still enough thread on it to last another thirty years.  But that's where I recall her working in my early years and then she went on to work at J.C. Penney [J.C. Penney Company] where she retired from.  And you know, I remember her doing some schooling or going back to take some data entry classes at Atlanta Metro- Atlanta Technical School [Atlanta Area Technical School; Atlanta Technical College, Atlanta, Georgia].  You know, I think it was in the maybe elementary school.
Speaker 1: So she, at Lovable, was she a seamstress, did she work with the stitching (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did, she did something in that fashion, yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: And then she went to J.C. Penney and she was a--
Speaker 2: She ended up retiring as a computer operator, but I think she started out working, this is when catalogs were in existence.  So she was working, you know, in the catalogs department.  I think she may have worked in shipping.  I mean she worked there so long that I still remember the phone number.  I mean, you know, I still remember her work phone number in my memory right now.  Because, you know, I--she worked there for so long, so many years.
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother share any stories about her growing up with you?
Speaker 2: You mean, with her mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh wow.
Speaker 1: You know, when she was growing up, well did she tell you anything about her high school and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, yes she was a cheerleader, extremely athletic.  You know, couldn't do a whole lot of dating because, you know, because my grandmother and grandfather [Arthur Shannon] were very, very strict because she was the oldest girl and oldest daughter.  You know, she was the one that had to, you know, take the brunt of everything, you know, she was the first girl.  But what was interesting though is that, you know, when I got to the age and finally became of age and finally realized that I have an aunt and I'm a year older than she--I'm a month older than she is.  And I have an uncle who is a year older than I am.  Well through my calculations that meant that my grandmother was pregnant with my aunt and uncle at the same time my mother was pregnant with my brother and I.  So I asked her one day, I said, "Well, what did your mom say to you when you were pregnant at nineteen and twenty?"  And she said she was fussing at her about, why are you having children, why are you pregnant, but she was pregnant at the same time.  And we laughed about that, maybe three, four years ago when my grandmother passed, I was asked to give remarks on behalf of the family.  And I told that story.  And I said then, it may have been considered planned parenthood, but today that may be considered, you know, ghetto, crazy or whatever, and everybody in the church just busted out laughing--burst out with laughter.  But I do recall specifically asking her that because it was just a, you know, that was--you know, it's very rare that your mother and your grandmother are both expecting children at the same time.  And not just once, it happened twice.  So, that was very interesting.  That's probably the biggest story that we shared that was--that was most interesting--
Story_ID: 377279
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Henry Simpson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Junior [Henry Simpson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Junior, all right.  Tell me about your father?
Speaker 2: Graduated from high school, moved to Atlanta [Georgia].  I mean, that was--that was the thing then.  You know, the opportunities were in the big city.
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Washington, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Oh he was, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think they were--my grandfather [Henry Simpson, Sr.] and my grandmother [Maggie Simpson], I think they came from New York.  They were both born in New York and came to Georgia, settled in Washington, Georgia.  My dad was born in New York, but was reared and raised in Washington, Georgia at a very early age.  But graduated from high school, and you know, he came to the big city.  I know his first job was at The Varsity [Atlanta, Georgia] where most of them were employed at that time.  We're talking early, early '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].  Met my uncle, my mother's oldest brother from working at The Varsity.  And that's how they met.  My uncle introduced my mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson] to him from them working together at The Varsity and, you know, the rest was history.  And you know, with two kids.  And he left there and those--I don't recall him working there, I just knew he worked there, but the job that I can remember him working was at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], as he was hired.  This was back in the late '60s [1960s] when General Motors and Ford [Ford Motor Company] and all of the factory or plants had this big influx of hiring, and he was fortunate enough to get a job with General Motors, and started working with General Motors and worked there a number of years.  That was the job that he had from, you know, all the way up through the time I finished college [West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia].  But he was a hard worker.  I never recall a day where he didn't go to work because he was sick.  And my mother, I never recall either one of them being out of work because they were sick.  Never remembered him being out of work because of an illness, surgery, nothing.  I mean, I saw them going to work every day.  Every single day I saw them going to work.  He liked nice cars.  He drove nice cars.  Hard worker though, extremely hard worker.  You know, because of his knowledge and working at General Motors and from my understanding as a child, enjoyed working on cars and was fixing cars even in high school.  That allowed him to establish a service or body--oil, auto mechanic shop.  And he operated that for maybe three, four years.  There wasn't a very, very close relationship.  The respect was there, but it was a lot of--there was a lot of fear because of just being dad, but the fear was somewhat extreme to the point where it kind of prevented us from having that father-son bond.  You were almost like afraid to say something around him.  And I mean, and that's what--that's the way it was, that's just the way it was.  I mean I can remember, you know, going on--we went on vacation every year.  Every summer we went on vacation all the way up until the time I was in eighth grade, we went on summer vacation, every summer.
Speaker 1: Where'd you go?
Speaker 2: Excuse me?
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Oh wow, I can remember going to Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], Walt Disney.  I remember once--and we always drove, we never flew, we drove.  I remember once we went to California.  We went to--we went to Las Vegas [Nevada], California, then San Francisco [California].  And the only two people eligible to drive were my mother and my father.  So, I mean, we did some--well they did some serious driving.  But even sitting down in the restaurant, you know, I think as a child, you know, your eyes are bigger than your stomach and you look at the menu.  And, you know, my mother knew that my eyes are bigger than my stomach.  You know, I'd say, I want this and I want that from the menu, and she'd ask me two or three times, "Are you sure you're gonna eat it?"  And I said, "Yes, I'm hungry."  Well I'd get halfway through it and of course not eat it or not finish it, and she knew that I was about to get yelled at.  Well, I knew I was about to get yelled at too 'cause I'd just crying.  You know, it--but that was the type of fear and intimidation.  So, you know, you were just ex- we were always extremely, extremely careful and cautious and trying to do everything to prevent from being yelled at, because that's typically how he ruled.  And, you know, with that you were always conscious of the decisions that you would make because you knew what the repercussions were.  Although my mother was truthfully the disciplinarian, I mean that's where all the whoopings came from.  It didn't get to him unless it was very severe.  I mean I could probably count on two hands how many times he whipped us.  But my mom because he worked at night, you know, she was the one that was, you know, doing the--she was doing the real serious disciplining and you know, again if it was forwarded on to him it was real, real serious.
Speaker 1: Tell me when your father was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in '43 [1943] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 377280
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, I say this but people don't believe me.  I say that I can remember when I had pajamas that had the foot in, and I was very, very hot.  But because I couldn't talk, I couldn't tell them, so I just cried.  I really believe that happened.  I kind of know and understand why no one would believe me, but I remember the time of having those pajamas on and hating them and crying, but I just felt like either I couldn't communicate or I did communicate, one of the two.  That I remember.  Whether it was can't or don't, now that may be a little iffy.   A specific event I would have to say, you know, there's some--I don't remember the first place that we lived in.  I was told that we lived there.  The second apartment complex that we lived in I remember, you know, the--it was very, very large, an extremely large complex.  I remember this very large basketball court that everybody used to play at.  And I was in the second grade at this time.  I knew I went to a private school.  I remember what the school looked like.  I remember this one teacher that I had in first grade, Miss Pitts [ph.], I was very afraid of her.
Story_ID: 377281
Speaker 1: Before we go to school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you said you remember the complex that you lived on.  Do you remember what street it was on, what, okay?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Bankhead Highway.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of the complex?
Speaker 2: Grove Park Apartments [Atlanta, Georgia], 1401 Bankhead.  That was our address.
Speaker 1: And tell me, who made up the community?  What people lived (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) African Americans.
Speaker 1: Everybody?
Speaker 2: One hundred percent.
Speaker 1: And was it the type of community that your neighbor would tell on you if you didn't behave or?
Speaker 2: Oh certainly, it was.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I mean it had some issues, even back then.  I mean I remember hearing some gunfire from time to time, and you know, I can remember, this--oh, scared the daylights out of me.  I couldn't go back to sleep, I recall one night, the guy that lived upstairs from us, his name was Ralph.  And all I kept hearing was, you know, pouncing on the floor and running back and forth.  Well he had gotten into a fight with someone, I mean and it was a pretty serious fight.  And I heard it going on.  I heard things breaking.  And he ended up coming down to our apartment to ask for some type of assistance, but I remember him bleeding from the head and all of that.  But--and I was terrified, I was terrified about that incident.  I can remember the wooded area behind the complex.  Someone must've thrown a cigarette or something, but it caught on fire.  I mean it was huge, huge fire, and we would all sit around--we all sat around and watched it.  And that was exciting, you know, we got a kick out of that.  I remember someone taking my brother's bicycle and rolling it into the creek and my mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson] walking down to get it and all of the kids, including myself and my brother, following her.  And boy she is raising hell.  I mean, she is raising hell.  So I remember she went in the creek, got the bicycle and went in the house--went in the apartment.  Got a bucket full of water and pouring the water on the bicycle to get the mud off.
Speaker 1: What was your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Henry [Henry Simpson III].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said you were twins?
Speaker 2: No, he's a year older than I am (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, a year older than you.
Story_ID: 377640
Speaker 1: You have given us some sights and sounds of growing up, what smells remind you of your childhood [in Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I couldn't--I don't recall a particular smell, but I can remember or recall a sense of community in everyone knowing each other.  You know, going next door to borrow sugar, going next door to borrow--to get some ice.  You know, everyone willing and able to help each other and be neighborly, friendly.  Did--didn't appear to be any dissension.  You know, everyone, every child belonged to someone.  The--if you said you were going to So and So, So and So's house, there was no concern or there was no worry because I believe that there was a certain degree of trust that everyone displayed and a certain degree of love that everyone expended with every child and didn't have to maybe do as much of an investigation into the background of another family or another child as you do now.  So, but the smell, it wasn't far from downtown.  You went to the very, very top of the complex where we lived you could see skyscrapers from there and you could hear the hustle and bustle at night.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you and your brother [Henry Simpson III] watch television?
Speaker 2: Oh, plenty.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite programs?
Speaker 2: I knew--I had the whole lineup.  Favorite, 'Sanford and Son,' 'Gomer Pyle' ['Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.'], 'The Munsters,' 'Lost in Space,' 'The Brady Bunch,' 'Eight is Enough,' oh, 'Good Times,' 'Welcome Back, Kotter,' god.
Speaker 1: Well, you watched a fair amount of television?
Speaker 2: Oh, and at the top of the list, I'm sorry, the top one and two, 'Little Rascals' ['The Little Rascals'] and The Three Stooges.  (Laughter) I didn't like 'Romper Room.'  I didn't like 'The Electric Company.'  I didn't like 'Sesame Street.'  I didn't like any of the educational shows.  I didn't like--I didn't watch any of those.  I didn't like any of those.
Story_ID: 377641
Speaker 1: Well, that takes us to the next question.  Well, tell me what elementary school you went to?
Speaker 2: We started out at a private school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Haugabrooks.
Speaker 1: Harga?
Speaker 2: Haugabrooks Academy [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: H-A-U-G-A-B-R-O-O-K-S.  Haugabrooks Academy.
Speaker 1: And where was that located?
Speaker 2: That was probably about four miles from where we lived, about four miles from where we lived.
Speaker 1: How did you get to school?
Speaker 2: Mom [Roxie Shannon Simpson] or dad [Henry Simpson, Jr.].  It was a private school, so they'd--there was no transportation provided.
Speaker 1: How much did your parents have to pay for you to go to private school?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.  It couldn't have been that much, but they must've been making enough money to be able to do so.  They--we did--we were there for one year and I guess they realized we really weren't private school material (laughter).  I know I wasn't.
Speaker 1: Was this kindergarten or first grade that you went?
Speaker 2: I know it was first grade.  I don't know wh- it was first grade because before that, I remember there's--before that it was Mount Vernon Academy [ph.], Mount Vernon Academy right next--is still right next to the Georgia Dome [Atlanta, Georgia].  Matter of fact, they wanted to buy it from them.  They wanted to, you know, demolish the church so they could use that land.  But they didn't sell it, it's still open.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so after this first year and your first grade, where did you go to school then?
Speaker 2: Grove Park High School--I mean elementary school, Grove Park Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].  Still open.  I was there the second and third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what type of student were you in the second and third grade?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I remember fourth.  I don't remember first, second or third.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, where did you go--you went to the fourth grade at what school?
Speaker 2: The fourth grade--well, at that time, even in third grade--they were building a new school, Carter G. Woodson Elementary [Carter G. Woodson Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], which if you lived on the right side of Bankhead [Bankhead Highway] you went to Carter G. Woodson.  If you lived on the left side you stayed at Grove Park.  We lived on the right side so I had an opportunity to go to Carter G. Woodson.  And I was one of the first fourth graders there.  I remember this teacher by the name of Ms. Frasier [ph.].  She used to wear short skirts all the time, I remember that (laughter).  I was talkative, extremely talkative.  They'd call my house, I'd have to stay after school for talking.  And my dad had to be at work at four o'clock.  And he picked us up from school from time to time, that would make him late or put him in a position of being late.  So I, you know, of course I had some problems.  And it was--that was the wrong day to be staying after school.  So I paid the price immediately as soon as I got outside.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a whooping.  Just, you know, the typical.  You know, that was pretty constant with me.  I was ob- never disrespectful.  They could never say I was disrespectful.  I never talked back to a teacher.  But I was always talking when I wasn't supposed to.  I finished my work, I was gonna talk.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Well do you think that was because you finished your work early and was bored and just--
Speaker 2: I would've talked anyway.  I talked during my work.
Speaker 1: Now, Carter G. Woodson, at that time did you have any sense of who the school was named after?
Speaker 2: No idea.  No idea.  I'd--that didn't--it had no meaning, no relevance whatso- I knew he was an African American, male or man.  But all of what he did, Carter G. Woodson and you know, the founder of Black history, you know, 'The Mis-Education of the Negro' [Carter G. Woodson].  I had no clue until later, I was like, wow, that was powerful.  But I had no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went there until what grade?
Speaker 2: Until, actually I just completed that one year there because we moved into a house the next year on the southwest side of Atlanta [Georgia].  You know, we kind of stepped it up a little bit.  You know, dad's making a little bit more money with GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and that was the first house that they bought.
Speaker 1: So this is probably about 1972?
Speaker 2: It's about '73 [1973], maybe '74 [1974], uh-huh.  And I was a fifth grader at Beecher Hills Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] which was walking distance.  I mean, which was right up the hill.  I could walk to school in five minutes or less.
Speaker 1: So Beecher Hills (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Beecher Hills Elementary.
Speaker 1: --Elementary.
Speaker 2: Still open.
Speaker 1: And you went to fourth, fifth and sixth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifth, fifth, sixth and seventh.
Story_ID: 377642
Speaker 1: At any of these elementary schools, was there any other teachers that you can remember that--
Speaker 2: I remember--at Beecher [Beecher Hills Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], I don't remember.  Ms. Frasier [ph.] is the only teacher that I remember at Carter G. Woodson [Carter G. Woodson Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I don't remember any at Grove Park [Grove Park Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  At Beecher I remember Miss Peek [ph.] because she was ooh, so tall and she had a son that was in my class.  I remember Miss Rodgers [ph.], because she was always calling my mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson], always.  Miss Banks [ph.] used to make me hold dictionaries and--up over my head for talking.  That was when the Webster dictionaries were about that big.  You know, she made you hold them until you cry.  Miss Ford [ph.] would take those rules with the little copper strip on them with about five or six of them taped together and make--and hold your hand out like this and she would just--just tap your hand until you had little red streaks in your hand.  She'd have gotten fired if she'd done it today.  That was fourth, fifth and Miss Banks, man, she was really a disciplinarian.  Miss Ford--that was fourth and fifth grade.  Sixth grade I can't really remember--remember well.  But seventh grade, Miss Holloway [ph.], Miss Browning [ph.] and Ms. Goolsby [Flora Goolsby].  Miss Goolsby is the principal still today as a matter of fact.  But they were my seventh grade teachers.  And we were in a cluster, where all the seventh graders, we had our own floor, our own wing, and their classes, it was like a pod.  You know, the three--the only thing that separated the classes was a partition if it was closed.  So many times, you know, your class if you were in the middle you had two classes on the end.  If the cluster of all three classes went out, they would line us up before we went to lunch and bring out the paddles, and they would all give us a lick.  You know, they'd just exchange whoever's arm got tired.  But I can recall them (laughter) when I got up there to the front of the line saying, oh I got to get him, no let me get him, that's the one, no I--I got to get him.  I can recall them fighting over the paddle to get to me.  That was--no Miss Peek was sixth grade I do recall that.  Miss Peek was sixth grade.  But my seventh grade teachers, those three ladies, oh unbelievable, unbelievable.  They were great teachers, yeah, but I, my interaction with the teachers wasn't because it was--it was never because of academics, it was always me not being in my seat, me talking.  It was always something inappropriate that I'd done.  But never, never disrespectful.  They never ever said that I talked back, used profanity or was disrespectful.  I was never disrespectful, and all they had to do was tell me--if they told me at nine o'clock in the morning, "Ralph [HistoryMaker Ralph Simpson], I'm calling your mother tonight," I would shut down.  I mean that was over because the panic and fear of what was gonna happen when they called.  I had to rest with that all day long.  You know, I had to live with that.  My day was over.  You know, they could've--they would been better off--why I didn't even do much work on those days they told me that.
Story_ID: 377643
Speaker 1: Well what kind of student were you then?
Speaker 2: Very, very hyper, you know, couldn't stay still, always into something.  Loving to laugh, loving to talk.  Just social butterfly.  Now I was the talkative person.  I was talking to everyone.  Didn't know when to be quiet.  I couldn't talk by myself, but everyone else just knew when to be quiet, I didn't.  I always got caught.  And I think after a period of time they just, you know, they heard noise or heard someone talking, it was just automatically me.  And they were right most of the time, though.
Speaker 1: What about your grades?
Speaker 2: Average.  Math was good all the way up in to high school [Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I was okay with math.  I went to the seventh grade [at Beecher Hills Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], I enjoyed it.  Everything else, I could read very well, but my comprehension, I didn't focus on because then you were called out and asked to read a certain paragraph and if you couldn't read people would laugh at you.  So I made certain that I could read, but I didn't comprehend anything.  So my reading comprehension was horrible.  And that affected me, and it still does now.  I still have to go back and either read it again or highlight it.  So I just have to go over things a couple of times.  But my reading, I can read, sounds great.  But the comprehension piece is what I didn't focus on.  But my grades were average.  I didn't put forth A work.  I didn't care about making A's.  I didn't--I didn't like the smart kids 'cause I felt like the teachers showed favoritism toward them.  I didn't like doing homework.  I didn't like studying.  I didn't like anything about school except for going and having fun.  School was a place to have fun and socialize to me.
Speaker 1: Well when you got your report card, what did your parents [Roxie Shannon Simpson and Henry Simpson, Jr.] say about your grades?
Speaker 2: You can do better.  Stop talking.  Stop running your mouth.  'Cause those were always the comments.  You need to stop talking so much.  And you know, it was just, you know, a shot in the arm, and you kind of go back into it.  My dad having to work at night with myself--with my brother [Henry Simpson III] and I playing sports, baseball, him being a year older he was playing in a--at a different league so we had two different locations.  While taking me to practice she may be watching his game, having to leave his game, come back and get me from practice at another school.
Story_ID: 377644
Speaker 1: We were talking about your grades.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean just that, you know, I got yelled at.  You know, my dad [Henry Simpson, Jr.] really didn't--he didn't ever get involved in that part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were saying that you--I'm sorry, we actually were talking about you playing sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was--because, you know, because of her [Simpson's mother, Roxie Shannon Simpson] having to do so much running around with our activities and then getting us home and still, you know, getting us ready for tomorrow or the following today and then having to get herself ready, I mean she was exhausted.  But the message was very, very clear.  Get your lesson.  That was very clear.  You knew you had to do your work.  I did my--I did enough work to get by.  I did enough work to be promoted to the next grade.  It just wasn't exemplary work.  That was--that wasn't what she settled for, she was satisfied with it.  I wasn't--I didn't make any Fs, I didn't fail any classes.  But I didn't put forth my best effort.  Went to summer school every summer since fourth grade because you got to go somewhere if we didn't go--once we got to a certain age, you know, say well you know I don't wanna go to the country, there's too much more going on in the city [Atlanta, Georgia].  You know, skating and movies and Six Flags [Six Flags Over Georgia, Austell, Georgia] and all that stuff, so.  But we still had to go to summer school, you had to go somewhere.  And then you went to summer school to get ahead.  So I had enough credits to graduate in tenth grade.  Yeah, after my tenth grade year.  But again just average.  All the way through average.  Just put forth average ability.  You know, average effort, I'm sorry.  But you know, there was nothing about school, I didn't like it, I didn't like.  It was just the social aspects, the social, you know, it's strictly social--it was strictly social.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a teacher that tried to encourage you to do better?
Speaker 2: I had some teachers that I had good relationships with.  In a general fashion, yes, but whether they took my transcript and looked at it and said, "Boy, you need to do better if you plan on going to college."  No, that didn't happen.  That did not happen.  Mr. Johnson [ph.], I loved him to death.  Mr. Johnson told stories the whole time.  Stories, it was--it was a social studies class.  He spoke in a language in which everyone could understand.  Those stories which he told were true and real and you could relate to them, even outside of the school.  He was interesting to me.  He was the only teacher that kept my interest.  Now I loved Spanish because it was easy for me.  I loved my Spanish teacher.  She was my homeroom teacher.  We had a great relationship.  But everybody loved her, she had great relationships with everyone, you know, all of the students flocked toward her.  I mean her case load was heavy, but she was supportive.  I was in her homeroom.  She didn't have much of a choice.  But--and I know that she had a great deal of care and concern for me.  But it just wasn't specific.  I don't remember or recall a teacher saying, "Boy what are you gonna do with your life?"  Or, "Are you going to college, what are your plans?"  Yeah, I just think that was just an era at that time if you didn't display a very high standard of academic excellence or achievement that you didn't get a lot of attention.  You know, I was in the gray area and that was okay with me.  I didn't, you know, I didn't seek out teachers to build or establish a rapport with.  If it happened fine, but if it didn't, I was okay with that.  There was some that--Mr. Fisher [ph.], we had a great relationship, but it was never about academics, it was never really about, what are you going to do with your life?  Because then it was expected that everyone was going to college and that was a given and it was a known factor.  You know, you didn't have to talk about it.  It was like, well what else are you gonna do?  You're going to college.  But I needed someone to talk to me though, because I was lost.  I was lost (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 377645
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you went to church when you were visiting your [paternal] grandparents [Maggie Simpson and Henry Simpson, Sr.] in the country, but not at all when you were growing up with your mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson] and father [Henry Simpson, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Very, very little.  My mom went to church.  She's always gone to church.  We didn't act right.  She knew we weren't gonna act right and she didn't want us to embarrass her, so she just, y'all stay home.
Speaker 1: Which church did she go to?
Speaker 2: She--I can recall her attending Jackson Memorial [Jackson Memorial Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  And I liked going there.  I picked--the minister there was exciting.  He'd be hooting and hollering and I needed that to keep me awake.  So he, you know, the times that I did go there, he was interesting.
Speaker 1: What about your dad?
Speaker 2: He didn't go.
Speaker 1: He didn't go either.  Were there any other civic organizations, did your parents ever tell you about, whether they worked in the Civil Rights Movement at all or were involved?
Speaker 2: My mom told me that during King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] era that her mom [Roxie Shannon] told her, "Don't get caught up into that mess."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were not involved?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So besides baseball, what other activities did you participate in?
Speaker 2: I played baseball.  I played, you know, park league basketball.  I was in the orchestra for four years from fourth grade to eighth grade.  I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From what?
Speaker 2: Fourth grade to eighth grade.  Got out of it because of peer pressure.  You know, the boys all thought that--I played the cello, but to the guys it's a violin.  And they heckled me on the bus one day on the way home.  It was bigger than I was, I was very small.  And I just decided that was gonna be the last day I played the violin 'cause I couldn't take getting heckled on the bus.  So I failed to peer pressure.  I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] for three years.  Junior ROTC for three years.  Very active, extremely active.  And that was about it in terms of, you know, the associations.  That was really it.
Story_ID: 377646
Speaker 1: You're going to high school in eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year is this now?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: And the high school?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh?
Speaker 1: What high school?
Speaker 2: Southwest High School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Southwest, was it Southwest DeKalb [Southwest DeKalb High School, Decatur, Georgia] or Southwest?
Speaker 2: Southwest, it was Southwest Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Atlanta, okay.  And is that the name of the high school now?
Speaker 2: It's Mays High--well actually it's Jean Childs Young Middle School [Atlanta, Georgia] now named after Andy Young's wife [Jean Childs Young].  And high school opened up the year that it became a middle school with Mays High School [Benjamin E. Mays High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  So that's why all of the teachers left.  All the teachers went to Mays High School.
Speaker 1: Went to Mays High School?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about Southwest.
Speaker 2: Southwest High School was the place to be.  I mean it was in a community that was, you know, that had the likes of--I mean Benjamin Mays was the superintendent at the time.  I mean, he, you know, Andy Young's [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] kids went there.  Maynard Jackson's kids went there.  You know, all of the Who's Who and--and all of the Who's Who of the African Americans at that time, their children went to Southwest High School or lived in that community.  And they had--they were extremely successful in a lot of, in everything, in academics and athletics.  You know, still to this day in the State of Georgia, Southwest High School is the only high school in the State of Georgia that won a state championship consecutive, two consecutive years in football and basketball.  No one else has done that since that time.  I mean just--I mean everything, it was just, you know, every--the pride and the spirit, it was just unbelievable.  You know, I was just in awe, I was in shock.  You looked forward to being there, but it was like in another world.  I mean just to tell people that you graduated or went to Southwest High School was just--it was just amazing--it was the place to be.  It was really the place to be.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you had moved.  Where were you living at this time?  You all had bought a house?
Speaker 2: We had bought a house.  My parents [Roxie Shannon Simpson and Henry Simpson, Jr.] had bought a house.
Speaker 1: What was the street?
Speaker 2: 2211 Fleetwood Court.
Speaker 1: And so what was the--how did you transition from apartment to house, and then from the school that you went to, to this prestigious high school?
Speaker 2: I mean it was an easy transition.  You know, the transition actually was much easier because those that you went to elementary school with, you know, from those few years, you know, your entire class went on to the high school with you.  So, you know, you had some knowledge of the people that were there.  And then participated in little league sports.  You played with kids that went to other either elementary or high schools.  So once you all got to high school, it was like, hey I remember we played on the same team.  And then because, you know, you had always heard about, you know, Southwest High School you couldn't wait to get there.  I mean that was the thing.  So the transition was pretty smooth.  Going from an apartment to a house, you know, you got a backyard, you got a front yard.  You know, the kids in the neighborhood are playing softball in the street.  There's not as many.  We had not played organized sports until we moved into that particular community.  You know, we had played in the Boys Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America].  You know, we learned how to play basketball and softball, we learned that from the Boys Club.  So we didn't, you know, we didn't get the team concept down until, you know, with the uniforms, same teams, same kids, a schedule, scheduled practices, that didn't take place until we moved to that particular area.
Speaker 1: So tell me more about activities at the high school level?
Speaker 2: As an eighth grader you just kind of watched.  You know, it was just so much going on.  I mean, I didn't--I mean again I started out being in a orchestra, but that wasn't the popular thing to do.  You know, the girls were just--you know, I think I, you know, I walked in and saw these beautiful girls and just couldn't believe it.  It was just--and I was very, very small.  You know, I was wearing a size four and half shoe, sixty-five pounds, standing at about 4'11" with this big afro and yeah I was bullied by a few guys and picked on.  But, just to be in the environment was just, it was just amazing.  You know, you hear about all of these people, you know, the level at which they are being competitive on.  You know, some of the top athletes and to see them, you know, walking up and down the hallway.  It's like, wow, I can remember this one guy named Bobby Arnold [ph.].  He was a top athlete, very, very popular.  The teachers loved him, the girls loved him, he was cool.  And I used to always say, I wanna be just like Bobby Arnold when I become a senior, you know.  And he'd walk around with a towel in his back pocket, you know, one of his pants legs rolled up, and I said, I'm gonna be just like Bobby Arnold.  You know, I can remember on the bus one day telling the kids, telling the boys on the bus, "Man, Bobby Arnold spoke to me today," and I thought it was a big thing.  So, you know, I was just in awe, I was just in awe.
Story_ID: 377647
Speaker 1: So how did your grades become in high school [Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Same.  Same.  Still didn't carry books home.  Didn't do any homework.  I may have--did a lot of copying in the morning when I got to school, let me see your homework.  Math became a problem because I was in a math teacher's class who was good, Miss Nichols [ph.] was very good, very good teacher.  But moving at a faster pace, I didn't catch things or grasp them.  And because I didn't wanna be embarrassed by the--in front of the class, especially with some of the pretty girls in the class, I didn't ask questions.  And I continued to fall further and further behind.  And that followed me.  I mean I had problems in ninth--I made Ds in every math class from eighth through twelfth grade.  And the only reason that helped me pass is because I turned in the homework.  Much of probably which I copied because I couldn't pass the test, I didn't know what I was doing.  So I missed those concepts that I did not grasp from the eighth grade by being fearful of not asking questions.
Speaker 1: What other--what else can you tell me besides your grades about your high school years?
Speaker 2: About the tenth grade, you know, I became a part of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And then the fancy or the prestigious part of the ROTC unit was the drill team.  You know, the ones that would be spinning the rifles and they performed at the halftime of the basketball games and then they would go and perform at the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] basketball games and Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  And it was very, very tough to become a member of the drill team.  And I said that's what I wanted to do.  And you know, my very first year, you know, I didn't have that--I didn't have that opportunity.  But by my second year because the rifle weighed about sixteen pounds and then I was having some struggles, you know, spinning that rifle and throwing it up in the air and catching it, but I was determined that I was gonna be a member.  And my junior year I became a member.  I was fortunate, you know, after, you know, really sticking it out and then my senior year I became the captain.  I was the drill team commander.  So that kind of became my niche a little bit.  You know, I was kind of known for--the drill team was a very popular unit and popular throughout the school, so you know, that became my niche.  And then, I got off that--I loved to dance, loved to party.  You know, I was, you know, fastly becoming the guy to be recognized as, you know, the latest dances that came out I was always the one that could do them or do them better than everyone else.  So, whenever we went to a party, then I was the one that was out dancing everyone.  And developed a reputation for, you know, being, you know, the dancing guy.  You know, that's the guy--myself along with two or three of my best friends, you know, we stayed up on the latest dances.  We were always on top of things.
Story_ID: 377290
Speaker 1: Okay, so we was talking about your high school years [at Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Besides the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], what other activities were you in?
Speaker 2: I was on--I was in the yearbook.  I was on the yearbook staff as a photographer and the newspaper staff as a photographer.  So I was on--it was--I guess it was a big thing then, you know, to be on the sidelines taking pictures at the football games.  You got in the football games free and you got a chance to walk up and down the sidelines and take pictures.  And I enjoyed that.  I enjoyed that privilege, I thought it was a privilege.  But that was--that was mainly it.  And just, you know, just being extremely, extremely social.  Didn't really, you know, as school sp- I was school spirit, I was voted most school spirited.  And you know, was always at all of the events.  I said I believed in supporting the school and I would always encourage others to come and support, you know, support the team.  And I guess that's where it came from, you know, at least when they got ready to vote because I was always about coming out supporting the school, coming out and supporting, your team or your classmates.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom?
Speaker 2: I did.  I went to the junior prom by myself.  And I went to the senior prom with Regina Ware [ph.].  That was my girlfriend at the time--
Story_ID: 377291
Speaker 1: So now you're getting ready to graduate from high school [Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia], what path did you see yourself?
Speaker 2: Didn't, wasn't prepared.  You know, heard everyone talking about college and was extremely happy and excited about graduating, 'cause then, you know, you get this mindset that hey I'm grown now, I'm independent, but not really, you know, any direction.  So underneath all of that excitement, I was really afraid, but I didn't let it show.  I was afraid because I had not made any decisions.  You know, my peers, my best friends were all talking about college and they knew, you know, they were talking about--two of them were going to Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], one was going to the University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], and because I was so good in--in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or Junior ROTC, I said well, you know, why--why don't I just go in the [U.S.] military.  So you know, I was headed toward the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  You know, about to take the test, and I did take the test.  And you know, I can recall like it was yesterday, you know, standing outside of the Civic Center [Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center] in Atlanta [Georgia] after graduation, after all the hoopla, it's like, man, what are you gonna do, you know.  I was terrified because I had not made any commitments.  I didn't know, I just did not know, I didn't think.  You know, I had the lowest--I probably had the lowest scores on the SAT in my class.  And I took the SAT but I wasn't serious about going to college.  So, you know, my scores, I made a 480 on the SAT, you know, 200 for your name out of a perfect score of 1600.  So I just didn't feel like anybody would accept me anyway.  And just had no direction.  I was still--I was working part-time at McDonald's and talked to a friend who was going to West Georgia [West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] who didn't graduate with me, but played little league ball together and he was, you know, asking me what I was doing.  I said, "Man, just working right now and thinking about going in the military."  And he said, "Well I'm going to West Georgia," and I said, "Oh okay."  And he started naming a few others that were going that I knew and I was like wow, you know, I like all those people, pretty sociable crowd and crew.  He said, "Why don't you apply?  And I thought about it.  The next day I called them, I asked for an application.  They sent me an application.  I filled it out and I went to my grandmother's [Maggie Simpson] house on my--on my father's [Henry Simpson, Jr.] side.  And while I was down there, about two, three weeks, my mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson] called me and said, "You have a letter from West Georgia."  And I said open it up, she opened it up and she told me, said you've been accepted to go to college.  I said well I'm going, came back to Atlanta [Georgia].  And you know, headed, you know, three weeks, you know, headed to college and you know, I had some obstacles because of my low SAT score, I had to take a placement exam to determine where I would fit in in terms of college curriculum and you know, I ended up having to take, you know, learning support courses which didn't get any credit toward graduation and you had to test out of them and it was a struggle for me.  Although it prepared me, I really needed to be there, but I spent a year--an entire year, I called it the thirteenth grade.  I spent an entire year taking courses that I didn't get any credit for.  But it prepared me for the college work.  You know, I didn't--I never read a book, I never did a book report in high school, never did a term paper, that's what they called them then, now they call them research papers, never.  Never read a book from cover to cover, never.  So, you know, I couldn't write formal grammatically correct sentences or a paragraph or a five-paragraph essay.  I'd--the first time I heard of--I heard of a run-on sentence, had heard of fragments, but out of the four major areas, subject-verb disagreement or subject-verb agreement and comma splices.  I'd never heard of comma splice before until I got to college.  It's like, wow, so I could not write.  I couldn't write.  You know, that was because I stopped taking English after the tenth grade because I had enough credits to graduate.  And they said well if you plan on going to college you need to continue on taking the four core subjects, and I'm like, man, I'm not going to college, who cares.  So I spent that first year in learning support and by the grace of God I made it out and started taking some courses, you know, to complete the core, but I still had no major.  I hadn't declared a major, didn't know.  I started out with a Spanish major because I was good at it.  I just started bringing up my grades until it was time for me to--I became interested in pledging a fraternity, and one of the requirements was a 2.5 GPA [grade point average].  After my first quarter in college I had a 1.69, I was on academic probation.  And that was at the time I became interested.  And they said--I knew it was too good to be true and I went to the first meeting.  And they were talking about all these things they do, and I was like, it's just not that easy.  And that's when they hit the scholarship part.  I thought, oh here it comes, excuse me, 2.5 GPA, I had a 1.69.  But that's when I started doing some work.  That was the goal, that was the goal, to get that 2.5 GPA so I could, you know, be initiated into this fraternity.  It took me an entire year and after a year, I was, you know, I was initiated, I had a 2.67 GPA.  And that's all I wanted to do, I was okay with that.  I had fulfilled what all of what I had wanted to do most immediately.  Not graduation, I become a member of the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc. and I was happy.
Story_ID: 377292
Speaker 1: This one brother that would always come to check on me, wonderful fraternity brother [in Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and this was before I was initiated in, he would always come to visit.  He was from Atlanta [Georgia].  And when he came down, I was introduced to him and I was introduced by the brothers then as, you know, that's the guy that's from Atlanta who's always supportive.  He's at all of our events, we really like him, we want him to go online it just--we want him to pledge, but he didn't have the grades.  So every time he came to visit he would say, "Hey man, how your grades doing?"  And then a year later he came and said, "Man you--you worked it out, you--you stuck in there and you made it happen."  From that day until now, he's still my mentor.  Because he was the first person that I could identify with that had graduated from college, was working in that field, had--had purchased a home, driving a nice car.  My brother [Henry Simpson III] was just a year older than I was, so that was really no model or role model, or didn't really look up to him, he was going through the same things that I was going through.  But that was the first example that I saw of education being a means to your success or the reason or rationale for graduating.  And when I asked him, I said, "Man how did you go all this, what did--?"  He said, "Well, you know, my major was this and I worked in my field, and this is why."  So after leaving his house that weekend on my way back to West Georgia [West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia], I was saying, wow, maybe I need to graduate.  So I went back to school, and yes.  I did enough work to continue with that lifestyle in college because I really enjoyed it, the lifestyle.  I didn't want to come back home, so I did enough work to get by to stay in school.  But when I went back I said, well, you know, maybe I need to graduate.  Declared a major.  I think I took an introduction to criminal justice class.  And that was really interesting to me.  That was the first thing that interested me, first time something had interested me.  So I said oh okay, wow, I'll change it to criminal justice.  And the more and more I got into it, the better it became and my grades got better.  I think I--one of my professors, Dr. Fuller [John R. Fuller], I'll never forget him.  He showed me how to study.  I didn't know how to study, I had no study habits whatsoever.  No study skills.  He showed me how to study.  And when I used the technique in which he gave me, I started making good grades on tests and it was like, wow.  So for my junior year, my last two years, I'm sure my grade point average may have reflected 3.0 or better.  But it was the first two years that killed it, that kept me in the low twos.  But, you know, I declared a major in criminal justice and, you know, it was time to graduate on out of there.  But, you know, again it was that social part of college that kept me motivated.  I mean, I enjoyed it.  You know, being in a fraternity and the partying, and visiting other campuses throughout the State of Georgia, beyond the State of Georgia.  You know, I was the chapter president; that was my first time ever in a leadership position.  I was kind of thrust into it because the brothers all graduated and, you know, it wasn't a bureaucracy, it wasn't a democracy, you know, it was an autocracy, it was very autocratic 'cause I ran everything.  No vote.  It was what I wanted because that's all I knew.  I'd never been in that type of a position before.  I learned and I grew from it.  That was my first experience being in a leadership position.  I can remember my mom [Roxie Shannon Simpson] saying at graduation, right before I got ready to go line up, that when she sent me down here, she said, "When I sent you down here I just knew I was wasting my money."  And I told her, I said, "Well I knew you were wasting your money too."
Speaker 2: That was gonna be one of my questions, who paid for you to go to college?
Speaker 1: Well, the first year my moth- my mom and my dad [Henry Simpson, Jr.], they, you know, combined their resources.  But because I had become somewhat of a popular name, I started having parties.  And the first party I had was in my backyard at my mother and father's house.  It was free, about three hundred people came.  Pretty large backyard.  The next year, I charged a dollar.  A thousand people came.
Speaker 2: A thousand people (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So then I said well, you know, maybe I'll try my hand at renting out--renting out some space.  Borrowed some money from my dad to pay for the rental on the place, deejay, security.  No advertisement, just word of mouth, and I did all of this in five days.  And I think it made me about $3,500.  Well that was enough money to pay back the money that I borrowed from my dad and go back and pay my tuition, as well as my rent because I moved off campus.  Well I did this, this was right before Christmas, it was on December 26th.  I'll never forget it.  So that was enough to pay for my fall and my winter tuition.  Well we got off of at spring break and I said well, you know, why don't I just have a party in the spring break, that week, to pay for my spring tuition.  And that's what I did.  So it paid for my spring tuition, paid my rent for the quarter, got out of sch- got out of school for the spring semester, I had one to get right out of school to pay for my summer school.  I did that for the next three years and that's how I paid my tuition.
Story_ID: 377293
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the music since you were talking about having parties.  In the middle '70s [1970s], that's when rap came out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me, who were you listening to at that time?
Speaker 2: Grandmaster Flash--Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five.  Oh man, you know, Run-D.M.C., Kool Moe Dee [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese], Tone Loc, KRS-One, Public Enemy.
Speaker 1: These were all groups that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, that was my era.  Yeah, they were--his is when, you know, rap and you know hip hop, it wasn't even called hip hop then, it was rap.  That's when it was really just coming into its own.  You know, it really hadn't been--it hadn't been widely accepted.  You know, but there were some breakthroughs, but not major breakthroughs.
Speaker 1: Well at that time, rap--well, I mean, most of the groups that you, you know, mentioned had a message, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of them, it was political, do you wanna speak to that at all?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, you know, X Clan and Public Enemy and KRS-One, you know, were the ones obviously that--that really carried a message.  You know, KRS-One, which was an acronym for Knowledge Reigns Supreme Over Nearly Everyone.  I mean, to listen to him, I mean it was just a history lesson within itself.  Public Enemy was more of a--more radical, extremely knowledgeable though.  You know, it was, you know, they--it was remnants of the black power era.  But--but at the same time speaking, you know, black is beautiful, pride in yourself and knowledge of self.  So those carried a message.  Run-D.M.C., it was my Adidas, it was fun.  It was fun stuff.  It's like that and that's the way it is.  You know, everyday language.  But nothing provocative, nothing explicit, it was all fun.  It was either fun on one side or it was--it was knowledgeable or it was, you know, had those political overtones, but nothing degrading, nothing degrading or condescending.
Speaker 1: What about Goodie Mob, did you ever listen to them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Goodie Mob.  Goodie Mob was after my era, although I, you know, about the same type of a message.  You know, they had a message as well.  You know, the good die mostly over bull.  That's--that's their acronym.  So you know, they were--they were the modern day Public Enemy if I had to say, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 377294
Speaker 1: And one other thing I wanted to ask you about because you lived in Atlanta [Georgia].  During the time of the missing and murdered children [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders], what did your parents [Roxie Shannon Simpson and Henry Simpson, Jr.] tell you about that time or were you actually consciously aware of what was going on?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I was a senior in high school [Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  I mean, we--every Saturday there was a search crew going out looking for missing boys.  I remember their arm badges, I had one.  M-A-M-B-A-C, missing and murdered black Atlanta children.  That was the armband that you wore when you went out on the search parties.  There were no cell phones then, but you had to call every hour on the hour to let mom or dad know where you were.  You missed curfew, you got the keys to your car taken.  Although I didn't feel as though it was a threat, I didn't ride around or go places in fear.  You didn't really go anywhere by yourself.  But later on I realized how serious of a time it was, and how serious of a concern it was, I'm sure, from my parents' perspective.  But to actually having to be in that era.  One of my high school classmates and my--one of my former baseball coaches, George Napper, was the chief of police at that time.  And his responsibility was to go to those parents' houses, those mothers, to inform them that their child had been murdered.  And you know, we grew up in the same neighborhood.  It was, you know, right around the corner, lived in the same neighborhood.  So it was, I mean that's historical, you know, to have lived in that era and then to have lived in that community where it was all taking place.  It really didn't hit me until years later that wow, you know, we were right there in the middle of it.  But, you know, you had to maintain constant communication and contact with home, with the home front.
Story_ID: 377295
Speaker 1: You're in your senior year [at West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] and you're thinking you now have your major of criminal justice?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are your thoughts now, where's your path leading to?
Speaker 2: Hey, I wanted to be a [U.S.] Secret Service agent.  One of--a good friend of mine had graduated, criminal justice major, and he had gotten on with the Secret Service.  Came back to visit and I was like, wow that's it, that's what I wanna do.  I did that Treasury Enforcement Exam [Treasury Enforcement Agent Exam].  Standardized test just wasn't my thing.  I took the test, I missed about four, six points, I was discouraged.  It was a section on math.  Two hours' worth of word problems.  It just destroyed me.  I didn't wanna fool myself by going back to take it again.  I had taken a friend of mine to an interview at Metro Correctional Institution [Metro State Prison, DeKalb County, Georgia] right out here in Decatur, Georgia.  And I was sitting in the lobby while he was having his interview and the receptionist who was in the office asked me what I was doing.  I said, "I just graduated from college."  And she said that, well, we're hiring.  Oh she asked me what was I doing, I said, "Well, you know, trying to find a job."  I told her I was, you know, criminal justice major.  She said, "Well we're hiring," and she gave me an application.  Well I filled out the application and I got a call back in a couple of weeks, went for an interview and got the job, and started working in a maximum security prison.  I was twenty-two years of age.  And I did that for about the next three and a half, four years, and wasn't going anywhere with it.  I was frustrated.  You know, I saw myself being, I felt like I could be a sergeant or a lieutenant or a captain.  I mean, you know, there--it was a field that, you know, education wasn't really, you know, didn't really carry a whole lot of weight.  But I felt like my education should have carried some weight, you know.  I was always told go to college, get a college degree, and it will do this for you and do that for you and here it is, I'm working on the job where I didn't even need a college degree.  You know, I didn't have weekends off.  I didn't look forward to Fridays because my off days were Tuesday and Wednesday.  And I didn't see how the college degree was working for me.  It didn't help me to get promotions.  I applied for a probation officer job, had thirteen interviews, never got the position.  Applied for the sergeant's position, I never got that.  So I became very, very frustrated.  And then, you know, began to look at the surroundings.  You know, right out of college it didn't matter to me that 98 percent of the people incarcerated were African American males.  It didn't bother me then.  I mean, I was still going to the club, hanging out.  I worked from 6:00 in the morning to 2:00 in the afternoon.  I take my uniform with me and party all night and pull up in the parking lot at 5:30 and change clothes and uniform, and go to work.  But when I really--my roommate asked me one day after getting off from work, how was work.  I was like, what do you mean, I laughed, what do you mean how was work, I work in a prison.  There's never a good day.  You know, you go and you see people who look like you, it's never a good day.
Story_ID: 377296
Speaker 1: I was beginning to become a little bit more conscious.  A fraternity brother [in Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] of mine, who I, you know, who I treasured, we had a great relationship, who--he had become involved in the Nation of Islam and invited me out to a meeting.  Not trying to push Islam over on me, but just invited me out to a meeting and I went.  And I heard some things, it was like wow, not about Islam, but just about knowledge, black history.  Things beyond what I had only been exposed to in--by living in Atlanta [Georgia], growing up in a predominantly African American community, not an all-black African American community.  K [kindergarten] through twelve, I didn't sit beside a child that was--that was other than African American.  My history ran no deeper than Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], his children, Harriet Tubman, you know, Sojourner Truth, those.  Knew nothing about Malcolm X.  I knew nothing about Nelson Mandela.  I found out about apartheid from one of my professors [John R. Fuller], the one that taught me how to study in one of my classes, a sociology class.  And when the apartheid system, when it was brought up and all the students in the class was discussing it and they started talking about this man that had been in prison for twenty-seven years and I'm like, "Who is--who are you all talking about?"  Well I didn't wanna feel like an idiot so I waited until after class and I followed him to his office and he was surprised that I did not know.  So I began becoming a little thirsty for knowledge.  It's like, okay what else is there I don't know.  So through that relationship and being exposed to information and people talking about information, having discussions about, you know, knowledge and knowledge being power and giving you that confidence.  I said wow, okay and it blew me away.  And I, you know, became--it was like a latch, you know, I latched on to it and started attending the meetings and some of the practices, but not becoming a full-fledged member of the Nation of Islam, but just, you know, the practices.  And it was just for knowledge of self.  You know, the--you know, and my mom [Roxie Shannon Simpson] was, you know, going off the deep end.  You know, you don't need to do this and--I'm like, "Mom, look I'm not quitting my job, okay.  I'm not quitting my job to become self-employed.  I'm not going around bashing, you know, the white man this, the white man that."  No, that's not it, that's not what it's about for me.  It took a while for her to become convinced of that when she saw that one, I wasn't gonna leave my job, okay.  While I respected and understood what they did, I wasn't going to give up that to work for a one--or work for one particular religion that means by way of either selling newspapers or bean pies.  And again, the utmost of respect to the Nation of Islam, but that's not what I wanted to do.  It was an experience.  It was something that--what was on the plate that I liked to eat, I ate it, the rest I left it on the plate.  But when I walked away from it, I was--I was more knowledgeable.  I was then looking for a solution to the problem, what I saw was the problem.  That problem them--there was the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic or the crack era, '91 [1991], somewhere around in there.  I had been out of college [West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] for a few years and--
Speaker 2: You graduated in 1986?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I graduated in '86 [1986].  So I'd been, you know, working for about four years in--in that industry and it was like okay, you know, you got to--I just came to the realization that you're gonna be either part of the problem or part of the solution.  So, you know, lights were beginning to flicker on.  It's like okay you're either gonna--what's your purpose, what are you gonna do.  And started, you know, because I started reading and ran across a book by this author by the name, Dr. Jawanza Kunjufu.  He had written these four volumes on 'Countering the Conspiracy to Destroy Black Boys.'  At that time he'd only written two volumes.  But what was most profound in the book, it talked about one to fourth grade failure syndrome of African American boys, lack of male role models.  But more so importantly to me then was that the lack of African American male teachers in the classroom.  Excuse me.  In '91 [1991], it was like less than 1.5 percent.  And I was like wow.  So I'm looking for a solution.  And I'm saying, a teacher, oh no, ah I don't like school, I didn't like school.  So I said, "Okay, I can't do that."  But I continued on reading and it was--it had such an impact on me and I just, you know, it just kind of never went away, and--
Story_ID: 377297
Speaker 1: So I applied to be a substitute teacher at the school that I graduated from, the high school [Southwest High School, Atlanta, Georgia], that was now a middle school [Jean Childs Young Middle School, Atlanta, Georgia].  And one day I decided to test what it is or what it was that he talked about in the book in terms of the male role models.  And I asked the boys, I posed a question to the boys in the class one day and I said, "Is there a male in this school that you see, from the time that you get here to the time that you get on your bus that you can look at and say, you know, 'I wanna be like him, I wanna be like him?'"  I said, "From the principal to the custodian, to the cafeteria worker to the counselor.  Is there just one man that you see in the hallway that you can look at and say, 'I wanna be like him?'"  All the boys in the class said no.  I was like, wow, this is real.  That was the day I decided that I was going to do something I said I would never do again, and that was go back to school.  And I went back to West Georgia [West Georgia College; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] to become certified to teach middle grades.  It took about a couple years.  But as I continued to work at the jail [Metro Correctional Institution; Metro State Prison, DeKalb County, Georgia], it increased my level of integrity and speeded up the process because I got tired of seeing what I was seeing at work every day.  And ended up teaching and then '91 [1991] is when I became certified to teach.  I started out teaching fifth grade at Main Street Elementary School [ph.].  And my first class was twenty-one boys and nine girls.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And I don't think they were--I wanted--no they weren't the best twenty-one boys that had been promoted from the fourth grade (laughter).  But it was a learning experience.  I didn't know how--I didn't go through the formal teaching process of teaching, what do they call it, student teaching.  I didn't do that.  I mean, I was hired on a provisional certificate.  I met all of the qualifications and criteria for a provisional.  So I was--I left the jail, prison system, and in two weeks I was in the classroom.  And you know, and it kind of went from there.  It turned out well.  I was enjoying it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, tell me about your first class teaching these twenty-one boys.  I mean, what was your strategy to incorporate what you had read so that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I knew that I wanted to become the teacher that I did not have.  I wanted to create that teacher.  I wanted to be the teacher that provided and gave just as much attention to the students that were excelling academically and those that were struggling.  I knew that it was a time and an era where there was a very low representation of fathers in the household.  So I knew that I had to be a model.  I knew I had to play that role.  I wanted to be the example for what these boys either aspire to become or more, not just a teacher, but to instill within them that they--that you can do more.  You can be more than--not just a teacher, but there--whatever it is.  I was a very good disciplinarian.  I was probably a better disciplinarian then I was a teacher.  They were prepared to learn when they went to the next class, certainly.  But immediately, and I guess what was my biggest fear, was the not knowing whether this was going to work.  I mean I was making a major career change and I was somewhat leery and I was like, I hope this really, really works.  I know my heart is in the right place.  I said, "I wanna make a difference.  This is where I wanna be."  But you just don't know until you actually do it.  And immediately, I was a household name.  You know, everybody was talking about Mr. Simpson [HistoryMaker Ralph Simpson], Mr. Simpson, Mr. Simpson.  Next year, parents are trying to get their boys into Mr. Simpson's class.  I started a male support group, had about eighty boys in it.  And you know, teaching young men to become--teaching boys to become men.  You know, we dealt with etiquette, we dealt with grooming, discipline, speaking and entrepreneurship.  You know, just a load of things that we talked about.  We did the military drill that I learned from being in the drill team back in high school.  You know, exercise.  You know, we dealt with everything and did that for a couple of years, and--but that was the impact that I was making immediately and based upon the talk and the popularity that increased or grew along with that, then I decided okay this is--this is where I'm supposed to be because of the immediate success.  And after being there for about two years, the enrollment dropped.  And when the enrollment drops, then you end up losing teachers.  And the way it works is, the last hired is the first to be transferred out.  Well I was the last one hired, but I was the only male teacher at the school.  That didn't matter.  I started out the school year and my principal said, "You know, Mr. Simpson, you may--the number's looking kind of low."  But I didn't think it was gonna happen--
Story_ID: 377648
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about Main Street Elementary School [ph.], where you were making such a major difference.  One of the questions that I wanted to ask you was, how long did it take you to get these programs rolled out?
Speaker 2: There was--my mentor was a guy by the name of Danny Buggs.  He had played--had success for years in the NFL [National Football League], which was probably and still is probably one of the most successful athletes to have graduated from a DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] school.  After his retiring from the NFL, he began working with the youth.  Young men in the school system.  He founded an organization called The Winning Circle, teaching boys to become men.  And I met him at a community function, and we exchanged numbers.  And when I began to look for schools or seek out schools that I wanted to work at, I gave him a call and I gave him the list in which I had to go and interview at.  Main Street Elementary School, the principal there was his former track coach, and which was his mentor when he signed his NFL contract.  He was there with him.  So he said, "That's where you wanna be."  He had already founded and chartered that program in another elementary school [Fairington Elementary School, Lithonia, Georgia], so I just chartered it at Main Street Elementary School.  So it was just a spinoff of what he was already doing.  It all fit up under The Winning Circle umbrella.  So it was really nothing new--it was nothing new at all.  Me being a teacher on that staff and having knowledge and working with the program, and we ran a summer program for two or three years successfully as well.  But just having knowledge of, you know, him working with that particular program and working with him, it was very, very easy for me to go over--well to just start up, you know, something very, very similar.  And you know, it was a good mesh.
Story_ID: 377649
Speaker 1: So you were beginning to tell us about the cutbacks.  Why was the enrollment falling?
Speaker 2: Flight out of the community.  You know, families moving.  It was becoming a transient community.  You know, the--a number--in '91 [1991] that school's population and the demographics may have been 60 percent African American and 40 percent white.  In two years it was 90 percent African American and maybe 10 percent white.  So there was some white flight that had taken place within that particular community and the enrollment dropped.  And I was at the bottom of the totem pole.  When he told me, and I was told right before a faculty meeting, he said, you know, "Sorry Mr. Simpson [HistoryMaker Ralph Simpson], you didn't make the cut."  I was like wow, I was off to my best year, I was off to my best start.  And I just couldn't believe it.  It was like--it was just a shock.  So he asked me, you know, if I wanted to make the announcement at the faculty meeting or did he want to.  And I said well sure, you go ahead.  Well I didn't realize how much of an impact I had made at the school [Main Street Elementary School (ph.)] in just those two years.  And when he said that, teachers started crying.  And I was like wow.  You know, I mean, it just kind of shook me up.  And then I asked for some advice about okay, how do I break this to the kids.  And so the next day I told the students and, I mean it just became a school disturbance.  You know, they just didn't understand that.  And I tried to explain it to them, they just didn't understand.  And you know, the girls started crying, the boys started crying and they took this home.  So the next day, the parents are up to the school.  Like, what's going on, why does he have to leave, send someone else, he's the only male teacher at the school.  Then that led to petition letters.  Then that led to protests outside the school, and it was like, wow, and I'm trying to tell my mom [Roxie Shannon Simpson] what was going on.  And she's like, "What have you done?  You know, these people ain't, they're not doing all this to try to keep you."  They had a town hall meeting.  I ended up having to go to the superintendent's office to speak with one of the deputy superintendents because the parents blocked the office phones in the central office with all of the phone calls.   So they wanted to see who Mr. Simpson was.  And I went and see who they, you know, went to see the deputy superintendent.
Speaker 1: And who was that at the time?
Speaker 2: That was Eugene Walker.  Dr. Eugene Walker.  And he said, "Son, you know, we need to bottle this up.  You know, you're doing all of that," and I had no explanation.  I didn't know--I didn't know, it was fulfilling, but it was--it just blew me away, I just had no idea that I had made that much of an impact on the lives of those children.  But by law, there was really nothing they could do.  So what they did was kind of met the parents halfway.  They said, "Okay, well we'll make sure he stays in the feeder pattern."  I went on to Miller Grove Middle School [Decatur, Georgia], which the elementary school feeds directly into it.  So the same kids that I had taught or was teaching at the time, I would've seen them again.  And I did.  So they kind of said, "Okay, well, we'll take that then."  And I went on to teach at the middle school, and I was there, you know, for about a year and half and then I had that Joe Clark vision.  You know, wanted to--you know, looking at, you know, I think I can do that.  'Lean on Me,' it's my favorite movie of all time.
Speaker 1: What movie is that?
Speaker 2: 'Lean on Me.'
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Lean on Me' with Joe Clark, okay.
Speaker 2: But I knew I had some--I had some challenges, I had some obstacles.  And I had to go back to school and I had to take that test again.
Story_ID: 377650
Speaker 1: Take the GRE [Graduate Record Examination] or MAT [Miller Analogies Test] and I was like, oh no.  So I started out taking the GRE.  Took it one time and didn't meet the qualifying score.  Took it two times, didn't meet the qualifying score.  Took it three times, didn't meet the qualifying score.  Took it four times, didn't meet the qualifying score.  Someone said, "Well take the MAT, it's easier."  Took the MAT, one time no, two times no, three times no.  I applied to West Georgia [State University of West Georgia; University of West Georgia, Carrollton, Georgia] again.  I mean, I really had decided again that, you know, I was a dropout after college anyway because, you know, I was done, I had exceeded in my expectations anyway.  But went back to get the certification and I could've taught for thirty years, I was okay with that.  But then now boom, here comes something else.  So I applied either way and didn't get accepted.  They rejected me based on the fact that I did not meet the criteria on the graduate records exam.  I went back to Miller Grove Middle School [Decatur, Georgia] that year, worked hard.  Continued to work hard, build my portfolio.  Took a prep class at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] to try to prepare to increase my score.  And mentally, I just felt like, you know, this is not a true reflection of my ability.  I just--this is not it.  I went through the motion but I was discouraged.  And the time that I took it I just didn't feel like it was doing anything for me.  So obviously it didn't.  A year later I applied again.  Except for this time, I asked for an appointment.  And they granted me an appointment, Dr. Jack Jenkins.  He was a psychology professor when I was there as a student.  Now he's a dean of graduate education.  When I walked in the office he knew exactly who I was.  "[HistoryMaker] Ralph Simpson," is what he said.  He remembered me from my days of being, you know, the president of my fraternity [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and my chapter, and you know, all the little shenanigans that I had going on from the time that I was there.  And he asked, how could he help me?  He had my profile, my appeals package.  And I said, "I just want an opportunity."  I said, "I have not met the criteria, honestly."  He said, "Mr. Simpson, I really have no proof whatsoever that you can handle the master's level or the graduate level material."  And I said, "I do understand that.  Because ten years ago, if you look at it, you have no proof.  I was a totally different person in 1986 when I graduated.  It's 1995, '96 [1996].  You know, just--the lights have come on, I've identified, you know, what I stand for, my purpose.  I just want an opportunity."  Well, you know, he pondered back and forth.  So I asked him to cut a deal with me.  I said, "Admit me on probationary status and allow for me to take one class."  And if I don't make an A, you kick me out.  He agreed to it.  Took the class, made an A.  Went back to him at the end of the quarter, "Can I take two classes?"  Took two classes, made two A's.  I didn't have to worry about the probation after that point.  I finished the program maybe at about sixteen months with a 3.86 GPA.  And immediately after that I was offered a position at the same middle school as an assistant principal.  So I was on my way to fulfilling my Joe Clark vision.  Worked there a couple of years as an assistant principal for discipline.  And then I wanted the major challenge.  I wanted to get back to the high school because I felt like I could really identify and make a difference.  And the principal at the time was transferred my first year as an assistant principal.  She was transferred to a high school.  So the second year I work--well the next two years I worked with a new principal, and she was very good.  When she got ready to go to an elementary school where she wanted to go back to before she retired, she said, "You need to go to high school."  And I was ready to go.
Story_ID: 377651
Speaker 1: Ended up being transferred to Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia], and I worked there as an assistant principal for a couple of years.  And that principal said, "Hey I'm out, it's time for me to go, I'm retiring."  I got a call during the summer while I was working summer school and was asked to go to the superintendent's office or come to the superintendent's office.  And that was in 2000, August of 2000.  Then, that's when I was offered the position at Stone Mountain High School.  I became the first African American principal in Stone Mountain's history--Stone Mountain High School's history.  And just kind of, you know, walked in and--I had established a level of respect with that community, with those teachers and with those students.  The former principal knew that and she told--she shared that with them and she shared that with me.  She said that she told them, "Look, you're gonna go wrong if you choose anyone else.  No one has the command of this community like he does."  And they believed it.  They bought into it and they offered me the position and I was appointed.  Think I may have been 35, 36 at the time.  Didn't know a whole lot, but was willing to learn and absorb it because it was a lot of veteran principals, you know, that were, you know, older and have been doing it successfully for a number of years, and I leaned on them.  I relied on them and they taught me a lot.  I respected their knowledge and wisdom of the position, and I was very, very humble in knowing or respecting the order.  When you're a young boy you don't--you keep your mouth closed.  You've not been around long enough.  You've not been in this long enough to be talking and asking questions, and I respected that.  I knew I had to build and establish that rapport based on respect and respecting them for doing and having done a successful job.  And they eventually, you know, they opened up more and more and more, and I was--I was able to absorb more.
Speaker 2: Well--well let me ask you, in the schools before getting to Stone Mountain, did you put together or were you using your programs in these schools also?
Speaker 1: I was.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me ask you one other thing.  You allude to Joe Clark.  Did you do any research about what Joe Clark, you know, did besides--of course, you know, we've seen the movie, but there's a lot of history there about Joe Clark.  Did you do any research on the types of--
Speaker 1: Just his leadership style.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was at a time where, you know, it was drastic times and it calls for dras- it called for drastic measures.  I mean, just--I mean, I can remember some of the words, the script to the whole movie ['Lean on Me'] almost.  But I remember the superintendent going directly to him while he was principal at an elementary school when he was trying to coerce him to come to the high school.  And I remember him saying, "But we need someone who has nothing to lose, someone who's not willing--someone who's willing to take risk, someone's who's bold, someone who's not afraid."  That's what was needed at that time.  That was in the early '80s [1980s].  Well it's the '90s [1990s] now and that--that's not the type of leadership that would be welcomed, but there were some things about his leadership style that could be used.  Again, that same plate, you know, I picked from it what I wanted to eat, and the other things I just kind of left alone.  You know, the talking down to your staff members, you know, in the presence of children, even in the presence of other adults.  I mean, you just can't do that now.  You know, so those were some things that I picked out of it that I was able to utilize, you know, fully to my advantage.  And then the others, you know, I just kind of left it alone.  But more than anything, I can recall him being that person that just didn't have anything to lose.  So when he went in he had everything to gain.  So he was willing to try this, try that, try this.  He identified where his problems were, either with the teachers or the students.  He got rid of those, you can't get rid of students that easy, you know, that's not a realistic picture.  You can't do it that--you can't do it that way.  I don't know if he was able to do it then, I still even believe then there was a process, but that was Hollywood.  But you control the environment, and that's what he did, and that's what I picked up.  He controlled the climate.  He understood the culture.  You know, and those are some of the things that I picked out.  He was very in tune to what was going on in his school.  He could feel the pulse of what was going on in the school.  He could walk into the cafeteria and feel when something wasn't right.  He could feel tension.  He knew those types of things.  So those are some of the things that I began to look for, and it became natural.  I worked in a prison system.  I knew what tension felt like.  And in all of what I learned and experienced, you know, I just transferred over.  And that was, you know, those were some of the things that kept me on my toes.
Story_ID: 377652
Speaker 1: You also talked about picking from the plate of the Nation of Islam, and tell me some of the things that you picked?  It's kind of apparent with the bow ties (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know--
Speaker 1: --and the suits.  But I mean, tell me some of the things that you picked up there that you use?
Speaker 2: One thing, and I don't think there's no one that can disagree with the fact that the Nation of Islam has been--has done an exceptional job with cleaning brothers up.  I mean, very well groomed.  I learned that your appearance is your table of contents.  That people are going to prejudge you based upon the way you look.  The bow ties that they wear are clip-on bow ties.  I became more fashionable and started tying mine.  So, but I know that being an African American male, that is going to be synonymous or there's going to be the stereotype because I'm always asked, "Are you a Muslim?"  It just happens to be my accessory of choice.  I used to wear neck ties, but I decided, you know, I wanna distinguish myself or, you know, I want that label to be on, you know, that's the bow tie guy.  And that has happened, so maybe the last seven years or so, seven, eight years, you know, yes the principal wears the bow ties.  So that--that has kind of become my pin.  And surely there are certainly a lot of others that wear them, but it's a very, very small minority that wear bow ties that tie them themselves.  Because a lot of people want to wear them, they just don't wanna go through the rigor of learning how to tie one.  But that appearance is something that I picked up.  They took care of themselves physically.  They were physically fit.  That was important to me.  Dieting, although I, you know, was into health and physical fitness, I didn't have to stop eating pork because, you know, that was something that they didn't practice, and I stopped eating pork before I even, you know, began to take up some of the practices.  The respect for womanhood, while I'd always respected women, but that's one of their emphasis.  Had a respect for womanhood, it was very, very, very high on their list.  You know, the common courtesies of yes ma'am and no ma'am and yes sirs and no sirs.  You know, just being that person that's willing to give and be humble, and open to help any and every one.  You know, those were the--you know, building and establishing the relationships with any and every one, you know, were some of the things that I picked up.
Speaker 1: Well, is it true that you require your teachers to, also the male teachers, to also wear neck ties and be well groomed?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I noticed walking through the hallways [of Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia] that--of course we saw a little baggy pants, but I--it wasn't to the extreme.  Is that something that is a code here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we have a--well we have a standard here.  But we have a rule we call tuck and pull policy.  Shirts have to be tucked in, pants have to be pulled up to your waist.  Now we allow a little bit.  You know, we try to meet them halfway.  Excuse me.  But, if you're dragging the ground or sagging the ground, that's unacceptable.  Shirts have to be in, have to be tucked in.  Belts have to be worn.  This is not a fashion show.  This is an institution for learning, and we wanna keep the emphasis on the things that are most important, that's an education.  You know, a lot of students ask, you know, why do you place so much emphasis on the way we look?  My question is, because you do.  I place just as much emphasis on the way you look as you do.  Because if you place emphasis on the things that you should, like making sure you have your books on your way out of the door or making sure you're getting to class on time, or your grades.  I never mentioned dress, but as long as that's your emphasis, then it's going to be my emphasis.  I have to eliminate the things that are not important.  That's not important.  I eliminate those distractions so that you can focus on getting an education.
Story_ID: 377653
Speaker 1: --So now you're at Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia], so tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Grew a lot, learned a lot, hired three assistant principals, all from the classroom that I had met and worked with at previous schools.  A very, very supportive staff, loyal.  Inherited a staff that, I mean, had one teacher, Miss Lambert [Venita Lambert], love her to death, ended up retiring after teaching forty-four years.  And I had some veteran teachers, very good teachers, but who are beginning to retire.  By the time I left there in four years, 80 percent of the staff members I had hired.  And when you hire people, you're the person that hired someone, there's another degree in sense of loyalty, feel a little bit more indebted to you, feel like they owe you something.  But I'd gotten to a point where after four years it was time to move.  And I was working in those increments, every four years I was doing something else.  Four years as a teacher, became an assistant principal.  Four years as assistant--four years as an assistant principal, became a principal.  Four years as the principal at Stone Mountain, okay, what's next?  It was time for a change.  I would've loved for it to have been a position or a promotion beyond the level of principal.  But--well before that, you know, I kind of got caught up into that same peer pressure of going back to school and I was--and again, again I'm gonna drop out, this is it, I can't do it folks, I'm sorry.  And like ah man, come on, you know, we're gonna do it as a group.  I've never done anything as a group.  I'm not doing work as a group.  I said, "Okay, do I have to take a test?"  Said, "No, you've graduated from a master's [degree] program.  You have to write an essay, a commitment letter or something like that," and I said, "Okay, well I'll do that."  So I did the essay, got accepted fine, so about fifteen to twenty of us.  This is in December '99 [1999] is when I took my first class [at the University of Sarasota; Argosy University, Sarasota, Florida].  And from December '99 [1999] until 2004, February of 2004, went back and forth to Sarasota, Florida.  You know, Christmas break, like this one coming up, we're heading to Florida for a class.  You know, spring break, heading to Florida.  Four weeks during the summer in Florida.  And yeah, I just never, ever--I just didn't think I ever finish.  I mean, it just--if you look back to where I come from, it just--that wasn't in the plan.  This--that was not something that would have ever been predicted.  But others began to finish before me that started with me, and I had to go to their celebrations and I had to talk--had to speak and I didn't like that.  And I told them I was jealous.  But they continued to provide me with the motivation and encouragement, hey man you've got to finish, got to finish.  So, it became even a bigger thorn in my side.  So, I chipped away at it and worked at it.  You know, made some sacrifices, instead of getting up early in the morning and going to run, I got up early, same time, went to the office and I just put it all out on the desk and it may look at me or I may look at it.  And for two hours, that's what I gave it.  Then in February 2007 [sic.], I gotten to the point where I began to see just a little bit of that pot of gold and I got real hungry, I got greedy then, 'cause it's like, wow I may be able to finish this thing.  And you know, I can remember getting the call, okay you made it here, you can come down and defend your dissertation.  I was like, really?
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was in 2004.
Speaker 1: Four [2004], okay.
Speaker 2: And again, it was just still all just a--it was just unbelievable.  I just didn't think that I would ever get to that point.
Story_ID: 377654
Speaker 1: Besides the peer pressure, why did you wanna get your doctorate?
Speaker 2: I wanted options.  I knew that's all it would provide me with.  But that was good enough.  You know, my options went from two to two thousand, if not two to two thousand more.  You know, what I would've needed to get to the table, now I had.  You know, if I would've--some don't need to have a doctorate to get to the table, but if I needed a doctorate to get to the table, I have that now, so I'll get to the table.  So it provided me with more options.  And although I never sought out to get one or obtain a doctorate, I just said it sounded good.  It sounded good, it really did, it sounded good and I said, well you know, why not?  But when it happened and I was there [University of Sarasota; Argosy University, Sarasota, Florida], it was still just like a dream and I can remember after presenting and walking out and walking down the hallway and the receptionist said, "Well you know, just stay right here because they'll be out in a few minutes.  They're gonna call you back in."  I said, "No, I really need to go to the restroom."  And she said, "No it'll be just be a few moments."  And as soon as I heard that door open and they said, "Dr. Simpson [HistoryMaker Ralph Simpson] you can return," I was like wow.  And it was so much of a shock and so much of a surprise to me, and then it was just as much a surprise for my mother [Roxie Shannon Simpson], because again, if you, you know, the just doing average work.  You know, I think what I've done is just pro- be an example that you can be an average student--choosing to be an average student and still obtain the highest degree in the land.  Because determination wins over all of that.  The SAT means nothing, the GRE [Graduate Record Examination] means nothing, the GRE means nothing.  You can make a perfect score, but if you don't have the determination, the drive, the perseverance and the will power, it's not gonna happen.  When that kicks in, you can do anything you want to.  That kicked in for me, just I'm not quitting, it's just like with not being accepted into the master's [degree] program.  I'm--no, I'm gonna go a different route and I appealed and I appealed again.  I'm just--once that drive is there, no, I'm not stopping until I get there.  And once I finished it, you know, it was just the biggest sense of relief, but it gave me those options and I was happy just about that.  Not about the graduation ceremony, well just knowing that I had completed something that, what, 1 percent of the people in the country have, and it's not something that I boast about, it's not even about that.  It's not a definition of who I am or it's not an indication of who I am.  It's an indication of what I was able to achieve.  Because I tell my students all the time and you know, people that I meet on the street or where ever, I don't introduce myself as Dr. Simpson, that--who really cares.  I'm not into titles.  But when people find out, it's a different reaction.  I don't care about it.  That's just--all that says is that I went to school a lot of time, I may even have a school loan (laughter).  That's really all it says.  It says that I was able to endure, I was able to persevere for years and years, and meet some challenges.  That's what it says and that's what it means to me.  But more than anything, I want to be the one that children or adults look at it and say, "If he did it, taking remedial classes, 480 on the SAT, all the learning support classes, all of these challenges, if he did that, I know I can do it."  That's the story, that's the story I wanna tell.  And truly, and I mean that from the bottom of my heart, if I can do it, I believe anybody can.
Story_ID: 377655
Speaker 1: And so therefore, you encourage the students now?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: In your program, is there a place that you can identify the children that were like you that were average who, you know, just--was just doing the bare minimum just to get by?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And identify them, and tell me what do you all do to make sure that you encourage them to like--I mean, you can do better than just be average?
Speaker 2: I have one of the--one of my former students is one of my basketball coaches [at Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia].  While he doesn't teach at my school, he teaches at another school.  When I was the principal at--I was an assistant principal at Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia], he was a senior.  His grade--his grade point average was almost identical to mine, maybe even a little bit less.  I said, "Apply to college.  You're gonna go in, you're gonna take learning support classes, I did it."  I showed him my transcripts, I did the same thing.  Stay there, get you a job.  He went to Fort Valley State University [Fort Valley, Georgia].  I said, "Get you a job and don't come home.  You've got to live there, you've got to become a resident.  If you want to finish, don't come home very weekend like your colleagues though, stay there.  Grind it out, don't quit.  All your buddies and all your classmates that have 3.0, 3.5," I said, "That's okay, that's all right.  As the years go by, you will see what's gonna happen."  One year went by, he stuck it out.  Two years, hey, you know, so-and-so, so-and-so dropped out.  What did I tell you?  Third year, he's still there, struggling, still there.  Man, you know, my boy he just left Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  What is he doing?  Working, just had a kid.  Stay there.  He graduated after five years.  I said, "Don't leave, get a master's [degree]," finished his master's.  This is his first year teaching this year.  He's now one of my basketball coaches.  I knew he was just like me.  It was very easy for me to identify that.  With the students that I have here now, those--I put them in positions where they're exposed to rigor and challenge so that-- that learning curve will be much, much easier or much, much smaller of a learning curve and the transition much, much smoother, advanced placement courses.  Advanced placement now is equal opportunity.  It's access and equality, and equity.  You don't have to have a 3.5 GPA to take an advanced placement course now.  Anyone can take an advanced placement course.  I could've completed an advanced placement course had I been placed in that environment, which pushes you.  So I'm taking average students and I see them.  Pulled one out of the hallway today, said, "You need to take an AP course, AP class next year, make sure you do that when you speak with your counselor."  And I'll follow up with them.  Just one, just one, you need to be exposed to the college rigor so that when you get there, it won't slap you in the face.  I do that because I wasn't prepared, I wasn't prepared as a high school student.  So I make sure that they are exposed to the rigor.
Story_ID: 377306
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia] and tell me what happens from there?
Speaker 2: Was feeling a need to make a change.  And knew that--I had made my immediate supervisor aware of that and knew that there was going to be a change at the end of the year.  They were already in the process of, you know, they had broke ground here and--but had not named a principal.  They posted the position, I didn't apply.  Because I--again, my ambitions weren't to really become a principal or, you know, be a principal any longer.  But was pretty certain that I would have to get another school under my belt.  My immediate supervisor shared with me that you--we want you to open up Miller Grove High School [Lithonia, Georgia].  And I looked at it as an opportunity to control my own destiny.  You know, I get a chance to create a culture and a climate.  I get a chance to hire everybody, every living, every working body in the school.  And then I'd have the opportunity of doing something that very, very few administrators or principals are able to do, to say that they opened up a school, and to have that experience under my belt and to be able to place that on my resume.  And you know, I mean it's insurmountable, something that, you know, only very few principals have been able to say that they've been able to do.  And it's kind of known, it's the--it's an understanding in the field of education that if you've opened up a school, then obviously you were well thought of, because they don't pick any principal to open up a school.  And then it being the largest, largest school in the history of the school system [DeKalb County School District].  This is--it was an opportunity and I jumped on it.
Speaker 1: Tell us, say the name of the school again please?
Speaker 2: Miller Grove High School.  And, you know, things that I will be a part of I'd have never imagined.  You know, creating the school crest, the naming of the school, selecting the school colors, the school alma mater, the mission--I mean the mission statement.  I mean just--you know, everything that we've done has been first.  You know, we made history.  We've done--fifty years from now, my picture is gonna hop up as being the first principal somewhere.  Why I don't realize it now, but that is the reality of it.  It was a wonderful opportunity.  I mean, it was--you know, to start out with ninth and tenth graders and create this, you know, and see it grow.  I mean, I can remember standing right here and looking up and being able to see the sky.  You know, and nothing outside, no walls and so that's my office right there as I rolled by.  This was all dirt, you know.  Picking the colors of the carpet and the furniture, and you know, having all of the intricate details strategically placed in the areas where I wanted them to go.  And you know, going to Florida to seek out the best possible marquee.  And you know, it's just an opportunity that--it was an opportunity that I would've--that I relished, that I know I can take anywhere else if I, you know, chose to go somewhere else.
Story_ID: 377307
Speaker 1: Being that this is the largest school [Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia] in DeKalb County [Georgia], explain more about the campus, itself, it's about how many acres?
Speaker 2: It sits on about fifty acres.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of land.
Speaker 2: About two hundred--and is it 245,000 square feet, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the new technology that's in this school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's wireless, that's a beautiful thing.  It's wireless and it features--well this is the first high school built with a comprehensive concept.  You know, typically our students have or have been having in the DeKalb School District [DeKalb County School District] have been having to be transported to the Occupational Educational Centers for such things as cosmetology or construction, or nursing assistant.  We have all those.  We have a culinary arts lab.  We have a video productions lab.  We have a health occupations lab, we're right next to the hospital [DeKalb Medical Center at Hillandale, Lithonia, Georgia].  We have an IT [information technology] lab.  Gosh, what's one more, but those types of opportunities that would not have been available, that's not available, but oh we have a barbering program as well.
Speaker 1: A barbering?
Speaker 2: Not cosmetology, just barbering, straight barbering.  And you have to turn away students.  I mean there's so many kids that want to get, to become involved, girls, just as much as boys.  It's amazing.  And excuse me.
Speaker 1: Bless you.
Speaker 2: It is--having those opportunities available right here makes it more convenient.  And I believe that the wave of the future in terms of the growth in buildings is going to lean more so toward providing career academies, which by our architectural design, we already have.  Our students are able to take advantage of some opportunities.  Our video production program students made a movie and it's being featured this Saturday at the movie theater in the community.  And last year the video productions team won an award on--from an independent film festival.  So, I mean, the kids are doing some great, great things.  You know, health occupations lab, these students will be--will have completed enough hours to work as a dental hygienist, a pharmacy tech, or to work in first responder EMT [emergency medical technician] right out of high school.  So the students that are not or have no plans or intentions on attending college, we have some opportunities available here for them.  And then that's really the beauty of it.
Story_ID: 377308
Speaker 1: Now recently on the news, we saw the teachers picketing outside the school [Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia], tell me what that was about?
Speaker 2: One day I was meeting with my leadership team, and I just said that we need to do something to get the parents more involved, to educate them.  You know, our--all schools, you know, the driving force is accountability, AYP [Adequate Yearly Progress], there's no secret.  We're on the needs improvement list.  What happens if you're on that needs improvement list for three years, your school can be reconstituted.  Principal and everyone else goes, have to find a job somewhere else.  But the impact that has on a community when you bring in someone who did not stand right here and look up and could see the sky, who were not a part of the inaugural staff and saw how things were established.  Who does not have the bloodline that flows, the original bloodline that flowed through the building when it opened its doors on January 5th of 2005.  And attempt to inform parents and educate parents that if we don't have a successful school, you're not gonna have a successful community.  If this school is not successful, then you're gonna lose money by way of property value.  Your property value is going to decrease.  We all have to work collectively to make this happen.  We have to make this happen and there is no way that we could do it separate.  So, we staged it as a parent protest for parental involvement.  Knew one thing for certain is that the media was gonna jump on it when they saw teachers out there protesting.  And certainly they were coming out here with the intent to advertise or do a story on something that was negative.  I think once they got here and realized that they have committed themselves, they found out, wow this is nothing negative at all.  These are some teachers out here begging for parents to become more and more involved.  Our superintendent says that principals, you can do more.  As a principal, I'm saying to my teachers, you can do more.  Though at the same time, we're all saying to parents, you can do more as well.  And that was the charge.  We'll provide the parents with information about their children, that for those that had not come in to a parent teacher conference, to a PTSA [Parent Teacher Student Association] meeting, this is where your child stands academically, on grade level or not.  This is the plan of remediation to get them on grade level.  These are the Internet sites that can assist you and your child.  We're preparing for the end of the course test, for the graduation test, for the SAT, for the ACT.  These are the financial aid--financial sources in which you or anyone else wants to seek financial aid if your child is graduating.  This is a list of the community technical schools and junior colleges.  So we provided them with a wealth of information, so even if they don't come back, they have enough in that folder that relates specifically to their child that they can provide some assistance, and additionally ask your child, where are their books.  Ask for some homework.  You have the progress report dates, where's your progress report.  Ask them questions, keep them off balance, hold them accountable.  If you do that, you can help us.  That's what it was about.
Story_ID: 377309
Speaker 1: In the elementary schools they have theme schools, and I believe they're gonna open a middle school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Already have, uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --theme school.  What about the college, the high school level?  I mean, do you think that this is something that would work as--because it's working well in the lower grades with the parent involvement, I think if the parents started elementary they're just used to being involved in the schools all the way to high school?
Speaker 2: Right.  I believe it will, although I somewhat disagree that you have to sign a contract that says that you'll be involved or you'll support the school.
Speaker 1: Why, tell me why you--I mean, why that is your opinion (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just think, I feel the level of parental support is truly an indicator as to whether your child is going to be successful in anything.  But what happens typically is that elementary, you see a lot of parental involvement and support.  But it decreases as the children ascend to higher grades.  When it really--it should work the opposite, but for anything it should increase even more so because then education really becomes an investment.  We're talking about HOPE Grant, HOPE Scholarship.  We're talking about really, really saving some money.  But to know and understand how important it is, I don't need to sign a contract to say I'm gonna be involved in my child's education or I'm gonna be a presence at the school.  If an entire community understands and knows that--that it's important to just to care about the child that's sitting in front, back, left, right of your child because they're gonna have an impact and can have an impact on your child's education.  If they are disruptive every day, and yes there is discipline, and there's progressive discipline if this child's continually disruptive, distracting the teacher from teaching, depriving the children of a learning opportunity, then that child will be removed and dealt with.  But in--but as just as much, the parent has to instill in that child that the importance of an education and recognizing that that teacher that's in that classroom is certified and qualified and bona fide to teach that specific content area.  And you need to respect that and respect him or her as a professional, and that you have everything to gain and nothing to lose.  And that teacher shouldn't have to worry about or spend time saying, "Sit down, where are your materials?"  Managing the class instead of teaching class or providing instruction to the class.  That shouldn't be the focus.  That should never be the focus.  A community or a parent or parents that are involved controls just as much, has just as much of an impact on the environment as we do.  Because they are sending a child to us that understands the importance of an education.  If it's understood from every child, then no we don't need to stand them in the hallways every day.  That's not what we asking.  We're asking that you hold them accountable, make sure they understand why they are doing this.  'Cause a lot of children don't understand why they're doing.  For a child that does not see or hear a parent asking about their academic progress, they're not gonna care.  Just not gonna care.
Story_ID: 377310
Speaker 1: You're here [Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia] and everything's great, and it seems like every four years you're looking for a new challenge.  What are your future goals?
Speaker 2: I truthfully want to travel throughout the country and beyond to elementary, middle, high schools, colleges, teacher organizations, college organizations, conferences, churches, sharing my story.  Providing leadership training for principals, you know, by way of my experiences of the management, operating of a school both from an instructional perspective and a management perspective.  Publish a book which will be synonymous with the story that I tell that I believe is so simplified and so real and speaks to the majority, more so than the minority, that will serve as an example and as a crutch and something that they can rely on and look to and say, you know, this guy did it right here, I know I can.  Nothing so difficult that a fifth grader couldn't read it and understand.  I want it to be something that's going to be very practical that can be read in forty-eight hours.  But the sense of once completing it that I can do this.  That's what I want.  I want to be--I want to get on that international circuit and share that story.  Provide the motivation and the encouragement for those that wanna continue to teach, for those that wanna continue to lead the schools, lead the school districts.  How important is parental support--and involvement is.  Mothers raising teenage male students specifically without the presence of a male, I have a message for them too.  But to provide them with what is going to be necessary for all of them to be successful.  If I just happen to become a superintendent along the way, then I'll take that too (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Well, okay do you have a message to share with the future generations?
Speaker 2: Oh wow.  My message, learn to think, learn to critically--learn to think critically, make decisions for yourself, don't be a follower.  Be humble, be respectful and courteous at all times.  Look the part, talk the part, be versatile.  Be able to assimilate in any and all environments.  Be able to change gears, know when it's time and when it's not time.  Be aware of your surroundings at all times and know when there's trouble and know how to distance yourself from trouble.  And don't allow for the negative influences to control your way of thinking and to--don't allow for that fantasy to become your reality.  Stay in tune to your reality because if you're not in tune to your reality then your fantasy is gonna take over.  I know the cars and the clothes look good, and the bling bling.  But those images that are perpetuated, what about the in between?  Focus on the traditional means of success versus the nontraditional means of success.  Traditional being matriculating through high school and college, working, getting into a career versus dribbling the basketball or hitting a baseball or catching a football, which is a great thing if you have that ability.  But education, as you grow older, especially with the more you get, you become more valuable.  The more and more yards you run up and down the football field, years and years and years, you become less valuable.  You know, I often share with the--with many of my students and many of the groups that I speak to, you know, the images that we see typically that are on the walls in our libraries and media centers depicted of professional basketball or the baseball players or entertainers.  And they have a book in their hand, and the caption below the picture says, read.  Shaquille O'Neal for one example is on one and he's in his basketball uniform.  That's a great thing, but Shaquille O'Neal has a college degree.  He has a master's degree.  I think it would just be, I think it would be more befitting if that same picture of Shaquille O'Neal in his cap and gown as he's walking across the stage at Louisiana State University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] shaking the president's hand with one and getting his college degree in the other.  I think that sends more of a message than him in his basketball uniform, because then the focus is on the traditional and not the nontraditional.
Story_ID: 377311
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to?
Speaker 2: My pride and joy (laughter), my six-year-old son and my one-year-old daughter.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: My son's name is Chandler [Chandler Simpson] and my daughter's name is Skyla [Skyla Simpson].  And, I mean they're my heroes.  You know, they're why I do this.  And--and you know, I have to go back to mom [Roxie Shannon Simpson].  You know my mother never went to college.  She could only say just the subtle things that meant a lot.  Just, you know, keep trying.  That's all she could really offer because she didn't have the experience.  But what she did, what she couldn't tell me she did, was that she spent a lot of time on her knees praying for me and I do know that.  And because of those prayers, you know, or reasons and this is the sole reason I am here.  I have a brother [Henry Simpson III] that's--that's always been supportive, we're like night and day, but has always been supportive.  My dad [Henry Simpson, Jr.] although we didn't have the greatest relationship, I have the utmost of respect and love for him because of the examples that I saw.  I have perfect attendance at work.  I had perfect attendance grades K [kindergarten] through twelve because they went to work every day, I went to school every day.  That work ethic, that transcended, you know, beyond imaginable years and that's one thing that was instilled within me that, you know, just by observation it was expected.  You got to go to work.  And that I knew.  I woke up in the morning realizing I had to go to work.  Okay if you have a cold, take you some medicine, go to work.  You may have the flu, take you some medicine, go to work.  He was a great provider.  He took care of his children.  He took care of home.  So in the absence of maybe that very close knit father-son relationship, I knew he loved me.  He may not have known how to show me, but I knew he did because I knew he bragged about, both my sons have graduated from college.  You know, he bragged about, that's what I heard.  Yes it would've been good to hear it from him.  But I can't blame him for not knowing, but that helped me to be a better father.  Because every morning I drop my son off for school, I give him a hug and a kiss and tell him I love him.  And although, you know, my children's mother and I are not together, one thing we do know and understand is we have two children to raise, our children have two loving parents, and we're gonna do that, we're gonna do that to the best of our ability.  And I just hope and pray that nothing else will get in the way of us doing that, and that's whatever it takes, that's whatever it takes.  Because, you know, them being here, they didn't ask to be here.  But by the simple virtue that they're here, we're gonna make sure that they're provided with nurturing and the support that we were provided with if not more.
Story_ID: 377312
Speaker 1: If you were to look over your life, would there be anything that you would change or do you have any regrets about anything?
Speaker 2: It all happened--I think all of my experience, all of my experiences molded me or shaped me to become the person that I am, and I needed that.  I needed to see that.  As a corrections officer, because that shaped my mind and my heart and my spirit to become that teacher and it helped, you know, assisted that passion.  That's where I got the passion from because I've got to avoid--I got to help them, you know, avoid this route.  So that's where the passion came from.  While I didn't enjoy it and at the time I didn't understand it, but I needed to go through that.  I needed to go through the experiences of not being able to be successful on those tests.  Without a test, there is no testimony.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: You know, my failures, you know, which I turned into successes, I couldn't be of any help to anyone else if I was perfect.  So because of my obstacles, I'm able to share that with others who are having the same experiences, and I needed that.  I need that to be able to go out and assist and provide those others to get over the hump.  So I'm more than grateful of all that I've experienced.  I wouldn't rewrite it.  It is all out--it's not by happenstance, I believe everything is by divine order.  It's happened just the way it has.  And I truly believe that working with children and being able to provide them with my experiences is why I'm here.  I truly believe that by God, and I mean it's truly a blessing.  And that's why I named the title of my book 'From Remedial to Remarkable' [Ralph L. Simpson], but nothing remarkable in terms of magic, has nothing to do with magic.  It's just a true blessing from God.  And you know, to Him all praises are due and given.  I know that nothing, nothing in all of what I have done I could've done by myself.  Nothing whatsoever and it's truly a blessing.  I've really been blessed.  I've been blessed to be forty-three years of age and doing what I'm doing, and still in my mind just beginning.  I'm still just beginning to scratch the surface because I believe that there are some things in order--even much, much larger for me.  I truly believe that.
Story_ID: 377313
Speaker 1: Well, usually if somebody is a little older I'll ask them, how do you want to be remembered, but instead, what do you want your legacy to be?  Because you can build a legacy, so what do--what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, a couple of weeks ago I got a message from my secretary and you know, I looked at the notepad and I called the person back.  And this person that shared with me, it was a lady that shared with me that she had heard me speak, I can't remember where it was, but she said that, you know, my story, you know, affected her so much that she wanted to call and get some information about what she needed to do because she really, really wanted to become a teacher, but she was having some challenges passing the test.  And she said that she had called, you know, other people who were, you know, friend of friends that were in education and she said she never got a phone call back, never got a return call.  And she was just so blown away, even to tears that I called her back.  But I took the time to call her back, because she knows the schedule, but more than anything that, you know, who am I just calling the school [Miller Grove High School, Lithonia, Georgia] asking to speak to the principal.  And I shared with her, I said, "I return all my phone calls because I don't know who that person may be."  But we talked on the phone for about thirty minutes and I was able to provide her with, yeah share my experiences even in more detail and I was able to provide her with some resources in which she could obtain and seek out to help her to get over the hump.  I want to be remembered as a person that provided opportunities that normally would not been provided otherwise.  And I do that because I wasn't provided the opportunities as well, I had to make those and create those opportunities for me or for myself.  And, you know, a person that's been willing to help any and every one regardless to where they stand, you know, on whatever level in terms of stratus or status.  But that--that's humble to the point that he's willing to speak any man, woman, boy or girl and provide them with the information that will allow for them to be successful.  You know, to touch all of those.  I wanna touch all of them.  But not to be so big where, you know, I'm just untouchable.  I wanna always be touchable.  I wanna always be reachable.  And, you know, when I'm out of the understanding or the level of understanding where I can't have an impact on children, then it's time for me to leave this profession at any level or at any cost.  But to prepare others and provide others and equip others with being able to do better what I'm able or trying to do.  You know, and just making them understand that you can be ordinary, but you can still do extraordinary things.  You know, Michael Jordan was an ordinary athlete, he did extraordinary things.  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was an ordinary person, he did extraordinary things.  I wanna follow in their same footsteps, in that same path, just an ordinary person, an average student with average ability.  That anybody that has that ability, regardless of whether you're just average, you can still do extraordinary things.  Because those are human beings that have done great things and we have to continue to remind ourselves of that.  I want to be that individual that was just an ordinary person, and made it known of that, but they did extraordinary things.
Story_ID: 377314
Speaker 1: Well, if there is nothing else that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Other than having the best staff (laughter).  I mean my support staff is--I mean, my support is--Dr. Thedford [Carol Thedford], one of my assistant principals, Mr. Ambler, you know, those are the first two that I--Mr. Ambler worked with me as an assistant principal at Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia] .  And I'm gonna say this too, and I think there were some surprises and maybe and maybe not, but Mr. Ambler is a white male.  He's a white gentleman.  And I selected him amongst the other three assistant principals that I had--four assistant principals.  I had two male--two white and two black, and I selected him.  What I think that most would've presumed or assumed that I would have taken one of the African Americans, but I chose him because I believe success has nothing to do with color.  I had to choose someone that I knew was one, gonna be loyal, was gonna have my back and to work just as hard as I do.  And I know that I have that in this person, I know that.  Dr. Thedford is a person I trained as a teacher when she was aspiring to become an administrator or an assistant principal when I was working as an assistant principal at Miller Grove Middle School [Decatur, Georgia].
Story_ID: 377315
Speaker 1: So you were talking about Mr. Jones [James H. Jones], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr. Jones.  Mr. Jones was my chorus teacher over at Stone Mountain High School [Stone Mountain, Georgia], who had begun working on his leadership degree and trained him, you know, as a classroom teacher as well.  He came over with me as a chorus teacher.  He was actually the one who wrote the school's alma mater.  And then my newest assistant principal, Miss Searcy [Latashia Searcy], she was a teacher on my staff at Stone Mountain High School whom I've, you know, trained over the years as well.  So, you know, all of my assistant principals I've trained since they were in the classroom.  And either one of them could run this school on any given day.  You know, I believe that part of the legacy as well is yes, you may be successful, but what about--how many of those would be successful that have worked up under you.  I lose at least three or four staff members every year to promotions at some level, whether they be assistant principal, whether it be principal, the coordinators at central office administration, because I believe a good leader builds leaders.  But--and then my teaching staff is, I mean, I can ask them to do just about anything, the parent rally for one and the protest.  You know, that was bold.  That was--that asked a lot for them to, you know, stand out there with those signs from 3:40 to 11:00 three nights straight and then go around the clock on one night.  So, that's just--that's indicative of the level of support.  But I provide that same level of support to them and I give that to them as well.  You know, I make sure that we, as an administrative staff, support and foster an environment that's conducive to learning and teaching.  And that we control so that you can teach and children can learn.  We're responsible for that, well we'll get them in class.  We'll make sure that they're not disrupting that environment and if they are, then we'll have to deal with them because these children are coming here to get an education.  But without them, as a school principal, I can't do it by myself.  You know, they're the ones that have to make this work.
Speaker 1: You're talking--you said that you gave them the support, but the board of education [DeKalb County Board of Education] also supported you in the process in which, I mean even though they weren't visibly here, they did give you--lend you the support to say that what you were doing was a good thing?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, you know, amazingly enough, I would've never imagined, I didn't think it would get to that point in terms of, you know, all of the news coverage.  I knew it would get their attention, but I didn't think it would be something that runs or that ran on the news for two or three or four days and in the newspapers, I didn't anticipate that.  So it was more like a reactive responding in terms of making them aware of what we were doing.  And once they found out what we were doing, it was like, oh wow, you know, that was out of the box.  Yes, it was taking a major risk because it could've backfired.  I had to emphasize to the parents that we're not blaming, we're begging.
Speaker 1: Beg them to come out and help their own students in school, yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely.
