Story_ID: 611125
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Charles Z. Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what does Z stand for?
Speaker 2: Zellender, Z-E-L-L-E-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story behind the name Zellender?
Speaker 2: No, the Zellenders were friends of my parents [Eva Love Smith and John R. Smith, Sr.], and I was their first son, and they gave me the name Zellender as a courtesy to their friends.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 23, 1927, Lakeland, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, Lakeland, Florida (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Just look at Larry [Larry Crowe], Judge Smith. Don't look at me or the lens.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just pretend we're not here, and you're just having a conversation--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --with this gentlemen.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Basically, I am a lawyer. However, I do not practice law. I retired as a justice of the Washington State supreme court [Washington Supreme Court] in December, 2002.
Story_ID: 611126
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled by management to ask of everyone. And they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yes, any dessert with chocolate in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime, anywhere in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere in Hawaii (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Truth, justice and freedom, which is my motto and my logo in my letterhead.
Story_ID: 611127
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John R. Smith, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eva, E-V-A, Love, L-O-V-E, Smith, S-M-I-T-H, Shannon, S-H-A-N-N-O-N [Eva Love Smith].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 25, 1900, born in Franklin, F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace your mother's people?
Speaker 2: On her paternal side, her paternal grandfather [William Love] was born into slavery and was emancipated when the slaves were emancipated in 1864.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the product of a woman characterized as a house slave, who was a mistress of the plantation owner. And so he had a strange privileged status as the son of the plantation owner, living in the big house with his mother, the house slave, who was a mistress to (laughter) the owner. That's one of the ignominies of our existence as descendants of slaves.
Speaker 1: And what was the--I think you gave us the owner's name the last time. It was--
Speaker 2: It was--I think Colonel McCormick [ph.].
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, McCormick, right. Okay. All right, and are there any stories from that era that--I mean did he talk about what it was like living in the big house in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not really because I only met my great-grandfather several times, but I was a child and never had a conversation with him.
Speaker 1: Well, it is something that you got a chance to meet him, you know, someone--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who was born in slavery and raised in a, in that situation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him in the year 1939. And so I had to have been around eleven or twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, any other stories about, you know, those days? I mean how did--any stories about Reconstruction, what it was like to--did they stay on that place or did they have to move or what?
Speaker 2: Well, I only know from the historical perspective. My great-grandfather received an allocation of property from his natural father. And so he had three hundred acres of property which belonged to him in Franklin, North Carolina. And that was his legacy from his father. And that's all I know is that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's quite a, that's quite a thing to know 'cause a lot of people don't know how--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --their ancestors wound up with property.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Especially during Reconstruction when it was by no means certain that you would get anything, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he, he ended up with three hundred acres--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from a legacy from his natural father, the Colonel McCormick.
Story_ID: 611128
Speaker 1: Does anybody in the family ever talk about what the relationship was between him and Colonel McCormick [ph.]? Did they have--I mean other than giving him the property, did they actually interact and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no family discussions. My relatives who lived with him as he was getting older would have been a source of that, but I never had that much communication with them. And quite frankly, for most of my life, I chose to close the door between myself and slave ancestry. And to--sort of a form of intellectual denial, is that I did not start with slavery. You know, I started (laughter) at birth, and I became who I was at the time of my birth in moving forward, not moving backward. As I matured and became older, certainly, my curiosity has been aroused, and I wish I had had an opportunity to talk with my [maternal] great-grandfather [William Love] to find out something about his life as a resident of the big house and the son of the slave owner and all of those other things. And his father was not the owner. He was, I think the superintendent of the plantation. But nevertheless, the master, quote unquote. And so that part of the history is the kind of thing that I have never wanted particularly to know about or to even remember, but from, again, from an intellectual standpoint at my present age, I would be curious to know some of the things that I chose not to know in earlier years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, many of us, many black people have white ancestors that they don't know--that we know nothing about and to actually know that there was one that actually did something for his offspring (laughter), I mean, and they knew that he did, was--is significant in a sense that, you know, I mean it tells another kind of a story though there are other stories like the one you just told. I've heard other stories like it, but I--which--I think, in general, part of it's you don't really--most of us don't even entertain that as having been a possibility, you know, but, that this man would father children and then actually try to take care of 'em on some level. But, okay--so your mother [Eva Love Smith] grew up in Franklin, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now, who did her father [Charles Love] marry?
Speaker 2: Her father married a woman, my grandmother, whose name was Julia Sellers [Julia Sellers Love], S-E-L-L-E-R-S. And my grandmother's mother was a Cherokee Indian [Native American]. I know nothing about her father except by name. I never knew any of my grandmother's relatives. I knew my grandfather's relatives, but I did not know any of my grandmother's relatives. And their existence is only names to me as opposed to discreet persons.
Story_ID: 611129
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother [Eva Love Smith] talk about what it was like growing up in Franklin, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Only in the sense of day to day existence, the family existence. She was in a large family. She had a twin sister, an older sister and seven or eight brothers. And so my mother's relation of her family history in Franklin, North Carolina related to things inside the family as opposed to things outside the family so that the social aspects of existence in that period of time and that kind of community was of little or no consequence in terms of what she would talk with us about.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't really pass any on any political analysis of what was going on or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, none at all.
Speaker 1: --anything like that? Did you have a, did you get sense from her that, that the race relations were good or that, you know, or was it typical of what people think they--you know, when they think about that period of time--
Speaker 2: This is, this is an interesting thing about Franklin, North Carolina. I never spent a lot of time there except from the time I was eighteen months until I was five years old. And so my recollections of the area was during that early period of my life, which is a bit more specific than one would believe for a person between the age of eighteen months and five years. But from time to time, we would go back to Franklin to visit our grandparents [Julia Sellers Love and Charles Love]. And in that, that particular community, black/white relations were very unusual and not--even though in the deeply segregated period of our national life, in the town of Franklin, there was not that much difference between whites and blacks. And in one year, within the last twenty years, we had a family reunion there. And we had people coming up to us saying, "We're your cousins." They were white, and so not a great thing to be concerned about because in every family, there are mixtures of racial types, and whether they exist as African Americans, or whether they exist as whites, is not as important as the fact that this is a community, and where you have people of all kinds who claim to be related to people who look different than they. And so I've always had the feeling that in that little town of Franklin, North Carolina, that even at the height of segregation in our national life, and I was not there during that period, that there was not the tension that one would find in places like say, Mississippi or Alabama or Georgia or even my home state of Florida where I was fully aware of the fact, of the difference between blacks and whites and Cubans and non-Cubans. And so all of this is part of an interesting flashback in trying to determine what the atmosphere was in the town where my mother was born and where she grew up. It was a place where people got along together and where people, even though they maintain segregated schools, segregated churches in the residential areas, there wasn't that much separation. And, of course, in very, very rural areas in earlier times, there was no such thing as a, a black neighborhood and a white neighborhood in a agrarian community. So the next door neighbor may be black or white and the people would exchange things that neighbors exchange, so like sugar and flour and eggs and milk and things like that without any reference whatever to the racial identity. And that's the feeling that I have about the town of Franklin, North Carolina, with which I am not familiar in these days. But I have an impression that it is a fairly integrated, open community.
Story_ID: 611130
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Eva Love Smith]--now, where did she go to school in Franklin [North Carolina]? Did she--
Speaker 2: She went to whatever school they had for what we then called colored people, and I think my mother probably at best went to the eighth or ninth grade. Back in those old days, in many communities, even for white persons, there were not fully qualified schools, but for persons who were black, the colored people, there were segregated schools that had limited access to facilities, limited access to grades and limited access to teachers. And so for a person like my mother who was born in the year 1900 to complete eight grades of school was phenomenal. She was a highly educated person, despite the fact that (laughter) her formal education was limited.
Story_ID: 611131
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Eva Love Smith] finished the eighth grade around 1913.
Speaker 2: Probably around that year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, yeah, now did she--now, people married young in those days. Was she thinking about getting married then? Or was she--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was a professional chef. She worked in a tourist home as a cook in Franklin, North Carolina. And the family that owned the tourist home also had a tourist home in Lakeland, Florida. And they took her with them from Franklin to Lakeland, Florida to work as the chef in their tourist home. And that is how I ended up being born in Florida because my mother had moved from North Carolina to Florida to work as a cook--
Speaker 1: Now, had she (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they called them a chef.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had she met your father [John R. Smith, Sr.] yet when she moved?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So now it's a good time to introduce him.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father.
Speaker 2: And they, in trying to think of the time that they met because my mother was fourteen when she left Franklin to work in Lakeland. And I think she was around eighteen when she met my father. And, but they met in Lakeland and were married there. And my best recollection is that they were married--I was born in 1927. I have a sister born in '25 [1925] and a sister born in '23 [1923]. And they were married about 1920. So my mother would have been twenty years old when she got married.
Story_ID: 611132
Speaker 1: Now, can, can you give us your mother's--your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's English language name (laughter), John Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, Smith, S-M-I-T-H [John R. Smith, Sr.], and to use a cliche that was not his true name. My father was born in Havana, Cuba, and with his parents [Herminia Delpino and Manuel Delpino], they emigrated from Cuba at the height of the Spanish American War. And they settled in Key West, Florida. And it is--
Speaker 1: So this is like 1890--
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-four [1894].
Speaker 1: Ninety- '94 [1894], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right. And my father was born, I think May 5th, 1884. And he was ten or eleven years old when they left Cuba to come to the states.
Story_ID: 611133
Speaker 1: They settled in Key West, Florida where the Cubans were settling then rather than in Miami [Florida]. And the immigration history is very confusing. The--in the--even now, in 2008, the immigration system will do this. If they can't spell your name, they'll give you a name. And so I'm not altogether certain what my father's [John R. Smith, Sr.] family, true family name was. When I used to ask him, he would say Derigus. And I'd ask him how to spell it, and because my father was illiterate in English, he said R-E-Z-Y. And that's the way I remember it. However, one of my sisters and one of my brothers, as adults, went to Key West to trace the family. And they came up with the conclusion that the family's name was Delpino, D-E-L-P-I-N-O. And my, I know that my father's mother's name was Susana [Herminia Delpino], her first name was Susana, S-U-S-A-N-A. And his father's name was Manuel [Manuel Delpino], M-A-N-U-E-L. And I, I remember my father referring to his mother as Susana and to his father as Manuel. But that last name is what is confusing in my mind. But, you know, I was a child and did not understand the Spanish language and did not know how to spell Spanish names.
Speaker 2: What was the name again that he gave first, that he gave you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He said, he said Derigus.
Speaker 2: Derigus.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if I were to spell it now, I would spell it D-E-R-I-G-U-S. And I've never seen that name anywhere. And I don't know whether it was a confusion with the name Rodriguez, which is a common Spanish name. But, again, I, I used to probe my father (laughter) and say, "How do you spell it?" And he'd always say R-E-Z-Y. And there is no such name as R-E-Z-Y (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) R-E-Z-Y?
Speaker 1: --which would be Rezy. And, but at any rate, it's sort of a mystery of family name. One of my brothers, has a son who had his name formally changed to Delpino, and, of course, his mother is Panamanian and they come from a Latin culture, and he didn't like the name Manuel Smith [ph.], and so he went into court and had his name changed (laughter) to Delpino. But at any rate, it's sort of an amusing family mystery as to what the true name was. And the closest I can get to the Delpino mystery is that back in the '30s [1930s] immigration was trying to deport my father to send him back to Cuba. And there was a woman in Key West, Hattie Delpino, who was his aunt, and Hattie Delpino was able some way or the other to convince immigration that he was a lawful citizen of the United States because back in those days, immigrants did not have papers. And my father's parents were dead, and he didn't have any papers, and they were going to deport him. And Hattie Delpino, his aunt, and I remember the description of her: the fat lady who lived in the house near the lighthouse in Key West. And that's part of my recollection of how my father was not deported because his aunt, Hattie Delpino, had come to his rescue and established his identity. And so based upon that, when my sister and my brother went to Key West to trace the family, and they came back with the conclusion that the family name was Delpino, it makes a little more sense to me than not because I remember my father's aunt, Hattie Delpino, coming forward to establish his residency in the United States. And so it may well be that Delpino is the family name, but I would not be able to take a stand and testify to that.
Story_ID: 611134
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Not, not a significant one. My father [John R. Smith, Sr.] was an automobile mechanic, and my mother [Eva Love Smith] was a chef and a nurse in a tourist home. And it's a town where persons of color tend to gravitate towards each other. My father was Mestizo. He was not white. And my mother was a gorgeous woman, and I remember her as I was growing up, she was a very beautiful woman. And so I could understand how my father would be attracted to her. But in--I think it was simply a matter of a small town, a small community, two people who were new to the area--my mother was not born in Lakeland [Florida]. She came from North Carolina. My father was not born in Lakeland. He came from Havana [Cuba]. And so here they are in a small town, and they met some way or the other. And whatever happened, they got married, and they ended up with eight children. And I'm one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your father though--let's see, he's--he was born in 1884.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that makes him like sixteen years older than your mother? Is that pretty much--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 611135
Speaker 1: So, when you, when you think about their personalities, their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: It's--that's hard to tell because the qualities I admire in each of them are qualities I'd like to claim that I have (laughter), my mother [Eva Love Smith] was extremely bright and intellectually curious, and emphasized reading and correct language and speech. And she was sort of a disciplinarian when it came to managing her children and her family. My father [John R. Smith, Sr.] was a gentle, quiet person who loved his wife, loved his children and nothing was more important to him than his family. And so I would like to believe that I acquired my sense of family significance from my father, but also that my curiosity for improving myself through education on a continuing basis was partly the influence of my mother, so that in combination with those two, I became whoever I am. But there are qualities in both of them that I greatly admired and I still admire, though they're no longer with us. And the only thing about my mother that I would criticize was her intolerance of the Spanish language. And my mother could not speak Spanish. And she was very intolerant of my father speaking Spanish when he was around his Cuban friends, and they were speaking Spanish, and she could not understand it. So my mother decided that her children would not grow up with an accent like their father. And she used to drill us in English pronunciation and words. It was a routine part of our existence. Like in some families, they pray every day. In my family, my mother would drill us in the English language, and I--in retrospect, I regret that very much because I wish she had had an open mind about another language and that she would have encouraged us to adapt to two languages rather than one language.
Story_ID: 611136
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [John R. Smith, Sr.] have much education in Spanish? I know you said he didn't have much in English (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have--yeah, I have no idea what his education was because it would have been interrupted when they left Havana [Cuba]. And I, I have no idea what his life was like between the time they came to Key West [Florida] and the time he ended up in Lakeland [Florida], which is, you know, three hundred miles north. And, but I know that my father could read Spanish because periodically, we would get the Cuban newspapers. I, as a child, I tried to learn Spanish with my father reading the newspapers and listening to Radio Havana [Radio Havana Cuba]. But the--there was simply no literary approach to his existence because he never learned to read English, and he never learned to write English. And he spoke English in the manner of a person who doesn't know the language and his, his syntax, you know, very interesting, and I, I used to, as a child, I was amused at the syntax that my father would use. But I didn't have the understanding that it was a matter of existing in another culture with another language. I now know why. But back in those days, it was a matter of amusement to me that my father spoke the way that he spoke.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he was an auto mechanic for most of his life?
Speaker 2: Automobile mechanic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was his only profession.
Story_ID: 611137
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: In general?
Speaker 1: What's the earliest thing that you remember? I think you almost told that. Didn't you say that--let's see. Wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest childhood memory, see, I was born in Florida, but my parents moved to Franklin, North Carolina, where my [maternal] grandparents [Julia Sellers Love and Charles Love] lived. And they had a compound and his three daughter had homes on the, on the property. And my father [John R. Smith, Sr.] owned a school bus. And back in those days, schools buses were not contracted as they are in communities these days. And so the school district would contract with people who owned school buses to provide transportation. So my father's principal existence while in Franklin for the two and a half years, was driving a school bus. And this was the days before seat belts. And he would put me behind him as he was driving the school bus, and I would go with him as he would pick the students up and deposit them at school. And I was sort of like a camera. I would take in everything I would see. And I would go back home and tell my mother [Eva Love Smith] everything that happened (laughter) from the time I left home until I got back home. And those are my earliest recollections of things that I remembered. And I remember having an absolute ball with my father, standing behind him as he's driving this school bus and all of that, and as a consequence of that, that's why I started school at the age of three. And it was that the teachers in the school determined that since I was coming to school every day with my father that I should start classes because I had learned to read at age three.
Speaker 1: You started in Lakeland [Florida], right?
Speaker 2: No, in North Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In North Carolina at age three.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, 'cause you were in North Carolina 'til age five?
Speaker 2: Until five.
Speaker 1: Until you were five, okay, all right. So do you remember the name of the school you attended there in the beginning?
Speaker 2: In Franklin?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It didn't have a name. It was a colored school (laughter).
Speaker 1: The colored school.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were at the colored school until--for two years then, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you moved to Lakeland.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was there, was any big difference between the two schools?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Quite a difference. The school in Franklin, I've been back to it in my adult years, and it's as I remembered it, a white clapboard building, typical of schools of that type. In Florida, the school that I went to had a name. And they had brick buildings. And the school in Florida was then called Washington Park School [Lakeland, Florida]. And they did not then divide schools between elementary and high school. So it was Washington Park School; that was first grade through twelfth grade.
Story_ID: 611138
Speaker 1: What were some of the--now, you--I know we're talking about two different places, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I remember about Florida that appealed to me was the smell of orange blossoms and orange groves and palm trees and tropical fruits and--such as papayas, mangos, citrus fruits, all of which tended to grow naturally, although somebody had to cultivate them. But if I were to think back, the most pleasant of my experiences in going from North Carolina to Lakeland, Florida at age five, and the years that followed, except for experience with other human beings, that would be the smell and the sight that I remember most, plus the lakes, clear water, alligators, moccasin snakes, things that I remember. And I learned to swim in a lake that was infested with alligators and moccasins. But, and, of course, my recollection after all of these years may be somewhat distorted and maybe over glamorized, but that's my recollection. And I was in Lakeland earlier this year. Or if you--I think it was earlier this year, and I would not have recognized the place because it has changed. And there was nothing there that I remembered. Even the school [Washington Park School, Lakeland, Florida] that I attended was no longer there, and when they integrated the schools in 1964, they abolished the school that they had for the quote colored people. But, again, it's like everything else, with the passage of time, things are different.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your favorite pastimes growing up? Well, first of all, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: There were four girls and four boys in our family. I had two sisters older than I. Then there was me, and then two sisters younger than me, and then three brothers, younger than all of them. My oldest sister's now dead, and my oldest younger brother is dead. And the rest of them are still alive and live in the Seattle [Washington] area.
Story_ID: 611139
Speaker 1: In Lakeland [Florida] now, I know one of your teachers in school was a relative of Cannonball Adderley, right, and it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --is that in Lakeland?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that the, the sister of Cannonball, the--
Speaker 2: No, she was his aunt.
Speaker 1: His aunt, all right.
Speaker 2: Married to his, his father's brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So her name is Nettie Jean Adderley [Nettie Adderley], who was one of my favorite teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, Nettie Jean Adderley. So did Cannonball and his brother, Nat [Nat Adderley], grow up in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were from Tallahassee [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I knew them at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but, no, I--as, as a matter of fact, another of Cannonball's relatives, his uncle, was principal of the school that I went to, Quinton, Q-U-I-N-T-O-N, Quinton J. Adderley [Quinton Adderley] was principal of the school around the time I left there [Washington Park School, Lakeland, Florida], 1942, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) It was not mathematics (laughter). I, I think any, any subject that required reading such as history, English, and in those days, the black public schools did not have a versatile curriculum. So I could say that we had English literature and world literature. So we had geography and history and things like that, that I thoroughly enjoyed because I'm a sort of a loner, and I wouldn't say that I was a reclusive loner, but I liked to go to the library and read books. And so I would read everything I could get my hands on until I met my Waterloo, 'Pilgrim's Progress' ['The Pilgrim's Progress From this World to that Which is to Come,' John Bunyan] that I tried to read and I didn't understand it (laughter). It was so--
Speaker 1: John Milton [sic.] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) John Milton. I still don't understand it. But that was the one, one book in the little library that we had that I ran across--I, I had determined that I was gonna read every book in the library. And the librarian was very cooperative. And I'd there, and she'd see me coming and she'd have books out for me. But 'Pilgrim's Progress,' and I must have been, I think I must have been around twelve years old. And I tried to understand it and didn't. And even now, if I see John Milton, 'Pilgrim's Progress,' on the table, I'll run away from it. I don't want to read it. That was a very interesting aspect of my intellectual non-development as I've never finished reading 'Pilgrim's Progress.'
Speaker 1: It sounds like you needed a shepherd to go through it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone to shepherd you through it, you know, maybe. That's, they teach that in college English literature courses, and, you know, it's not, it's not easy.
Story_ID: 611140
Speaker 1: Now, was, was radio a big factor in growing up, when you were coming along (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, radio was the only form of communication that we, we had. They had not developed television to the point of which it was owned, but in my background--and this is sort of going on a tangent, I have a music background. I studied piano for twelve years, and my sisters had a singing group. And I was the pianist for it. And we used to do regular broadcasts in the local station in Lakeland [Florida], WLAK [WLAK Radio; WLKF Radio], and so that was my orientation to the outside aspects of radio in addition to having a radio at home that we listened to for news and especially, where we could get the Radio Havana [Radio Havana Cuba] very easily. It was easy to get. My father [John R. Smith, Sr.] would just turn it on and listen to the newscasters in Spanish--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and to the music. And so--
Speaker 1: Well, this radio show idea is intriguing. So you and your sister were on the radio for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what--
Speaker 2: We had a weekly program.
Speaker 1: What was it called?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was the 'Smith Sisters Quartet' [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you played the piano for 'em?
Speaker 2: I played the piano.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And, but we--
Speaker 1: So you must have been--they must have been pretty good, you know, to get a spot on the radio, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, we weren't paid anything (laughter). I don't, I don't think we were paid.
Speaker 1: Was that common for, for the people in your neighborhood to be on the radio?
Speaker 2: No. Yeah, and, you know, a small town, and, of course, if you--I don't think we were exceptionally talented, you know. We were not, we lived in a different generation. If we lived in the new generation, it would have been different, but we appeared on the 'Major Bowes Amateur Hour' in North Carolina, as a matter of fact. But we were at least of that quality. You know, we used to perform for church groups and tourists groups and other things like that. So we were sort of in the early stages of an entertainment world. But the radio broadcast was a higher class, I think, of--than merely performing for a group here in a hall or a group there. But it was--I don't know how long we did it, but it was a weekly program. And I remember getting ready to go down to the radio station (laughter) and going down there, and when the light would come on, we would start singing.
Speaker 1: What was your repertoire? What did you all sing, pretty much?
Speaker 2: Well, some church type songs, but novelty songs, you know, and it was not jazz, and it was not folk songs.
Story_ID: 611141
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the radio show ['Smith Sisters Quartet' (ph.)]. And what--it came on--how many times a week were you all on?
Speaker 2: Once a week.
Speaker 1: Once a week.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get paid for it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember. If we were paid, it wasn't a lot. But as I reflect back on it, I can hardly see us, regular performers on a radio station [WLAK Radio; WLKF Radio, Lakeland, Florida], an established radio station, without receiving some compensation, whatever it happened to have been. But I have no recollection of seeing money being paid by check or by cash. But I, I think we must have received some kind of compensation.
Speaker 1: So you think your sisters probably handled that.
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Eva Love Smith] was our manager (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mother, oh, your mother, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was, it was, it was a fairly formalized entertainment system. And so we didn't have agents, but we would have bookings to perform here, to perform there and to perform here. And, but the radio station was a regular activity that was over a sustained period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year is this? Or what years were you on the radio?
Speaker 2: It was about--I have to figure how old I was.
Speaker 1: Were you over ten?
Speaker 2: I was over ten. I was either eleven or twelve. I think I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Think about 1938, '39 [1939] maybe (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, about '38 [1938]. I'm--
Speaker 1: Thirty-five [1935], '35 [1935], okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm reminded that the year '39 [1939] is part of that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was '38 [1938], '39 [1939] and probably '40 [1940].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, puts it in perspective. All right, so, now, that's something. Now, did you have aspirations to be an entertainment at that time? Did you really think that you would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I, I was just good at everything I did, and I was very good at playing the piano (laughter) and so. But for me, everything I did was more fun than anything else, rather than aspirations. And I was at one time a music major in college. But I realized that I would never be a performer.
Story_ID: 611142
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go back to--well, we're gonna--we'll get to college, but let's go back to grade school, I guess. So, you--I mean, or, well, we could go to--
Speaker 2: Well, we don't have to go that far?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, high school. Now, where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: (Pause).
Speaker 1: Or did you go to junior high school first? Was there a junior high?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't separate them. I went through ninth grade at Washington Park School in Lakeland [Florida] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to a private school in the tenth grade in Maitland, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a school called Hungerford [Robert Hungerford Normal and Industrial School, Eatonville, Florida], H-U-N-G-E-R-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Hungerford, okay.
Speaker 2: And Maitland is best known as the home of Zora Neale Hurston, the great writer. But in the State of Florida in that time, there were two, what we called boarding schools. One, Fessenden Academy [Fessenden Elementary School, Ocala, Florida], which I did not go to, and Hungerford, which I went to. So the two boarding schools were rivals with each other. And so if you went to Fessenden, you thought you were better than those who went to Hungerford, and if you went to Hungerford, you thought you were better than those who went to Fessenden. But you were better than all the kids who went to public schools (laughter), so, but--
Speaker 1: So how did you get selected for Hungerford? How did that happen?
Speaker 2: I had attended a church related conference during the summer after my ninth grade of school. And the conference was sponsored by the Methodist church. And the people in the office of the Methodist church who were responsible for things like that decided to offer me a scholarship to go to Hungerford School. And so that's how I happened to be there.
Story_ID: 611143
Speaker 1: Now, I know Dr. William H. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] was very important in your life. Now, when and where did you meet Dr. Gray?
Speaker 2: After my year at Hungerford [Robert Hungerford Normal and Industrial School, Eatonville, Florida], I met Dr. Gray when he was the president of what was then called Florida Normal College in St. Augustine, Florida [Florida Normal and Industrial College]. The school is now located in Miami [Miami Gardens, Florida]. It's called Florida Baptist University [sic. Florida Memorial University] or something like that in Miami. But Dr. Gray decided that I was very bright, and convinced my parents [Eva Love Smith and John R. Smith, Sr.] to allow him to take over my education. I never graduated from high school. I completed tenth grade at Hungerford and then entered college from tenth grade. So I never had eleventh and twelfth grade. And so that was the beginning of my relationship with Dr. Gray.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they could do that. He--in those days, they could just make sure that you're--they could start you when they wanted, you know, I guess early without--
Speaker 2: Well, and, and it was a little more complicated than that. Robert Hutchins [Robert Maynard Hutchins], the president of Chicago--University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] had instituted a program for early entry to take quote bright kids unquote, from tenth grade and start them on a college career. And Hutchins' group was called the Quiz Kids, and in the educational field, the idea that bright young people need not stay in high school through twelfth grade in order to be successful college students, became sort of a pattern of imitation. And Dr. Gray had just gotten his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and was very much into experimenting in the educational field. And he subjected me to a battery of tests and determined that I had great potential and decided that I would be a successful experiment in moving from tenth grade into college and to do anything that I wanted to do. And so that was how it happened, and, of course, it--it's a complicated long story of what my college career was from that point on. But nevertheless, as I look back on it, it made sense. You know, I, I didn't understand it at the time because I felt that I was a guinea pig, and, but I now understand. I've, I've had courses in psychology and I understand the educational process, and I understand all of those things. And I understand what he was doing, but at the time he was doing it, I didn't understand it where he would sit down and say, these are the questions you will take, one, two, three, four, five. And you don't have to take it here, and you don't have to take it there, and you will do this and you'll do that, and you'll do this, and you'll do that. And he had it all figured out. And it--ultimately, I got control of my own education. But--
Speaker 1: Well, did you resist? I mean did you find it oppressive at first that everything was planned out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I, I really, I enjoyed it while it happened. It was only when I was getting older that I felt that I should not let somebody else control my life, including the courses that I would take in school.
Story_ID: 611144
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it worked for a while, then you started trying to, you start kind of chaffing at it a little bit.
Speaker 2: Right, see, and just as quickly, background, Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] decided I would go to medical school. I learned that I could not stand the sight of blood. So medical school was out. And so ultimately, he decided I would go to law school. I didn't wanna go to law school, but I did [at the University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]. And the, the pathway to law school was a very complicated one. I wanted to, initially, I wanted to be a psychiatrist and I found that would have to go to medical school. So psychiatry was out. I decided to go into social work. And I was dead set to go into social work as a career. And Dr. Gray decided in directing me or counseling me that if I went to, into social work, I'd spend three years getting trained for something where I'd be working for somebody else, and why not spend those three years in law school, where I would be independent. And at the time he said that to me, I resented it because it was in my opinion, controlling my destiny. But he was right. And I found that going to law school was not that much different than social work. In fact, I'd been on the social work faculty at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] for a number of years. And, but at any rate, I was telling a group of young lawyers the other day that I was a reluctant lawyer. I never wanted to be a lawyer. I was a reluctant judge. I never wanted to be a judge, but in retrospect, I can't think of any career that I would have had that I have enjoyed as much as I have enjoyed my career in the legal field.
Story_ID: 611145
Speaker 1: Did you feel at the time that you were exceptionally bright? I mean you were told that by people, but did you, did you kind of feel like you were, and said, yeah, I'm, I'm smarter than these other people (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, even though I'm a very modest person, I'm also very arrogant. And I've always felt that I was brighter than the average person (laughter). My wife [Eleanor Martinez Smith] says my parents [Eva Love Smith and John R. Smith, Sr.] gave me a very strong self-concept. But for me to make an A in a course was no big deal, you know. Can everybody make A's, you know? And when I was at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], where I did most of my work, they had a, a process where you could challenge a course. You could register in a course, and challenge it and take the examination, and you wouldn't have the course. I did a number of my, my credits by challenging the courses. And, but, again, not a big deal to me because, can't everybody do that? And, but I think it, it isn't a matter of believing that I'm brighter than anybody else--although I sometimes jokingly say it, but it is having confidence. I never had a feeling of negative worth. I've never felt that there was anything I wanted to do that I couldn't do. The things that I know I cannot do, I cannot practice medicine. I cannot do surgery. I am baffled by mathematics. And I passed that on to my children (laughter). But there are things that I know I can't do, and it's sort of a matter of self-preservation, you see. You don't do something you know you cannot do, but you do the things that you think you can do, and you do them, and you find out, why, yes, I'm very good at that. And so, back to your original question, I, I never gave it the kind of thought that I'm better than somebody, but I've been in classes where I was surprised that people were not as well informed as I was, at any level, graduates level, even in law school. And--
Speaker 1: Now, when you were coming along, did you--were you exposed to a lot of newspaper? I know you said you got the Spanish language newspapers from Havana [Cuba], but did you get the Courier or the Defender or the Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I read all of those papers--
Speaker 1: All of, okay.
Speaker 2: --and very familiar with them. As a matter of fact, at one stage in my life, I worked for the Philadelphia Afro-American, and, but I was familiar with all of them, Chicago Defender, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Afro-American series of papers around the country and so.
Story_ID: 611146
Speaker 1: So when you left Hungerford [Robert Hungerford Normal and Industrial School, Eatonville, Florida], you went to--
Speaker 2: St. Augustine [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida].
Speaker 1: St. Augustine's.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for--
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: And then Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] became the president of Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --the following year. And--
Speaker 1: Now, St. Augustine is a black Episcopal college, right?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist.
Speaker 2: Black Baptist college.
Speaker 1: Oh, black Baptist, okay.
Speaker 2: And Florida A and M is a state college. It's not Florida A and M University. But, and I was part of the Gray family. I, I sort of--I consider myself as much a Gray as much as I consider myself a Smith. So in Dr. Gray's family, his wife [Hazel Yates Gray] now is ninety-two years old, and she's like a mother to me. And his son, [HistoryMaker] William H. Gray, III is like a brother to me. And their daughter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's the congressman, right?
Speaker 2: The former congressman.
Speaker 1: Former congressman from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, and he--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and he was president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] until he retired about five years ago. But when the Grays would move, I would move. So when they left from St. Augustine [Florida], I went to Tallahassee [Florida] at Florida A and M, and it was then, during that period of time that I decided to go into the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had you finished college at this point?
Speaker 2: No, I had two years of college.
Speaker 1: So, okay. You decided to join the Army?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--is this kind of like teenage rebellion or something or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In a manner of--
Speaker 1: Well, the war was going on, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, World War II. I was then beginning to feel I was, was seventeen and getting into the age of eighteen. And we had to register for the draft. And I registered for the draft in Tallahassee. And unknown to me, Dr. Gray got a deferment for me. And I wondered why they were not drafting me, and I went to the draft board, and they said, you have a deferment. So in my rebellion, I had my draft board transferred to Lakeland [Florida] where nobody ever heard of Dr. Gray. And I signed a request for voluntary induction. And I got my notice to report for duty, and Dr. Gray was out of town, and I left a note on his desk that says, "Goodbye, I've gone to the Army," (laughter). And it was sort of liberation and rebellion, you know, I, I had just turned eighteen years of age, and I wanted to get control of my life. And I--it, I went in the Army in July of 1945, and the war was still underway in both the Pacific Theater and the European Theater. But by the time I got into the Army, the war was over in--I think it was over in Europe before in Japan. But--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: So I found myself in the peacetime Army (laughter). And I had gone in, in order to do hand to hand combat with the Japanese. I didn't know any Japanese, American or otherwise, and so my concept of the world was, the world consists of Americans who were whites, blacks, Cubans and Indians [Native American]. And then there were these strange people, the Japanese, who were killing our people, and I wanted to go into hand to hand combat with the Japanese. That was my eighteen year old concept of what I could do. And having grown up believing I could do anything I wanted to do, that was it.
Story_ID: 611147
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have an idea in those days of--I mean what was your--did you have any idea of the racial discrimination that was going on in the armed services during the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: Not before I went, but when I went in, because I was in an all-segregated unit.
Speaker 1: Did people--you know, people often say that. Now, I just wondered did--the soldiers that returned never talked about that or people didn't talk about the fact that the [U.S.] Army was segregated and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, they, they had--we recently, incidentally, had an incident that came to light in Seattle [Washington] where some black soldiers at Fort Lewis [Washington] got into a fight with some Italian prisoners of war, and one of the prisoners of war was hanged. And they court martialed forty black soldiers with one law officer representing them, and no evidence. And they, they have now been pardoned. But all of 'em were dead except--there's only one still alive. And that was endemic of the segregated pattern in the United States Armed Forces where the prisoners of war were treated better than the blacks. Now, I was stationed at Camp Lee, Virginia, which is now Fort Lee, Virginia. And I was in a company--it was all-black. We had no black officers. All the officers were white. And at one point, there one black second lieutenant who was temporarily assigned to our group, which was about one quarter of the whole post. And, but they had German prisoners of war and Italian prisoners of war who were treated like whites. They could go in the white PXs [post exchange]. We could not go in the white PXs. But it was a very--for me, it was a very interesting thing because I had professional skills. I was a shorthand, a, a--I was a champion shorthand writer. I could do two hundred words a minute in Gregg shorthand, and they needed shorthand stenographers in the court martial system. And so somehow or the other because they knew my background and knew my records and all, I got transferred into the court martial system as a court reporter. And I never did basic training. And so I was promoted to staff sergeant and after six weeks, and so here was I a court reporter. And subsequently, because of the change in personnel, I ended up heading the court martial section in that, in that division. And it had nothing whatever to do with my going to law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]. If I had to use my court martial experiences, a basis for going into law, I never would have done it. But it was--in the court martial section, even though we were in a segregated division, the work in the court martial section was integrated. And it was--I, I think I had left the Army before Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the armed services. I was discharged from the Army in November of 1946. I was there from July, 1945 to November, 1946. And I think Truman desegregated the services in 1948. But the segregated Army, segregated Army was a part--then, another--I was manager of a theater at Camp Lee that was, you know, another hustle. That was an integrated theater. And I was the manager, and I got paid for it. And, but it's a very interesting aspect of segregated existence and here was a, a large camp that was totally segregated, but the theaters were not. And so here am I, this eighteen year old, staff sergeant who is black who's managing the theater. And, but that's a, a footnote to the segregated existence.
Speaker 1: Now, that's--I think a lot of people expect when they're looking at history to see consistency, but there--it's, I think somebody said once, the first thing to understand about American race is that it's crazy.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, so it's not--
Speaker 2: It doesn't follow a pattern at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, the idea--that's hard--so, it's an integrated theater, and yet the Army is segregated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they treat the prisoners of war better than they do the black soldiers. So, it's just, it's a mess, you know, it sounds like. So, at any rate, so, but through your skills, you didn't have to take basic training or anything because you were a stenographer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I had three weeks of basic training, but I was taken out of basic training--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and assigned to a court martial section.
Story_ID: 611148
Speaker 1: So, well, what happened when you got out of--what did, what did Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] say when he read the note? I mean were you--did you get--what was his response? Did he ever catch up with you and--
Speaker 2: Well, the answer is yes and no. But it's--he understood what was happening to me. And he had the last word, however, because he helped me to get discharged from the [U.S.] Army. And it was that the Army came up with a regulation that anybody who left college to come to the Army would be immediately discharged if they could get readmitted to college. And I called Dr. Gray and told him, and readmitted me to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. And he never let me forget it, that I ran away from him, that I had to call on him (laughter) to get me out of my dilemma, which was to get out of the Army.
Speaker 1: So you got tired of it after a while. I mean once you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --got in it, you got kind of tired of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--it's no fun being in, at that point, the peacetime Army when everything was in transition. And I had applied to OCS [Officer Candidate School] and the, the person I call my great white father, the colonel who was the commander of our division said I was too young. And in a sense I was glad because if I had gone to OCS and had gotten my commission, I would have ended up in the Korean War, and I could have been killed. And so life is like that. I, I've had a number of fortunate occurrences with the [U.S.] military in that generation. I was on the list for the Tuskegee Air Force [U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force]. And in those days, if you scored a certain level on the AGCT [Army General Classification Test], you were automatically determined to be eligible for that. So I was on the list to go to Tuskegee [Alabama] to be trained as an airman, but I was also a supernumerary. They were short of persons to go to Camp Lee [Fort Lee, Virginia], and they pulled me off the Tuskegee list and sent me to Camp Lee. And even though at the time, I was not sure what was happening, in retrospect, I think that that was a wise decision by the Army, however incompetent it was, not to let me go to Tuskegee because I had never been in a plane. I think I would have washed out or I would have been fearful or I might have been killed or something like that. And I was in no danger at Camp Lee. You know, I was living a comfortable life at Camp Lee (laughter). And I didn't have to do any of that (laughter). So at any rate, my military experience in those days was that serendipitous, serendipitous.
Story_ID: 611149
Speaker 1: So you come back, you go back to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I guess with Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.]. And it was shortly after you came back that he moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you ended up at--
Speaker 2: I went to Temple.
Speaker 1: Going to Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, did he get a position at Temple himself or what was he--
Speaker 2: No, he, he was--his father [William H. Gray, Sr.] was minister of a church, Bright Hope Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Dr. Gray became the minister of that, and his son, Bill [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], followed him until he retired from the church. But the church was across the street from Temple, Temple University. But a brief, short history, Dr. Gray was run out of the State of Florida as president of Florida A and M because he refused to follow the direction of the governor to stop blacks from applying to white schools. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, for graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there's a point at which there's a bit of accommodation to system changes, but it's, it's much more complicated than that, and I don't intend to go into it. But he was literally dismissed as president of Florida A and M and moved back home to Philadelphia, which was his home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, he did not continue as an educational administrator, certainly not at the university level. But he, in addition to being the full time minister of his father's church, he had a number of different positions. He was the executive director of the Philadelphia Police Review Board. He was the executive director of what was the forerunner of the Fair Employment Practices Commission of Pennsylvania [Pennsylvania State Council for Fair Employment Practices Commission]. He was the editor of the Philadelphia Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers], and my pattern of my relationship with Dr. Gray was whatever he did, I was always his administrative assistant so that--and I was in Philadelphia when he was at the Afro-American, so I was the business manager to the Philadelphia Afro-American. I was away from Philadelphia when he was with the Fair Employment Practices Commission and when he was with the Police Review Board. But he, he did a lot of things because of his creative energy and his intelligence, so that he was not restricted to one area, though being minister of the church was a significant, primary occupation. And he was the minister of Bright Hope Church until he died, I'm not gonna--I think in 1965 that he died. But, and I went to Temple in part because it was convenient. Now, we lived three blocks away and the church was across the street (laughter) from Temple and Dr. Gray's background was the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And it was a long commute for me to go from North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to the University of Pennsylvania, but it was simpler for me to get admitted to Temple than it was to get admitted to Penn. The tuition was lower. At that time, tuition at Temple was five hundred dollars a year. The University of Pennsylvania was three thousand. And so, even though Dr. Gray would have preferred that I go to Penn, it was simpler for me to go to Temple (laughter), and so I went to school at Temple.
Story_ID: 611150
Speaker 1: So you had like, at this point, what, you have like a year to complete or less than a year (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's hard to measure it in terms of years. I accumulated so many college credits that if I had to separate it into years, it would be certainly more than four years. But as a practical matter, the, my--any credits, and I only had a few credits from Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and a few credits from Florida Normal [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida], and they were not recognized and so--unless you, your credits were from an accredited college or university, they were not transferrable. So as a practical matter, the credits that I got were either earned by actually taking courses at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--I took some courses at Penn, or challenging.
Speaker 1: Challenging classes, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes, right.
Speaker 1: So that's when that really came in handy.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. So--
Speaker 1: Challenge the classes that you already had at Florida A and M.
Speaker 2: --when it came time to add up the credits for a degree, I had enough credits for a degree. So I got my degree in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay. I think last time we talked about some of the personalities at Temple, favorite teachers and such. Did you have any--who were your--
Speaker 2: Well, I had one particular favorite, Nate Levine [Nathan Levine], L-E-V-I-N-E, who introduced me to a concept called group dynamics. And he was sort of my inspiration for wanting to go into social work because I saw group dynamics as being very much akin to social work.
Speaker 1: Now what is--you said, group dynamics?
Speaker 2: Group dynamics (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Group dynamics, okay. Okay, well, what is group dynamics? I guess it probably sounds, it's a kind of word that people think they know what it is, but what is it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: It is the interrelationship between people in groups, whether it's a family group or a classroom or a community group, and we used to use, what we called sociometric charts to chart out communications between people in a group. And that was a simplified explanation for group dynamics. There was a, a professor at Columbia University [New York, New York] named Kurt Lewin, K-U-R-T, L-E-W-I-N, who wrote a book called 'Practical Applications on Democracy' [sic. 'Experiments on Autocratic and Democratic Atmospheres']. And that was our handbook in group dynamics as taught by Nate Levine and who was a product of Columbia, but he was teaching at Temple. And so of all the people that I remember and in my own field, which was business education, there were nice people, but not people that I would remember fondly. You know, if I--if they were still alive, and I'd run into them, I'd greet them with affection because I fortunately have been able to relate well to my professors. And I don't know exactly why, but if any of my professors at Temple were still alive, they'd remember me, and partly because I was probably the only non-white person (laughter) in their class among other things. And back in those days, I know in the department that I was in, I only knew one other black person. And his name was Jeffrey Jones [ph.], and I remember Jeffrey very well. But, again, back in the '50s [1950s], at a school like Temple, which was sort of equivalent to what community colleges are now. But it was a university, and then a private school. It's now a state school. But you could be in class all day and never see another person of color. Times have changed.
Story_ID: 611151
Speaker 1: Now, there was--we talked last time, I think, that I guess when you were on your way out, somehow, I mean you did meet Bill Cosby, I think, when he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: He wasn't--
Speaker 2: Bill Cosby came long after me.
Speaker 1: Long after you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, who was it that met Cosby then if it wasn't you. Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill is younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought so. But I--it seemed like we mentioned that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left, I left Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in 1952, and I think he was still in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would have been there in the late '50s [1950s], I guess, in the late '50s [1950s], yeah, 'cause he emerged as a comedian in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: And for a long time, it was an embarrassment to Temple to be known only through Bill Cosby (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And so (laughter), Temple has much more to offer than, than Bill Cosby, but he's a wonderful person, and I am proud to be a graduate of the same school that he graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you graduated in 1952, you said?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952], okay. And did you immediately go into grad- graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, there, again, it's yes and no. I graduated in February of '52 [1952], and I started law school in September of '52 [1952]. So there was a few months from the time I graduated until I started, but it was for all practice purposes, immediate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go to Temple's law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Law school here at University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay, University of Washington. Now, how did you come up with that, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to University of Washington?
Speaker 2: Okay, and this is another Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] story. Dr. Gray had gotten me admitted to University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I had not applied. And in those days, you could do that. Harold Stassen was president of University of Pennsylvania, and Dr. Gray knew Harold Stassen very well. They both--he ran for [U.S.] Congress and Harold ran for the [U.S.] Senate on the same ticket. And so in those days, the president of a university could influence the admission to one of its schools. And so Dr. Gray, through Harold Stassen, had gotten me admitted to University of Pennsylvania Law School. And at that point, I was resisting going to law school, and, but I especially resented the fact that he had gotten me admitted to a school that I never applied for. So I decided then I have to get away. So I came to Seattle [Washington] to visit my mother who had lived in Seattle for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she moved to Seattle during the time that you were in the war [World War II, WWII] and all that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a sister who was in civil service in Seattle, and she bought a house for my mother when my parents [Eva Love Smith and John R. Smith, Sr.] were divorced in 1945.
Speaker 1: Oh, your parents were divorced in '45 [1945]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so I, I came to Seattle to visit my mother.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get into that, I wanted to just throw this out for anybody watching this. Harold Stassen ran for president more times than anybody in history I believe right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Right, isn't that true?
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, he was known as the perennial candidate for president.
Speaker 1: Right, it became a big joke in the '60s [1960s], Harold Stassen, you mentioned his name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, you knew he was always running for president. And it was a serious thing at first, and then it became a joke--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that he would always--he was always gonna run.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd throw that out there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 611152
Speaker 1: Now, in Seattle [Washington], you come out to visit--
Speaker 2: I came out to visit my mother [Eva Love Smith], and I decided that if they had a law school here, I would go to that law school and not go to the University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So I found out, one, they had a law school, and I went out to the law school. And the assistant dean who later became a very good friend of mine said, "Do you have a transcript?" And I had a copy of my transcript in my pocket. And I pulled it out, and he looked at it, and said, "You're admitted." And that's the way I got admitted to law school.
Speaker 1: That's all it took?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). And in those days, all--in order to be admitted to law schools at--certainly at the University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington], you had to be a graduate of an accredited college or university, have a degree in anything other than music or agriculture, and have two semesters of accounting. And because my degree was in business administration [from Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I had accounting. So I had all the qualifications for it, and I had a 3.89 average [grade point average], and so it was easy for me to get admitted on sight. And so that was the beginning of my three years of law school. And I decided I was going to go the first year and quit. But after one year of law school, I enjoyed it so much I decided I would keep going.
Speaker 1: So you'd go one year and quit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was plan.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you plan to do after you quit?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I have no idea (laughter). But I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you didn't think you were gonna like it?
Speaker 2: I would have gotten Dr. Gray [William H. Gray, Jr.] off my back because he said I had to go to law school. And so I figured if I go for one year and it's unsuccessful, he would not urge me any further. But law school was, for me, a magnificent experience. I literally fell in love with my professors. I liked the courses, and I enjoyed every bit of it for three years, and my classmates who were my friends then and are my friends now. It was just three years of very, very pleasant experience. And so I got my degree from the law school, and I decided I was not going to practice law.
Story_ID: 611153
Speaker 1: So you got your degree in 1955 [from the University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay, and decided you were not gonna practice law.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you're resisting at every juncture, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and the part of the process--and this is how things happen in the evolution of things, even though I was a top performer in law school, no law firm would interview me because I was not white. So one of my professors called three of his friends who were on the state supreme court and said, you need to interview him for a law clerk position. So I was interviewed by Matt Hill [Matthew W. Hill] who hired me and two other supreme court justices and the next day I got a letter from Matt Hill saying, if you're still of the mind to work as my law clerk, I'd like to have you. And so that's how I became a law clerk at the state supreme court.
Speaker 1: And so Matt Hill was a justice of the Washington Supreme Court (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Washington State supreme court.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Were you the first African American to serve as an intern for him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or for any of the judges?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And how was that experience? Now, you--you're--
Speaker 2: Actually, the professional experience was great. Matt--Judge Hill was like a father to me. And I had several other of my classmates who were also law clerks, so we had our own little community. The real thing that I didn't like was at that time, Olympia [Washington], which is the state capital, was a highly segregated community. And one of the other judges who did not offer me a job later, who told me in a confidential conversation, that he wanted to hire me, but he didn't think I could find a place to live in Olympia. And (laughter) this is a supreme court justice who admits that. And, but I had just been married, and Judge Hill's then law clerk, who was a personal friend of mine arranged with his landlord for us to move into the apartment that he and his wife moved out of. And so I didn't have to look for an apartment, but we were the only persons of color living in Olympia in 1955. And, but the, the part of the experience in Olympia, then a very small town, was blatant discrimination. My wife went to a beauty parlor to get her set, and the young woman saw her brown face and ran out screaming. And it happened that the manager of the beauty shop was a member of the Kiwanis club [Kiwanis International] that I was a member of, and he calmed her down and had them take care of my wife's hair. And my wife doesn't have a curl in her hair, but this woman said she had never done colored people's hair. And, you know, this--that was a shocking experience for my wife who's--comes from Hawaii and did not understand the dynamics of racial discrimination. But then, my first son, Carlos [Carlos Smith], was born in Olympia, and the hospital in Olympia had never had a child of color born in the hospital in 1955. And Elie [Eleanor Martinez Smith] was partially sedated, and heard the nurses taking book to determine whether he would come out looking like a monkey. This was in 1955. So, Booth Gardner who appointed me to the supreme court said, "What do you think about Olympia?" And I said, "Booth, let me tell you what I think about Olympia," (laughter). "This one experience, well, do you think I like Olympia?" And so that was fifty-three years ago. And, but times have changed in Olympia now. You see all kinds of persons walking around and functioning and in the hospitals, I'm sure they have persons of color who are on the staff at the hospitals now. But fifty-three years ago, that's what Olympia was like and it was like Tupelo, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 611154
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you met your wife, now. Now, is she a native, is she a native of Hawaii (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elie [Eleanor Martinez Smith] was born in Hawaii. She's ethnically Puerto Rican.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her grandparents came from Puerto Rico to Hawaii, and her parents were born in Hawaii. And her siblings and their family was born in and grew up in Hawaii. Elie graduated from the University of Hawaii [University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii] in 1953, '54 [1954], and wanted to have a mainland teaching experience. And she applied to the California Department of Education, which referred her application to the Washington department of education [Washington State Board of Education]. And they referred it to an elementary school in the boondocks in Seattle [sic. Burien, Washington]. And the principal had just been to Hawaii that summer. So he saw this application from the University of Hawaii, and she was hired on the basis of that application. And, fortunately, she had good grades and all of that other stuff that goes along. But her first experience on the mainland was when she came to Seattle to teach. She had been to New York [New York] for a trip once, but she was in what we sometimes referred to as a bedroom community where married couples with children. And she was a single woman out of her element, and she decided to associate with young people and decided to go to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and registered for a course in Spanish. And I was in law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington] at the time. And one of my law school classmates had gone to the table with her in the cafeteria. And we had a habit of moving in if we saw one of our classmates with a gorgeous young woman, and take over the conversation. So we sort of did that, and I found out that she was Latina and from a cultural standpoint, we had that meeting. I found out she was interested in the Spanish language, which was her parents' language, and her grandparents' language and we had that in common. So I decided that I had to get to know her.
Story_ID: 611155
Speaker 1: So I found out from my classmate who had just casually sat at the table with her at the cafeteria, that she was teaching at a school in Burien [Washington] out in the boondocks, that she had a class at the university [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] on Thursday nights, and that she would have her meal at the cafeteria on Thursdays. So I decided to camp out at the cafeteria on Thursdays. I abandoned my friends in law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington], and I went over and would wait at the cafeteria until she arrived. She arrived, and I followed her through the cafeteria line and as it would happen, she had left her wallet at home, and did not have money to pay for her meal. And I said to her, "Would you let me pay for your meal," something like seventy-four cents or something like that. And she reluctant--she had no choice. And so she let me pay for her meal, and I said, "Can I sit with you at the table?" And so she was very pleasant and very, a decent young woman. And then my friends from law school discovered us and decided to pull the same stunt on us that we had tried to pull before. And because I knew none of my classmates understood Spanish, I just shifted into my limited Spanish with Elie [Eleanor Martinez Smith] so that we were able to keep them from invading our privacy by using the Spanish language which is an interesting thing. But then I found out that she regularly came to the university on Thursdays, and I was always there. And I would go through the cafeteria line with her. She always had her own money, but I found out that she was getting the Greyhound bus on the highway from where she lived out near the airport [Seattle Tacoma International Airport, SeaTac, Washington]. And at that time, the highways did not have lights, and I was shocked that this young woman, naive young woman would get the Greyhound bus and go into the downtown bus station and get the transit bus from the bus station to the university and would reverse that after an evening class. So I said to her, "Would you let me take you home?" I didn't own a car, but my sister did, and I could always use her car (laughter). So she said, "No, I do not wish to be involved." I said, "Fine. Would you let me take you home when it rains?" And she said, "Yes" (laughter). And prayed for rain. And it rained (laughter) every Thursday night for the next couple of months.
Speaker 2: Well, you're in Seattle [Washington] too. That's a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I, and I knew it would rain, but she didn't know it would rain. And that's how our relationship developed, and as it happened, of course, that, that led into a, a true relationship. And we've been married now for fifty-three years. So it had to have been a good relationship (laughter). But that's a long story, and you, you asked how did I meet her. And that's more than you wanted to know.
Speaker 2: No, that's a good, that's a good story to pass down to your children, I mean how you, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the rewards of being persistent.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 611156
Speaker 1: We were just talking about how you met your wife [Eleanor Martinez Smith], and so when you start with the, with Judge--is it Hills?
Speaker 2: Matthew Hill [Matthew W. Hill].
Speaker 1: Matthew Hill at the--
Speaker 2: State supreme court (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Washington State supreme court [Washington Supreme Court].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, and you're married, and you're living in Olympia [Washington], the only black couple in the town (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So take us from there.
Speaker 2: I left the supreme court and was a deputy prosecuting attorney for King County in Seattle [Washington]. And--
Speaker 1: Now, when did you leave the supreme court? I mean--were you an intern for a year or what?
Speaker 2: Right, it's, the position is law clerk. It's--
Speaker 1: Law clerk, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're professional lawyers who are hired to assist the judges in evaluating cases and writing opinions. We don't write the opinions, but we work in developing the opinions. So it's a professional position for graduate lawyers. And it's called judicial clerks, is what they were called.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was there for less than a year, and sort of an unusual circumstance, the prosecuting attorney for King County wanted to hire me and got Judge Hill to release me early so that I could come to work in the prosecutor's office. And the reasons for that are complicated, partly political, but partly also because he probably recognized that I would be a great addition to his office. And in those days, they had one black in the office, but the prosecuting attorney only had one of each ethnic group. He had one Italian, one Greek (laughter) and one black. And I was the--he made an exception and had two blacks in his office. But the other person was leaving anyway. But for some reason or the--and I, I'm not altogether certain why he wanted to hire me. There was some special reason, and I think it was a case that came up where he thought that I had the skills to develop it. I'm not altogether certain, but I was assigned to the criminal division and I prosecuted criminal cases. And I was very good at it. I was good at everything I tried, and so why not be a good prosecutor. So I had significant cases, jury cases and I don't think in terms of winning or losing cases, but I never--I lost one case, which I should have lost. I lost two cases. In a four year career, I, I lost two cases.
Speaker 1: Out of how many in total, would you say?
Speaker 2: Oh, I probably tried two hundred cases.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, all of which were jury cases, and the jury believed me, and the two cases that I lost were non-jury cases, and the judge was bright enough to recognize the cases should never have been filed. One was a jury case where the jury acquitted, and the other was a non-jury case where the judge acquitted. The cases should never have been filed.
Speaker 1: So were you--you were assigned cases rather than--you didn't necessarily--
Speaker 2: I did not select my cases (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't select the cases, okay.
Speaker 2: They were assigned by the elected prosecuting attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the, the decision to file or not file was not the decision of the person who tried the case. So it was a matter of a police report being brought in and a particular staff person would review it, and decide to file or not file.
Story_ID: 611157
Speaker 1: What was the criminal justice system like in the State of Washington in those days? Did it--'cause, you know, we could generalize that the criminal justice system in the United States is a lot rougher on black people than everybody else. I mean that could be said and it has been said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are several dimensions to it. In the State of Washington, until very recently, we had the highest incarceration of blacks than any other state in the union.
Speaker 1: The highest rate, really, of incar- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And from a statistical standpoint, that has changed. And I don't know what the statistics are, but a study was made as recently as ten years ago that indicated that the disproportionate rate of African Americans or blacks in the penal system is significant. So we have been struggling to overcome that in many different ways. We have a certain punishment schedule like the federal court has where judges do not have discretion in cases. If a person is convicted offense A, you look at the chart, and it's either two years, five years, ten years, fifteen years and judges in the State of Washington do not have discretion to give probation anymore. But at the same time, that has not alleviated the problem of overrepresentation of persons of color in the penal system. And this includes Latinos as well as African Americans. And so Washington State, being a great liberal, northwest state, is anything but that when it comes to treatment of persons of color. And so--
Speaker 1: So do you think that--I know it's probably true in other states too, but you think maybe the whole idea of fear of, of someone who is different is the major reason for this, do you think or kind of a xenophobia?
Speaker 2: Well, historically, that may have been true, but I think that--and from a professional standpoint, I've been involved in this, I, for the last twenty years have been either the chairperson or the co-chairperson of a supreme court commission called the Washington State Minority and Justice Commission [Washington State Minority and Justice Task Force; Washington State Minority and Justice Commission]. And our mandate is to determine the existence of racial and ethnic bias in the administration of the court system by judges and to take steps to overcome it and to anticipate a possibility of racial and ethnic bias in the courts by judges and take creative steps to prevent it. This is a recognition that there are problems. I would like to believe that of the 450 judges in the State of Washington, they all want to be fair. Whether they are fair is something else. It depends on their background and their internalized instincts. But our commission puts on educational programs for judges who, what we commonly refer to as cultural awareness programs. We have consultants whom we pay to come in to put on programs for judges conferences, for the, what is called the Washington Judicial College, which is a yearly activity for newly elected or appointed judges. And so that's part of the process that we are going through in order to overcome the stigma of disproportionality of persons of color in the criminal justice system.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is, as we were saying, has long roots, going back to when you first started back in 19--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And beyond.
Story_ID: 611158
Speaker 1: When you were a prosecutor [in the King County Prosecuting Attorney Office], was there a disproportionate number of cases involving people of color that came before you?
Speaker 2: I was not aware of it. You know, I, I prosecuted blacks, and I prosecuted whites. I prosecuted wealthy people and I prosecuted poor people. And it never occurred to me while I was doing it that there was anything disproportionate about it. And I had a number of cases that were drug related. You know, we used to really hammer down on heroin addicts. It used to be a crime to be an addict until the supreme court [Washington Supreme Court] ruled otherwise. And so I can remember prosecuting cases in that he was an addict to wit, heroin. A person prosecuted, convicted and sent to prison for that. We can't do that anymore, thank heaven. At the time I was doing it, I didn't realize it, that it was wrong. And we, but back to the question of the realization of it, I simply was not aware of it. And I know that there was discrimination at the police level. I know that police officers were very discriminatory and I'm of the opinion and, and certainly historically aware that a black person was more likely to be arrested than a white person for the same offense. And the suspicion of persons of color, especially black people, by established police officers, if you're black, you must have committed a crime. Therefore, we're gonna stop you, and even though the stop may be illegal, they're gonna stop you anyway and harassment of persons who are not white.
Story_ID: 611159
Speaker 1: And the police agencies--we've had programs. I used to be involved in lectures at the police academy on human relations and all those other things. And we've gone through transitional periods where we want to overcome a problem, and, but not always. And there's always those persons in a group, the so called bad apple in the barrel, and I remember a police officer and I can--he's now dead, and I could refer to him. He was commonly known as Tex Roddam, R-O-D-D-A-M. And he was notoriously racist.
Speaker 2: What nationality was he? Tex?
Speaker 1: He was a white person.
Speaker 2: Roddam, what's his last name was--
Speaker 1: Roddam, R-O-D-D-A-M.
Speaker 2: Roddam Morrow [sic.]. What kind of a name? I don't--
Speaker 1: Roddam, R-O-D-D-A-M.
Speaker 2: Okay, oh, okay, Roddam.
Speaker 1: Roddam, and, and this is a short relation of an experience when I was municipal court judge. Tex Roddam was the arresting officer, and defense counsel on cross examination said, "Officer, isn't it true that you referred to my client as a nigger?" And Tex Roddam looked up, and he said, "Sure, they like to be called nigger. I've had 'em at my house for dinner," and he turned to me and said, "Judge, I'd even invite you to my house for dinner." And so, I wasn't totally shocked, but I was surprised that he would be stupid enough to do that and say that. So I said, "Mr. Roddam, I'd like to see you after this case is over." I dismissed the case. And I had him in my chambers, and I talked with him, and I said, "I'm going to educate you. I'm gonna give you some books to read. I'm gonna call the chief of police and I'm gonna have the chief of police talk with you." And the chief of police happened to be a personal friend of mine. I called him and said, "This guy is crazy. One of your officers and he's stupid enough, not only to think that, but to say that in open court." No discipline was taken on him, but from time to time, Tex Roddam would be disciplined because he was mistreating white people. And the moment he started mistreating white people, with the attitude that he had about black people, some attention was given to it. So he ended up getting suspended from the police department [Seattle Police Department], and then I think he was dismissed from the police department for that kind of be- behavior. But that's the experience that--I can place that year easily because I was on the municipal court [Municipal Court of Seattle] in 1965 and '66 [1966]. So it was as recently as 1966 that this occurred in court, where he admitted that he called the defendant a nigger and turned and said, "They like to be called nigger. Some of my best friends are niggers. I've had 'em at my house for dinner." And, you know, this guy, he's a nut--he was a nut then and was a nut when he died. But he's now dead, and so there's no problem in my identifying him. But that could happen in the Pacific Northwest, in the City of Seattle [Washington], the great liberal area where everybody is treated equally, and that it doesn't happen that way.
Story_ID: 611160
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's go back to--okay, and in the prosecutor's office [King County Prosecuting Attorney Office]. Now, you were at, you were at the prosecutor's office how long?
Speaker 2: From 1956 to 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what happened in 19--1960, is that when you go to the Kennedy administration [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]? Or did you go to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think I did go there in 1960, but I had left the prosecutor's office. I was in private practice for about a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And maybe I left the prosecutor in '59 [1959]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was in that office for four years. So the year of '56 [1956], '57 [1957] and '58 [1958], '59 [1959] would have been four years. So maybe I left because I went to Washington [D.C.] in 1960. And it was around January or February because my daughter [Felicia Smith Gittleman] was a brand new baby, like a few days old when I got a call from Bob Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].
Speaker 1: Now, did you know him before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--when Bob Kennedy was the chief counsel for the McClellan Committee, which had the long name of the Senate Committee on Improper Relations in the Labor and Management Field [sic. U.S. Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management], they were investigating, among other people, Dave Beck, who was Mr. Hoffa's [Jimmy Hoffa] predecessor as president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. And Mr. Beck lived in Seattle [Washington]. So Bob Kennedy was on the field, getting information, accumulated information to use against Dave Beck. The prosecuting attorney, pulled me as one of his brilliant prosecutors to meet with him and Bob Kennedy. And so when Bob would come to Seattle, I'd meet with him. And so that's how I had a semi-established relationship with him. So he knew who I was, and I knew who he was. And when his brother ran for president, I was then a Republican and partly because my prosecutor was a Republican and it required us to be Republicans in order to work in the office. But I was also a chairperson of Young Lawyers for Nixon [Young Lawyers for Nixon - Lodge], and so when his brother became president and appointed him attorney general, I got a call from a friend of mine who was his press assistant, who said, "Bob is gonna call you. When will you be available?" And so we set up the time for him to call me, and I got this call from him, and he said, "I'd like for you to come and work with me in Washington." And I said, "I can't." He said, "Why?" I said, "I'm a Republican. And I didn't vote for your brother." And he said, "I'm looking for lawyers and not politicians." So, I says, "Okay." So then subsequent conversations--I had several conversations with him, and then I said, "When do you want me to come to Washington?" And he said, "Tomorrow." And I said, "I can't. My wife is in the hospital. She just had a baby," (laughter), "and I have to talk with her." And so I said, "I'll call you back in a couple of days." And so I talked with Elie [Eleanor Martinez Smith], and she being the person that she is, said, "I cannot tell you what to do. You have to make your own decision, and whatever you decide is fine with me." And so I called Bob back and says, "Okay, I'll come to Washington." And that's how it began. And so I left Elie and the children here in Seattle, and went to Washington and began work in the justice department, directly under Bob Kennedy. And, but later on, I moved them--we built a house in northern Virginia, and I moved her and the children to Virginia, and then I proceeded to leave them at home because I was on the field all the time. I was running grand juries all over the country, and my principal office of operation was Los Angeles [California] and San Francisco [California] and ultimately, Chicago [Illinois], which was where we indicted Mr. Hoffa. But prior to that, I had prosecuted Dave Beck in Seattle for grand larceny, and he was convicted by a jury in the state court in Seattle in 1957, sentenced to fifteen years, but never served a day because the governor pardoned him. And the same happened with Mr. Hoffa, convicted in the Northern District of Illinois [U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois], sentenced to fifteen years, but he was pardoned by Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. So he never served a day of my case.
Story_ID: 611161
Speaker 1: Do these guys, these--Jimmy Hoffa, just to put it in historic--they were--Jimmy Hoffa was head of the Teamsters union, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Dave Beck was an associate--
Speaker 2: No, Dave Beck was president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, and when he retired, Mr. Hoffa was elected president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Dave Beck was followed by Mr. Hoffa as--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. And the, the connection between Bob Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and me and Dave Beck was that Dave Beck had taken the Fifth Amendment seven hundred and fifty times before the McClellan Committee [U.S. Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management]. And there were people who were insisting that he must have been a crook, and therefore, there should be some criminal prosecution. And for a combination of other political reasons, a grand jury was called in King County [Washington], which we rarely used. We--in the state court [King County Superior Court], we rarely used grand juries. But the bar association got the judges to call a grand jury, and the grand jury had the responsibility of finding something on Mr. Beck. And that was my job, to find something on Mr. Beck. So we--with that combination, a number of circumstances, we ended up with a very academic case of misappropriation of Teamster pension funds by selling Cadillacs belonging to the Teamsters union to his son's friends. And that's how we had the conviction for him in 1957. And so with that alleged success with Mr. Beck in Seattle [Washington], and Bob Kennedy's interests in him and Bob Kennedy's interests in getting Mr. Hoffa for some other reasons, that's how he decided to handpick a group of people to follow through on the investigations and the prosecutions because he was convinced that Mr. Hoffa was a crook. And part of our responsibility was to determine that.
Story_ID: 611162
Speaker 1: Now, over the years, it seemed to me, even as a little kid, watching this on TV, and I was a kid at the time, maybe ten or twelve--eleven or twelve, wasn't a little kid, but I was kid watching this. It seemed to me there was a lot of animosity between Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] and Jimmy Hoffa--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --it seemed to, it was, it seemed to be bigger than the, whatever--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --he did. And was it, is--do you have any idea--can you tell us anything about what, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --in the world that was about?
Speaker 2: I could tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When Bob was with the Senate committee [U.S. Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management], he was responsible for Mr. Hoffa being indicted for tampering with a government agent, a fellow named Cye Cheasty [John Cye Cheasty] who had an encounter with Hoffa in the men's room and Cye Cheasty was armed with a recorder. And there was some conversation or incident where Hoffa offered Cye Cheasty some money or something like that. But he was indicted in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]. Bob Kennedy had publicly stated that they had a good case against Mr. Hoffa, and that if he was not convicted, he, Bob Kennedy, would jump off the Capitol roof [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.]. The case went to trial in the District of Columbia. They had seven black jurors and six--whatever, it's twelve in total, so the others were white jurors.
Speaker 1: Five, yeah.
Speaker 2: And these events occurred which have some significance to the result. Hoffa was represented by Edward Bennett Williams, one of the greatest in the world. I absolutely adored him (laughter).  And, but Ed Williams brought in as his co-counsel a black woman lawyer from Los Angeles [California] who it turned out was Joe Louis' wife [Martha Jefferson]. Joe Louis was from Detroit [Michigan], and they arranged for Joe Louis to show up in the courtroom while the jury was in the courtroom. And Joe Louis went over to counsel table and greeted Hoffa very fondly. The Washington Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] had an article about Joe Louis and Jimmy Hoffa and had a picture of 'em on the front page. And this newspaper was mysteriously distributed to the homes of all the jurors. When the case finally came to conclusion, it resulted in a hung jury. So Mr. Hoffa then taunted Bob Kennedy and said, "Now, jump off the Capitol." And that was the beginning of their feud. And so it's a strange explanation for utilization of the power of government, but he had, had other reasons--had evidentiary reasons, but the feud between them, the feud between them was over that incident, over the Cye Cheasty case and the hung jury, and his taunting Bob by saying, "Now, jump off the building." But there was certainly more to it than that--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --and if I ever had the energy to write a book, I would write a book, but it's all in the back of my mind.
Story_ID: 611163
Speaker 1: So you were involved in the, in the prosecution of Jimmy Hoffa in '64 [1964], right, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're saying that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And you got a conviction, you said, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But he was pardoned by--
Speaker 2: Mr. Nixon.
Speaker 1: Mr. Nixon, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], now, is this--it just sounds like it's purely political. Is it? I mean is it, do you think, do you think it was purely political that Nixon would pardon Jimmy Hoffa?
Speaker 2: It's complicated, political, but I'll tell you what it was. Frank Fitzsimmons was Hoffa's closest friend, who was the caretaker president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters while Mr. Hoffa was in prison in Lewisburg [United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania], prison in Pennsylvania. Frank Fitzsimmons came to realize the great value of being president of the Teamsters union and decided that he didn't want his dear friend, Jimmy Hoffa, to return and reclaim his position as president of the Teamsters union. So Frank entered into an agreement or understanding with the parole board under the Nixon administration that Mr. Hoffa should be pardoned from prison, but disqualified from holding office in the union for five years. And so in return for that, Frank Fitzsimmons supposedly was to deliver the Teamster vote to the Republican Party, or Mr. Nixon. And so in the course of things, Mr. Hoffa was pardoned from his prison sentence in Lewisburg, which arose out of a Tennessee jury bribery case, and he was also pardoned from the conviction in Chicago which was my case. And then Mr. Hoffa sued the parole board for imposing this condition on him. Now, in the meantime, Mr. Hoffa disappeared and Frank Fitzsimmons was still president of the Teamsters union, and Frank is now dead. Frank had cancer. But at any rate, that's the story behind the pardon. And so the case that I had in Chicago, which had to be boxcared with the case out of Tennessee, he had to serve the sentence in Tennessee before he would begin serving the sentence out of the Chicago case. And he was pardoned from the Tennessee and also pardoned from the Chicago case. So he never served a day of time for the Chicago case, but he was in prison for the jury tampering case out of Tennessee. And the, his--he was in prison with a, another Teamster official and they were, let's see, Tony, Tony--I forget Tony's name, but they had a dispute out in the courtyard in the prison and Hoffa slapped Tony. Tony Pre- Pre- Provenzano, Tony Provenzano [Anthony Provenzano], slapped Tony, and the word is from the informant who allegedly knows the story behind it was that Tony Pro had a contract out for Jimmy Hoffa. And that was the ostensible reason for Hoffa's disappearance, that Tony Pro had a contract out for him. That may or may not be true, and I don't have details of it because I was not with the government at that time. So I don't have inside information, but at, anyway, that's the long story behind the political story, behind the pardon of Mr. Hoffa from his federal convictions.
Story_ID: 611164
Speaker 1: Now, on a personal le- level, did you, did--was it, did you receive any threats or any bribes or anything yourself? I mean did they try to, you know, pull you off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never.
Speaker 1: --lure you off the case?
Speaker 2: Never, and I wasn't that significant, you know, I was managing the grand jury of some lawyers running around the country, but actually, strangely enough, I felt that--and Mr. Hoffa [Jimmy Hoffa] had the word out that nobody was to mess with me, and for whatever reason it may have been, but I worked out of Chicago [Illinois] for three years and would work until two, three and four o'clock in the morning. And I would leave my office and walk under the "L" [elevated train] from my office to my hotel without any feeling of insecurity.
Speaker 1: Right down Wabash [Avenue], huh, right.
Speaker 2: Right. And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you in the Palmer House [Palmer House Hotel; Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was in the Palmer House most of the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. And the Kluczynski Federal Building [John C. Kluczynski Federal Building, Chicago, Illinois] right around the corner, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the Federal Building had not been built when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: See, back in--this is 1960. We were in the old federal courthouse [Chicago Federal Building, Chicago, Illinois] that had DC electrical current [direct current] and no air conditioning. And during the course of our trial which lasted ninety days, the defendants--there were six defendants, Mr. Hoffa and five others, they filed a petition with the court to dismiss the case because of inhuman conditions in the courthouse, ninety degrees, in an un-air conditioned courthouse. But I wish they had the federal building (laughter) when I was there. But these were back in the old days, and this is--when you reflect back and thinking back, you know, '64 [1964] was forty-four years ago. And times have changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got to Chicago after those nice cool federal buildings were up with the tempered glass and all that, but it wasn't like that then, huh? It was more like '12 Angry Men' scenario with the fans going and the, you know. Okay, so, but--okay, so nobody threatened you or anything. You never experienced (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never had a threat. In fact, it became a joke with me. I had staff people who worked for me who were less significant than I who claimed that they had been threatened. So I arranged to have a twenty-four hour bodyguard for myself. So I had U.S. Marshals [U.S. Marshals Service] assigned to me (laughter) and just for the fun of it, really, because I didn't feel I was in danger. But I felt that if anybody was in danger, the person who was running the operation was in greater danger than insignificant people who nobody even knew. And I was pretty well known. It was--easy not--it's easy to know me because, one, I'm not white, and number two, I make a splash in whatever I do. And it was pretty known who I was, but I, for a while--it became tiresome to have a United States Marshal following me around, traveling with me, and even when I would go home, they would stay at my house. And, finally, I said, you don't have to cover me anymore. But, again, it was, for me it was more a joke. I never felt insecure. I, and I knew all the lawyers who represented Mr. Hoffa and his co-defendants, and while they may not have, while the defendants may not have liked me, his lawyers were top notch professionals. I never had a problem with them. And I think it's--the professionalism by which one conducts oneself could make a difference. And, but that was my experience.
Speaker 1: Now, what was Joe Louis' wife's name that, who defended--
Speaker 2: Martha Jefferson.
Speaker 1: Martha Jefferson, okay.
Speaker 2: And, see, that was--and I was not involved in that case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the, the Cye Cheasty [John Cye Cheasty] case, but Edward Bennett Williams was his lawyer, and Edward Bennett Williams had a good reputation, but I know he deserved it. Among all the lawyers that I came in contact with when I worked for the federal government, I was most impressed with Edward Bennett Williams. I never had an adversary relationship with him, but he was just first class. You know, if he said something, you could bank on it, and his demeanor in court from all the reports and anything I heard or read or saw, was he was a top notch lawyer. And if I wanted to have an example of a first rate lawyer, it would be Edward Bennett Williams.
Story_ID: 611165
Speaker 1: Now, you were with the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] through the--were you there through the end of the Johnson administration [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] or did you--
Speaker 2: No, I left in November of--I left in June of 1964 when Bob Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] decided to run for the [U.S.] Senate in New York. And I resigned from the justice department and worked on the Kennedy campaign in New York until the election, which was November the 4th of 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did not return to the justice department. After then, I came back to Seattle [Washington].
Speaker 1: Now, when you worked for the justice department, now, I know it's been said, and I don't know how this would affect you, but if, you know, if it does, we can just move on, but it's been said that there was, of course, a lot of tension between Robert Kennedy and J. Edgar Hoover. Now, what was the--do you have any stories in that regard about--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a lot of tension between Robert Kennedy and J. Edgar Hoover. But one of the jokes around the justice department was that Bob Kennedy thought as attorney general that the justice department was his responsibility. And there's a, a gym on the top floor of the justice department building [Department of Justice Building; Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building, Washington, D.C.] and Bob Kennedy thought, as attorney general, that he was entitled to use the gym. J. Edgar Hoover had determined that the gym belonged to the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and said, "Who gave him permission to use the gym?" And when the FBI guards or somebody tried to oust Bob Kennedy and his friends out of the justice department gym, Bob Kennedy says, "I'm the attorney general, and I am in charge of the justice department." Now, that story is apocryphal, and it may or may not be true. But that was somewhat indicative of the tension. The reality is that Mr. Hoover had a dossier on everybody including Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. And he maintained--Hoover maintained his position even though Jack Kennedy was going to replace him with another person who's--whom I know very--knew very well. He's dead now.
Speaker 1: But you can't, you can't mention his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can mention his name, Carmine Bellino [Carmine S. Bellino]. Carmine was the chief accountant for the old McClellan Committee [U.S. Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management] and was in, very much in the, in the Kennedy arena. And Carmine expected to be appointed as director of the FBI when J. Edgar Hoover was retired or dismissed. But something happened on the way. When word got around that President Kennedy was going to replace J. Edgar Hoover, J. Edgar Hoover visited him with a file. And all of a sudden there were no longer any rumors around that J. Edgar Hoover was going to be replaced. So J. Edgar Hoover stayed on.
Story_ID: 611166
Speaker 1: Now, this may sound wild to you. I don't know--or it might not, but as the only black--there weren't, weren't--were you the only black person in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] in those days?
Speaker 2: There was a black woman in the, one of the other departments who later became a judge. And--but at that time, it was very rare.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was extremely rare. I, I don't remember seeing any other blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just want--but this, I'm gonna ask this question. It may sound bizarre, but I've--I started to become aware of this about five years ago, and some of the people I've interviewed have said, yeah, that's--they think it's true. People that grew up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], a lot of people have, are now talking about the fact that J. Edgar Hoover may have been black.
Speaker 2: That I, I don't venture into. I can only accept the fact that I think he was an LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender] person.
Speaker 1: LGBT?
Speaker 2: Lesbian, gay, transgender (laughter) or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.
Speaker 2: But his relationship with Clyde Tolson was a very interesting thing. And another J. Edgar Hoover joke, which isn't directly related to Bob Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], but J. Edgar Hoover had a relationship with the Murchison brothers [Clint Murchison, Jr. and John D. Murchison], some extremely wealthy people. And the Murchisons would provide a place for J. Edgar Hoover to stay, a vacation type place. And one of the stories is that J. Edgar looked out the window and saw some orange trees and said how much he liked orange trees. And the next morning, the Murchisons had had an orange tree installed within his reach from the window of his bedroom. Now, there're all--there're many stories like that about J. Edgar Hoover. But J. Edgar Hoover and, and Tolson were very close friends and--
Speaker 1: That was his second in command at the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].
Speaker 2: Right, second in command, and they shared the same quarters and they traveled around together. And, of course, Co- Roy Cohn was--
Speaker 1: Oh, from the--
Speaker 2: C-O-H-N. Well, see, Roy Cohn was the chief counsel for McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy]. And Roy Cohn and Bob Kennedy were at each other's throats. They didn't like each other. You mention Roy Cohn's name in our circles, it was the wrong name to mention. But Roy Cohn had a close relationship with J. Edgar Hoover. And, of course, later on, revelations about his personal behavior came out. And there's a movie [sic. miniseries] called in--something in America, 'Angels in America.' I don't know whether you've ever seen that film (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: I've heard of it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you ever have a leisure time, you ought a see that film. But in it, Meryl Streep plays the role of a rabbi. She plays a role of, of Mrs. Rosenberg [Ethel Rosenberg] and the picture is very much about Roy Cohn's duplicity in his personal life and in his political life and how he was one of the persons responsible for railroading the Rosen- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bergs.
Speaker 2: --Rosenbergs. But that, that's a movie that you really ought--put it on your mental list, 'Angels in America.' If you ever see it, it would be worth seeing. But it's on an entirely different subject than what we're talking about now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there were never any rumors about his ethnicity, but, but there were rumors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never heard any of that.
Speaker 1: --about his sexuality.
Speaker 2: Rumors about his sexuality, but I never heard anything at all about his ethnicity.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some books about it now, and there's some stuff on the Internet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: And some of the people I've interviewed in D.C. claim that they, they know what neighborhood he grew up in--
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and it's true, and, but, so he was passing, is what they're saying, you know. But it's--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And we don't wanna claim everybody, but that's (laughter) one--that's what they say. And I don't know if anybody's proved it categorically though.
Story_ID: 611167
Speaker 1: So you left the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] in '64 [1964] and, so you went, you came back to Washington State.
Speaker 2: I was appointed to the Seattle municipal court [Municipal Court of Seattle].
Speaker 1: Okay, as a judge.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is your first appointment as a judge?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And actually, I was sworn in, in January of '65 [1965] and from November and December, I was back in the prosecuting attorney's office [King County Prosecuting Attorney Office] for a few weeks in order to have a salary. And my old prosecutor rehired me so that he could claim that his deputy was appointed to the municipal court.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I didn't care.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were some of the--how long were you with the Seattle municipal court?
Speaker 2: I was there from January '65 [1965] to November '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay, and any highlights of that stay? I mean were you the first African American (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the first person of color to become a judge in the history of the State of Washington, except that I was reading recently there was a justice of the peace [Nathaniel Sargent] in Kitsap County [Washington] in 1897. But justices of the peace, we did not consider real judges, you know. They were politicians who, well, justice of the peace. We've abolished the position of justice of the peace in the State of Washington now. We used to call them fee justices because they existed on the fines that they collected. And so we had that vicious system in the State of Washington for a long time.
Speaker 1: And when did it end?
Speaker 2: Let's see, about--had to have been about 1970.
Speaker 1: So it lasted that long (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We abolished fee justices. And the, we had grand parenting provision. Anyone who was a justice of the peace in office could stay 'til the end of their office. And when that term expired, the position disappeared. So we no longer have any fee justices in the State of Washington. When I was a prosecutor, I used to supervise the justices of the peace. And so I would handle the accounting for their fees and manage their cases and all of that in this county, which is, I think we had four- fourteen justices of the peace in King County [Washington] back in the '60s [1960s], in the early '60s [1960s]. And, but we fortunately have none now. But I have to have a footnote exception instead of saying that I was the first person of color to become a judge, there was a justice of the peace in Kitsap County in 1897.
Story_ID: 611168
Speaker 1: So are there any significant cases that were brought before you that you wanna discuss in that one year, that year?
Speaker 2: Well, I've--you know, from time to time, I may think about cases, but having tried as many cases as I did in that court--I handled all the criminal cases of arrests from the Seattle Police Department, 65 percent of all arrests by the Seattle Police Department came in the Seattle municipal court [Municipal Court of Seattle] so that in one year, I would handle thirty-five thousand cases. They would not all go to trial but--so the most significant part of it was my getting interested in decriminalizing the crime of public intoxication. And I became very much involved the alcoholism movement, recognizing alcoholism as a disease and being part of commissions and other institutions that ultimately worked towards decriminalizing public intoxication. When I was on the municipal court, I handled twenty thousand cases of persons arrested for public intoxication and the offense being in violation of the city ordinance in that he was drunk in a public place. And, fortunately, we no longer penalize people for being drunk in a public place. And in the main, those persons were, by medical definition, alcoholics. And so, but while I was on the court, we were still prosecuting them, and I had no choice. The case would come before me. I could not find the person not guilty if the proof was, they were intoxicated because the city ordinance made it a crime to be intoxicated in a public place. And it didn't have to be anything else. If you were staggering drunk down the street, they could arrest you and put you in jail and theoretically, in my court, if convicted, 180 days.
Speaker 1: Now, did--were civil rights cases--did very many civil rights related cases come before you?
Speaker 2: No, my--in the municipal court, we had no civil rights cases because it was all city ordinance and misdemeanors. And the maximum penalty was less than one year. So most of our sentences were 180 days. So it was all criminal cases. I handled no civil cases. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but even in terms of the civil rights activists that may have, that may have, you know, broken or violated a law, municipal law, like the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] or, or people like that, would they come before you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, so you never had--
Speaker 2: The police department would make sure they didn't come before me (laughter). No, the--during those days of activism, the police system would elevate the offenses to a higher level so they would be filed in the state court [King County Superior Court] rather than in the city court. And so these kids from the Black Panthers were being harassed and arrested for almost anything, and they end up in the state court. And I was not then in the state court until the following year.
Story_ID: 611169
Speaker 1: You were active, as you were saying earlier, in the de- decriminalization of public intoxication in Seattle [Washington].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This was a movement stimulated by agencies dealing with the disease of alcoholism; medical schools, commissions, the National Council on Alcoholism [National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence], to call attention to the fact that imprisoning people merely for being intoxicated in a public place was wrong. Over a period of several years, with the activities of a number of organizations with which I was very active, we were able to get the Washington State Legislature to pass laws which decriminalized the public intoxication as a crime of itself. So we were no longer and have no longer since that time been arresting people, charging them and convicting them for being merely intoxicated. And that's the general reference to decriminalization so that if one is intoxicated in a public place, they have to do something else, which is a crime, before they can be arrested.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think everyone's seen the television shows where the town drunk just comes--goes in the jail and turns himself in and locks himself up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --because he's, it's just a crime to be drunk.
Story_ID: 611170
Speaker 1: You were a, a municipal judge until 1973, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay, no--
Speaker 2: I was only in the municipal court [Municipal Court of Seattle] for a year--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty-five [1965] and part of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in 1966, I was appointed to the state court, what we call the superior court of Washington for King County [King County Superior Court]. And that was the next step in my judicial career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the superior court of King County [Washington].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, and that's a state court.
Speaker 2: Well, it is a state court. It's a state court for the county.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the superior courts in the State of Washington are all state courts, and they're interchangeable. I was assigned to the King County court, but I could sit in any court in the state, in the state court system.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it likely to be moved around?
Speaker 2: Only upon voluntary request. I was visiting a judge in another county in a case that was too hot for the local judges to handle. And my experience in that was of such that I refused to allow myself to be assigned to other counties.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did any--now, you were--did you handle primarily criminal cases when you were in the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --state court?
Speaker 2: In the municipal court, I was the criminal court judge. We then had a criminal municipal court and a traffic municipal court. I handled all criminal cases in the municipal court. And in the superior court, that is a court of general jurisdiction. So you would handle civil and criminal cases and you're likely to get any kind of case, whether it was a civil case or a criminal case or whether it dealt with the states or domestic relations, whatever it happened to be. And in those days, our superior court was very general and any judge was likely to get any case. They have departmentalized it now so that judges serving in that court may be assigned to the criminal court, maybe assigned to the domestic relations court, may be assigned to the civil court, but we did not have that division when I was on that court.
Story_ID: 611171
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the memorable cases that occurred when you were on the King County Superior Court?
Speaker 2: It is sort of hard to reflect back on what was most memorable. If someone called my attention to a particular case, and I would remember it, but among the--I'm thinking as we are talking, of a murder case involving a man who had shot and killed members of his family. And he was believed to be psychotic from a clinical standpoint. And he was on medication. And his lawyer--he had a very good lawyer as most people do, had an arrangement with the sheriff's department where the sheriff would administer the medicines to him through their medical staff, would administer his medication to him on a regular basis so that when he would appear in court, he would appear to be usual or normal. And the case proceeded to trial, but during the course of the trial he began to deteriorate and I cannot remember the details of the case of what happened as to whether we halted the case or whether we continued with the case. But the facts of the case were of this detail: he was a veteran of the Korean War, and we now know that he was suffering from posttraumatic stress syndrome [posttraumatic stress disorder], but he had hallucinations and believed that the members of his family were the enemy and that their home was a bunker and he proceeded to shoot them and kill them. And that was considered by psychiatrists to have been delusional as evidence that he was mentally ill. The ultimate conclusion in the case was that he was sufficiently able to stand trial and there was no plea of not guilty by reason of mental irresponsibility, which meant it proceeded to trial with a jury. And the jury convicted him, and he was sentenced by me to life imprisonment. In our state, the jury decides whether you get the death penalty. And fortunately, they did not impose the death penalty, so my responsibility as a judge was merely to follow the law and sentence him to life imprisonment. I was visiting the prison as I did regularly, and in the hallway and a stairway in the prison with nobody else around, this person encountered me and got into a conversation with me. And he was lucid, of course, and was not in his mental illness state while in the prison. And I had a lengthy conversation with him. And I remember the case simply because of my encounter with the defendant in a first degree murder case whom I had sentenced to (laughter) life imprisonment. As I was visiting the prison, and I ran into him in the prison yard. And that is the kind of thing that I would remember. But with hundreds of cases, it's very difficult to zero in on a case unless you had some reason to remember it.
Story_ID: 611172
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess the obvious question here is that, did you think he [a convicted murderer] was crazy, I mean or insane?
Speaker 2: In retrospect, and after all of these years, after the passage of time, my understanding of mental illness is much greater now than it was then. And I thought I was very well informed in those days, but as a judge, you have to rely on the advice of the professionals. And if a psychiatrist says he is suffering from certain forms of mental illness, but they do not affect his ability to understand the nature of his offense, then you have to accept--there's nothing a judge can do. And I could not say, I don't believe the psychiatrist.
Speaker 1: I got ya.
Speaker 2: And if the psychiatrist says he's mentally ill, I think he's not, and therefore, or if the psychiatrist says he's not mentally ill, I think he is, and therefore, judges do not have that power and do not have that authority. But I cannot recall that during the course of the trial I had any doubts about the fairness of the process he was going through. And I think it was largely because of my confidence in his defense counsel whom I knew very well, and who was an outstanding lawyer and who would never allow anything to happen in a case where he was representing a client that was not fair and not proper. And so the combination of all of those things went through my mind then, and as I presently recall it as that, my particular approach to that defendant in that case was that I had great confidence in his lawyer, that his lawyer would make sure that everything was done properly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it you didn't talk about the case when you talked to him in the prison?
Speaker 2: Not at all (laughter), yeah. I think we did exchange pleasantries, you know, "How are they treating you? Are you getting along okay? Are you taking your medicine," and that kind of thing. But I certainly did not feel threatened at all. And, again, back to the question of threats and fears, I never felt threatened by anybody when I was a judge, people coming before me. And I had a pattern of visiting the prisons on a regular basis, and I had an open offer to anybody I sentenced that if you want to talk with me, and I'm in the building, let me know or if you write to me, I will respond. And so I had correspondence with people I sentenced. I would run into them in the prisons and talk with them.
Story_ID: 611173
Speaker 1: What you're saying for the most part is that you pretty much had confidence in the system that, you know, that it was working fairly on behalf of most people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I, except for very technical things, I think that our system of justice in the State of Washington works rather well, and in the criminal justice system, in particular. The principal difference rests in two areas, the level of charging who is arrested, and after arrest who is charged. And once they are charged and they proceed in the system, the system kicks in and works fairly. Then we get to the point of sentencing. And in the old days where judges had discretion in sentencing, we had variations. If you were convicted of say grand larceny in King County [Washington], and you would get, say five years if you were convicted of grand larceny in one of the smaller, rural counties, for the same offense, you would get ten years. And so we had disparity in sentencing, not based upon race or ethnicity but based upon culture in the community. And so the Washington legislature [Washington State Legislature] changed the law and came up with what we sometimes call just desserts, where you have a sentencing commission which decides the penalties for different offenses, based upon certain criteria, so that once a person is convicted of a crime, the judge has no discretion. The judge has to follow the principles under the sentencing act, and applies the facts to the sentencing grid so that if it's grand larceny and the sentencing grid says one year for category A, five years for category B, ten years for category C, and you apply the principles that are applicable to the case, to the grid, and you'll come up with a sentence so that you know what the sentence is going to be at the time of conviction. And so that is, supposedly ameliorated the problem of disparate sentencing. It is working in large measure that way except that there're variables that can enter into it, but it gets back to who is arrested and who is charged. So we end up then, with a disparate representation of persons of color in the penal system. And we're still working on that. I don't have the solution to it, and I don't think I will be the person who solves it. But it is something that we aware of and something institutions, programs and commissions are working on to get to the point where we will not any longer have a disparate representation of persons of color in the penal system, which is our penitentiary system.
Speaker 1: Just for the record, I guess, there's not a state in the union that does not have this kind of disparity right now. Is that true?
Speaker 2: This is true. Washington, for a long time, was one of the worst offenders. We're not the worst offenders, we're still a bad offender, but not the worst offender at this point. And I don't know what the statistics are right now. At one time, we ranked number thirty-two among the fifty states in terms of negative reports, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So that's much better than it used to be, I guess, so, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that's--it used to be we were thirty- thirty-two in terms of the total volume. And so if what we'd like to do to improve it is to say we are number one, which means we have fewer people. So the smaller number is the population representation. The larger number if the population representation so when we rank thirty-two, that means that we were the thirty-second worst state among the fifty states in imprisonment of African Americans in our prison system. But I know that we have improved, but I have no idea of where we rank on that scale anymore.
Story_ID: 611174
Speaker 1: During the days when you were with the King County Superior Court, were there civil right cases coming your way as well?
Speaker 2: No, I never handled any.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, we really didn't have--I'm just trying to think. I was on the superior court from 1966 to 1973, and I know that I never had any civil rights cases. But--and it all depends on what one calls civil rights cases. We had protests of the hiring practices in unions and public buildings. And I think I had a case for disorderly conduct for something like that because I remember a young man coming before me in a criminal case arising out of one of those demonstration. And he was not African American. And he joined in the protests under the theory that it was a matter of principle for him. And I required him, instead of sending him to jail, to write a thesis on the labor movement and the non-inclusion of African Americans in the labor movement and have it approved by a professor of labor law at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] (laughter). And he did write the thesis, and he did get it approved, and he did learn something. And to me, that was the appropriate punishment. And of all the cases I had, that's the only one I can remember that had any, even indirect relation to civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the kinds of cases, civil rights cases that occurred in other jurisdictions simply did not occur in Seattle [Washington]. The Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], for example, were constantly arrested, and if you would call Black Panther arrests, civil rights arrests, I never had a case involving the Black Panthers. And, of course, I would have disqualified myself if I did because I knew all the kids in the Black Panther movement and so one of the things that judges have to be circumspect about is to be sure that they do not handle a case in which they have historical or actual interest. And if I ever had anyone who came before me whom I knew personally or had a social relationship with, I would not handle the case. It's sort of like not handling cases involving your own family. And if I were sitting as a trial judge and one of my children came before the court, I would not and could not hear it from a purely ethical standpoint. So judges have to be extremely careful that they do not violate any ethical code of fairness to be sure that they do not hear cases in which they have an indirect or direct interest. And so I am sure that if I had had a case involving quote civil rights unquote, it most likely would have involved somebody I knew. And if I knew them, I would not hear the case. I'd recuse myself from hearing the case and have it assigned to someone else.
Story_ID: 611175
Speaker 1: What percentage of the population of Seattle [Washington] was black in those days, I mean roughly. I know you can't give me an exact--
Speaker 2: About, then about 2.5 percent. It's still under 5 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was not significant, but--and it still is not that significant except that we know that we have African Americans here (laughter). And if you've been here as long as I have been here, you know all of them, those who are dead and those who are alive here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there wasn't a--did Seattle go through any kind of a housing crisis like other cities like St. Louis [Missouri] or Detroit [Michigan] or--
Speaker 2: Well, our housing crisis was a little different. I was watching a television program a few days ago about a community where the blacks were always referred to a particular real estate agent who would make sure that they were ghettoized into one particular area. And I had to smile to myself because Seattle was like that in the early days. There was a real estate agent in what we called the Central Area [Seattle, Washington], where most of the black people lived. And if a black person went to a real estate agent, they would refer them to that agent whose name was Morris Hardcastle. And Morris Hardcastle was singularly responsible for creating a black ghetto in Seattle because anybody who wanted to purchase a house in Seattle was referred to Morris Hardcastle, who contained them in the Central Area. The--there was a movement during the time I was in Washington, D.C. in the '60s [1960s], by some groups to get a housing ordinance passed in Seattle, which would prohibit discrimination based upon race in the purchase and sale of real estate. But prior to that, my personal experience was in 1956 when we were in market for a house, and I went to a real estate agent in the north end of Seattle, which is now Shoreline [Washington]. And she nearly had apoplexy when I walked in. And she got on the telephone and called her lawyer and said, "This man came in and wants to look at a house. What should I do?" And her lawyers said, "What's his name?" And she said, "Charles Smith [HistoryMaker Charles Z. Smith]." And he said, "You'd better show him a house if you know what is good for you," (laughter). So she--against her own instincts showed us houses. And so we ended up buying a house in the north end of Seattle, then integrating the area. But then the irony of it is that later on this woman in her nineties was in a nursing home. And she needed some legal advice, and she called me and reminded me that she was a very dear friend of mine and how much she had helped to get my house. And I felt so sorry for her because in her nineties, she is convincing herself that she had done me a favor. And I know what she went through, and I know the trauma that she experienced, and I know the trauma I could have experienced if I did not understand it. But at any rate, that was the housing in Seattle. As late as the '50s [1950s], and we bought our house in 1956.
Story_ID: 611176
Speaker 1: I returned to Seattle [Washington] in 1965, and at that time, it was still difficult to find housing outside the Central Area [Seattle, Washington], if you were not white. But today, you can live wherever you can afford to live. It's not, not a problem. If I wanted to live in--there's only, there are a few gated communities. There's a place called Broadmoor [Seattle, Washington], and it's the Broadmoor golf and country club [Broadmoor Golf Club, Seattle, Washington] where nobody of color has ever lived at Broadmoor. It's a small, gated community, just ten minutes away from here. But with that exception, I don't know of any place in the Seattle, King County [Washington] area where I could not live if I could afford to live if I could afford to live and if I wanted to live. And I don't want to live just anywhere for the sake of living. I would live where I want to live. When we built this house in 1968, it was redlined. And the banking institutions would not give me mortgage money. I had friends in the mortgage business who said, "Anything you want, we'll give." And I'd apply, and they'd find out where we were going to build, and they'd find a reason not to get it. So it took us five years to get financing to build our house here because it was redlining. Everybody denied that they were redlining, but that has changed. It is illegal to redline now, and so if I were, aside from the current mortgage crisis, if I needed a mortgage to build a house here where we built the house in 1968, I wouldn't have a problem, based upon the location. But all this is to say that even though we can now boast that we have truly open housing in the Seattle, King County area, it has not always been that way. And it was only post-1960 that things began to change so that now, in the year 2008, anybody can live anywhere they want to live, where they can afford to live.
Story_ID: 611177
Speaker 1: Tell us about the National Judicial College at the University of Reno [sic. University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, Nevada]--I mean--and the, I guess the Naval Justice School in Newport [Rhode Island] that's similar--these are schools to update your judicial skills or what--or to give you credentials that--
Speaker 2: They're two separate things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, two separate things.
Speaker 2: The National Judicial College in Reno [Nevada] is indeed a college that is underwritten by the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] to educate judges. And back in the old days when I was appointed to the superior court [King County Superior Court], it was desirable to enroll in the National Judicial College. It was purely voluntary on my part because in those days, you would have to take vacation time to attend it. But I attended the National Judicial College and completed a course, and was quote certified unquote, as a graduate of the college and continued over the years to present courses at the National Judicial College until it got to be a little too much for my schedule. The Naval Justice School was incident to my commission in the [U.S.] Marine Corps and in 1973, I was direct commissioned in the Marine Corps as a military judge. And part of the qualification under the [U.S.] Navy regulations for my certification as a military judge was to go through the officer training program at the Naval Justice School. And so, because I was in a very special program, they created a program for me, and--there were four of us who were recruited by the Marine Corps at that time. And so the program, as I recall like six weeks in the Naval Justice School where we were indoctrinated into military justice as administered by the Navy and by the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 611178
Speaker 1: Well, just kind of recap what you just told us about the sequence of events.
Speaker 2: All right, I left the superior court [King County Superior Court] in January of 1973. And then immed- almost immediately, not immediately, but shortly afterwards, I went to the University of Washington as associate dean and professor of law at the law school [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]. And shortly after that period, I was contacted by the [U.S.] Marine Corps in asking if I would accept a commission in the Marine Corps as a military judge.
Speaker 1: Now, you had served as a reserve in the Marine Corps for--
Speaker 2: Not prior to that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, not prior, okay, all right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not prior to that time. And, of course, the reason behind it was that the general who headed the judicial administration division of the Marine Corps had an adjutant who was a colonel, a lawyer from Seattle [Washington], who knew me and had recommended to the general that they contact me to get me to accept the commission in the Marine Corps, because the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] had conducted a study of discrimination in the [U.S.] Armed Forces and determined that there were no persons of color in, in the legal division of the Marine Corps. And they had to do something about it. And so I was one of the pigeons who was recruited to come into the Marine Corps and after consulting with the persons that I respected who had military backgrounds, I decided it wasn't a bad idea because it was reserve duty as opposed to active duty and that it was something where I could contribute. And so I was commissioned as a major in the Marine Corps. And that was why we went to the Naval Justice School [Newport, Rhode Island]. A special six week program was set up for the four of us. There were four, one woman and three men who were commissioned at that time, all African Americans. And we also went to the officers training program at Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia]. And it was again in an abbreviated program. So by the time I was in uniform in the Marine Corps, I knew about the traditions of the Marine Corps, and I knew about the military justice system. And I served from time to time. I would get a call--I operated out of Headquarters Marines [Headquarters Marine Corps, Arlington, Virginia]. I never was attached to a company. So they would call me and say, "Get out your calendar. Are you free?" And I'm free on this time, on this time, and they'd put me on orders. And I would be sent to Camp Pendleton, California [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California], and I would sit as a judge in court martials. And then usually, it was three weeks, sometimes six, as many as six weeks. And that's the way I functioned. During the period of time, I was doing research at Headquarters Marines in Arlington, Virginia, which is outside of Washington [D.C.]. But I retired from the Marine Corps when I reached the age of sixty because the Marine Corps had an age limit, and I got a call, "Colonel Smith [HistoryMaker Charles Z. Smith], we understand that you will soon be sixty years of age. You have three options, one to resign, retire or be discharged." And so I decided I would retire because I kept my rank and theoretically, kept my status. I was a lieutenant colonel at the time, and so I retired from the Marine Corps as a Marine--as a lieutenant colonel in November of 1986. And I still consider myself a Marine, and we have some people like me who are retired, we have a loose organization of retired military judges in the Seattle area. And periodically, we get together for dinners or other events of that kind.
Story_ID: 611179
Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there an interesting case or pivotal case that you were a part of in the [U.S.] Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Not really, except I remember one instance. I was sitting as a judge in a simple court martial, something like a larceny case or something like that. And the commanding officer of the young man who was on trial appeared as a character witness. And he looked up to me, and he said, "Your honor, this young man is a fine Marine. He is a born killer," (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I almost went into shock, man. This was a character reference from the commanding officer who felt that telling the judge that his Marine was a born killer was a character reference. And--
Speaker 1: Was this a sign that the officer had been a Marine too long or what?
Speaker 2: Well, that was a philosophy of the Marine Corps, you know. If you're-- you're a good Marine if you're a good killer. And to me, because I am antiviolence, to have someone look up to me and say this is a great person because he's a born killer was against all of my instincts. And, but that's the one thing that I remember from the cases. I, I have no idea how many cases I had. I probably handled a couple of hundred cases over a period of time. But they were fairly routine, you know, nothing outstanding. And things become outstanding when the media makes them outstanding. And when you're doing them on a routine basis, you really don't remember them.
Story_ID: 611180
Speaker 1: Is there a significant difference between military court and civilian court?
Speaker 2: At that time, there was. But now, I'm of the opinion the military system is better than the civilian system. And I have done comparisons. I, I did a lot of seminars for the military and intergroup seminars of one kind or the other. Even after I retired, I did a presentation for a military organization that compared the military judicial system with the civilian judicial system, and I concluded that based upon the manual of court martial ['Manual for Courts Martial'], the code of military justice [Uniform Code of Military Justice], which we now have, that there are better safeguards for the protection of the rights of persons in the [U.S.] military than there are in the civilian courts. And, of course, the military has its own systems of courts, including the court of military appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces], the court of military review [U.S. Court of Military Commission Review] and a, the, the highest court is equivalent to the federal circuit court system. And so in, in the military, and, of course, the Marines, with which I am directly familiar, if a person is convicted, they have the right to appeal. And you can appeal, and you go up and up and up and up. And you could end up at the end--at the top of the ladder where you would have your case decided by a panel of judges, the same as in the civilian system. And so in the appellate area, that is much more significant to me than in the civilian appellate level where you cross your fingers and hope things will work out a certain way. But back to the trial court level, there were so many safeguards available, and I used to teach courses in the Federal Rules of Evidence, which were adopted by the civilian courts in 1976. The military adopted the Federal Rules of Evidence, but their lawyers had to learn them the way that civilian lawyers had to learn the Federal Rules of Evidence. So I would conduct seminars for Marine lawyers on the Federal Rules of Evidence. And so all this is part of the package that I thoroughly enjoyed and it was, for me, part of my do good syndrome where I think that I have a mission to do good and that's sort of a simplified way of putting it. But it was very easy to get me to do something if somebody convinced me that I was needed and that I could serve a good purpose. My wife [Eleanor Martinez Smith] says when they say that, I believe them, and I would say, yes. But in all seriousness, my participation in the [U.S.] Marine Corps was, for me, a matter of my personal principle and I think that I was able to do something. And, again, like everything else, things have changed. I did a survey for the Marine Corps on the absence of persons of color in the leadership of the Marine Corps. And it is now an archived document in the judicial administration division of the Marine Corps. And I did that while on special assignment at Headquarters Marines [Headquarters Marine Corps, Arlington, Virginia], you know, not sitting as a judge, but more or less as a researcher. And, but it's things like that. But now that, in the Marine Corps I get publications from the Marine Corps, and I see all kinds of persons' faces in significant positions in the Marine Corps, and at all levels. So it's not any longer a question of an all-white institution in the military. It's a question of an inclusive branch of service. Certainly, I could say that for the Marine Corps, and, because Marines are likely to be killed in wars, you will find that persons in the Marines who are being killed regularly, include persons of color. We had a young, black lieutenant colonel in Seattle [Washington] who was killed three weeks ago, a Marine. And so in previous years, the Marine Corps was all white, and now the Marine Corps is totally integrated to the point where persons of color are getting killed on an equal opportunity basis. That's sort of a bizarre way of expressing inclusion, but it is proof of the fact that the Marine Corps to which I am personally devoted, is now a thoroughly integrated branch of service.
Story_ID: 611181
Speaker 1: All right, so you were, you were with the University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington] until 1986 right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, let's see, and you were with the [U.S.] Marine Corps until--well, you retired in '86 [1986] too from the, yeah, Marine Corps too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I retired from the Marine Corps in November of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: November '86 [1986], right.
Speaker 2: I left the university, I think in June of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it became part of, I mean you were able to fit the Marine Corps and the university teaching into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and it was easy for me to do that because I could control my schedule. And I knew every year what my teaching responsibilities were. And so I could do a lot of my volunteer activities, which were numerous, and the Marine Corps happened to be one of them, but the Marine Corps was more specific because I could chart out my time away from the university with reference to my Marine Corps service and other activities were sporadic, a meeting here, a meeting there. And it may or may not conflict with my teaching schedule. I tried not to miss any class sessions, although there were some that I did miss, and my students understood why I was away. And so I did not have a problem there.
Story_ID: 611182
Speaker 1: Now, you were--from '73 [1973] to '78 [1978] director of the University District Defender Services. That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was part of my teaching responsibility. I developed a clinical program at the University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington], funded by the United States Office of Education. And in those days, law schools looked down their noses at clinical programs thinking that they were something other than academic. There were a handful of us around the country who wanted to demonstrate that clinical programs could be academically credible. And the way we did it, I was a full tenured professor. So a full tenured professor at a major law school who develops and conducts a clinical program, can demonstrate to the rest of the faculty the credibility of clinical programs. And so the University District Defender Services, which I developed on the model of a law firm. I would personally select students, six students every six months--no, ten students every six months. So I would have twelve months; six months, six months. And so the students would participate in the program. I had contracts with agencies, the King County Office of Public Defense [King County Department of Public Defense] for example, who would refer cases to the clinical program. And I had students who represented clients in fifty-two courts in King County [Washington] with a supervising attorney. And they would meet once a week as a law firm at the university. And then I had instructional programs going on as well, and so that was what that was. Out of that program has grown--I have now, at this generation, judges all over the state who were graduates of my clinical program. So the university now has fully accepted clinical programs. They, they have twenty-nine different clinical programs at the very law school where I started with one, where I had to fight to get acceptance of it. And it is now fully accepted as part of the law school curriculum.
Story_ID: 611183
Speaker 1: Now, you also had a stint as a news commentator on KOMO Radio [Seattle, Washington] and television, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: From seventy- now, this runs from '73 [1973] to '79 [1979] according to what we have, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So, how did that come about? How did you become a commentator on radio and television?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, when I decided to leave the superior court [King County Superior Court] in 1973, I got a call from a friend of mine who was the president of KOMO, and I thought he was asking my advice to find someone to do something. After I got there, I found out that what he was doing was trying to recruit me to be a news commentator for KOMO Television [KOMO-TV, Seattle, Washington], which is the same as KOMO Radio. So the two stations operated under the same management. And at that time, the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] had a commissioner who was bombarding the media to insist that they have open participation by all segments of the community. And so KOMO, in keeping with that idea, decided that it would be highly desirable if they got somebody like Charlie Smith [HistoryMaker Charles Z. Smith] who came from the ethnic community to be a news commentator on KOMO Television. I said I have no experience. I'm not a, a television speaker, and I would agree to do it only on the condition that we have a training period. And I would decide the point at which I was ready to go on the air, and they agreed to it. And, of course, I got paid for it, and I had two children in college at the time. And so (laughter) it was, for me, a lucrative way to use my talents. So I was on primetime television twice a week, on the 6:30 news. My contract with the station did not allow the station to interfere. I selected my own subjects. I did my own research. I did my own writing. And all I had to do was to be there at a certain time. So for 1973 until 1979, unless I was traveling in Europe somewhere, I was on, on air, on television. For radio, I did radio five days a week, and it was rebroadcast three times. So my commentaries was fifteen commentaries per week on KOMO Radio and two commentaries a week on KOMO Television.
Speaker 1: All different commentaries?
Speaker 2: I had a different subject all the time. The radios--I had five different ones, but they were repeated three times. So you had five different ones for a total of fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I could prerecord my radio commentaries without problem. I'd prerecord maybe three or four weeks at a time, but for television, it was entirely different.
Story_ID: 611184
Speaker 1: And once I made the mistake of prerecording my television commentary because I had to be in Europe or somewhere, and I decided to prerecord it. It happened to be on a subject relating to school desegregation. And I had criticized a group called Citizens Against Mandatory Busing for their racist attitudes. And the manager of the station [KOMO-TV, Seattle, Washington] got nervous about it and referred it to their lawyers in New York [New York] to get a response. And what they decided to do was to get the lawyer for that group, Citizens Against Mandatory Busing, to do a counter commentary to mine. So they played my commentary and then they played the commentary of the lawyer for the group I was criticizing. It turned out the lawyer was a personal friend of mine, and he wasn't about to blast me. And he started out by saying, "I don't agree with Charlie Smith [HistoryMaker Charles Z. Smith], but--," and so it came out it was a very pleasant counter. When I found that out when I got back, and they told me they had done it, I said, no way I prerecord any television. I will always do them live. And that was the only one that I had prerecorded and I decided not to do it. So it was a, a good experience, and in those days, the television and radio stations were not concerned with content. They were concerned with audience response. And so when I would do a commentary, they would catalog the number of telephone calls they got in support of and the number of telephone calls they got opposed to, so that there were certain ones that I would do. If I did something on Indian [Native American] fishing rights, I know that it would hit a soft spot in the hearts of many people. And so they would criticize, and I'd get letters. I always answered all my letters. See, I'd get letters. I had one letter from someone who said she was going to see that I got fired, and that was laughable because I didn't work for the station. I had an independent contract (laughter). And so there was no way that these audience responses could make a difference in whether I had a contract. At the end of my contract year, they could decide not to renew my contract. But I was under contract from '73 [1973] until '79 [1979], and the reason I discontinued, they changed the format of the station, and it wasn't convenient for me. So I let it go. So that was from '73 [1973] until 1979.
Story_ID: 611185
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], you also served as co-chairperson of the Juvenile Justice Standards commission [IJA/ABA Joint Commission on Juvenile Justice Standards]. Now, that's, that sounds very important and, with the juvenile court over a hundred--we were talking about it before we started--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --doing this interview.
Speaker 2: Well, my background had included service in the juvenile court. When I was on the King County Superior Court, I was assigned on rotation to the juvenile court. So I had a background in juvenile courts. The American Bar Association and the Institute of Judicial Administration [New York, New York] had foundation grants to conduct an extensive study on juvenile practices. And I was initially a member of the commission, and through a transition of changes, I became co-chairperson of the, of the commission in the last five years of its existence. But we conducted studies. We hired researchers to do studies, but we had meetings of lawyers--the commission consisted of lawyers, judges, psychiatrists, social workers. And we would have a meeting somewhere around the country every three months. And all of this was, you know, developed and cataloged, and over a period of about--that started in '73 [1973]. Nineteen seventy-eight [1978] we published thirty-seven volumes of books on juvenile court practices. It was initially published by Ballinger Publishing [Ballinger Publishing Company] in Boston [Massachusetts]. And it was circulated throughout the country. And the Ballinger company was going to destroy the printing plates and the American Bar Association purchased the printing plates. So back in those days, we had printing plates. So it has been republishing, and since 1978, there is a current version of those juvenile justice standards, thirty-seven volumes. I, I pulled off the shelf a copy of it to give you some idea of what the volumes were like. But it's not necessary for this particular interview, but after it, I'll show you what it amounted to. But they sort of set the tone for creating a new approach to the treatment of juveniles and particularly, after a case called In re Gault [In re Gault, 1967], G-A-U-L-T where the United States Court of Appeals in the District of Columbia [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit] had a ruling that indicated that juveniles are entitled to constitutional rights. And up until that time, juveniles were not entitled to constitutional rights. And in the Gault case, very simply, Gerald Gault was charged with disorderly conduct for making an obscene telephone call to a neighbor woman. He was charged with a felony in Arizona. He went before the judge, and the judge says, you don't need to deny it. I know you did it. You're guilty and sentenced him to detention in the juvenile system until he reached the age of twenty-one years. And Gerald Gault then was sixteen years old. That case was appealed by a volunteer lawyer who took it all the way to the United States Supreme Court, and they ended up saying that juveniles had a constitutional right. And that changed the tone of juvenile courts throughout the country. And so the Juvenile Justice Standards commission was sort of using the Gault case as a platform for saying we have to do things differently now than we have been doing it in the past. And so that's what the Juvenile Justice Standards commission was, and we completed our work in 1978, published our materials and the commission itself went out of existence.
Story_ID: 611186
Speaker 1: Well at any rate, we were talking off camera about a case in Chicago [Illinois] where two youth were convicted of--they signed a statement admitting to, you know, murdering and raping another youth, a little girl, eleven years old, without any counsel or--is that the kind of thing that your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --that the commission, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the Juvenile Justice Standards commission [IJA/ABA Joint Commission on Juvenile Justice Standards] would condemn that practice, and would, would--it had no authority or power. It was more advisory than anything else. But good juvenile court practice would dictate that in the case you referred to, things should have been done differently. We had some Chicago area judges on our commission, so I know that the Juvenile Justice Standards commission's materials were available in the courts in the Chicago area and the American Bar's [American Bar Association] headquarters is in Chicago. But the first--under the Gault decision [In re Gault, 1967], which is mandatory, a juvenile is entitled to know the charges against them. They're entitled to have parents available when they are charged. They're entitled to be represented by counsel. They're entitled to the presumption of innocence. They're entitled to have cases proved against them beyond a reasonable doubt, which is the adult standard and had been for so many years. But prior to the Gault decision, a juvenile court case could be proved by some evidence as opposed to evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. So that case is a bad case as it proceeded from a procedural standpoint. But the end result that they were acquitted was a good result. But it should not have required the extraordinary efforts of an extraordinary lawyer to bring it about. It should have happened by the system itself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this, for the record, anybody watching this, we're referring to a case that Eugene Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham] in Chicago tried which is in his interview with HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. So if they wanna do a cross reference or anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --they could do it.
Speaker 2: I wish I had known him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he was quite a man.
Story_ID: 611187
Speaker 1: As neighborhoods, people in neighborhoods are increasingly fearful of youth and as youth crime has escalated around drugs and such and fire power of--has ended up in the hands of youth, you know. A lot of people have been hurt, you know, innocent people killed. And neighbors call for increasingly stiffer penalties against youth and they call for youth, almost regularly, for youth to be tried as adults. And it seems like prosecutors, you know, welcome this for some reason. And there's no--do you see juvenile court as being in jeopardy these days because of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not really. Well, I say not really in our area because regardless of whatever problems we may have in our justice system in the State of Washington, and I don't say that we have no problems whatever. Our juvenile system is working very well, and we follow essentially the principles enunciated by the Juvenile Justice Standards commission [IJA/ABA Joint Commission on Juvenile Justice Standards]. We religiously follow the requirements of the Gault decision [In re Gault, 1967] in making sure that children coming before the juvenile court--and anybody under eighteen by law is a child in the State of Washington. Any child coming before the juvenile court [of the King County Superior Court] is entitled to all these constitutional protections. And so even though there may be some violation at the time of the arrest, the courts have the responsibility for correcting whatever problems there may be. And so once the case appeared--once the child was taken into custody, the system sets in and constitutional rights become available. And I'm satisfied that the idea of--and, of course, the question of whether a juvenile should be tried as an adult is not a new question. It has always been a determination by juvenile court judges, even prior to Gault to decide whether in this offense, a child should be tried as adult or tried as a child. And in the State of Washington, if you are tried as a child in the juvenile court, upon conviction, the most you can get is confinement until you reach the age of twenty-one years. And once you're at the age of twenty-one years, that's it. You must be released. If tried as an adult and convicted of the same offense, you have penalties on the adult system, which may be more than the time it takes you to reach the age of twenty-one years. And so that's where the real problem comes. But there is an established procedure which we've had in the State of Washington for many years. And there are supreme court [Washington Supreme Court] decisions which regulate this, that say you must make these findings before you determine that a child should be tried as an adult. And I don't remember the specifics of it, but at one time, I could recite them to you, what those requirements were and such as the nature of the offense, whether there's any facility in the community to assist the child, whether there is any alternative to trying the child as an adult. And it's things like that that have to be decided on the record by judges, certainly in the State of Washington before they could refer a person to the adult court. Now, what the legislature has in some states and I'm not quite sure whether that is true in the State of Washington, is making it a specific determination prior to a judicial determination, that if the child is charged with a certain offense, regardless of their age, they should be charged as an adult. And that's where it becomes a real problem. The legislature does not have the right to decide what happens to children. They can set the rules, but they cannot take away from the judicial system the right to determine whether a child should be tried as an adult. And the point at which that collision occurs, that's when I would be opposed to it. But I am comfortable in allowing judges to make the decision whether a particular child should be kept in the juvenile system or whether that particular child should be tried as an ad- as an adult.
Story_ID: 611188
Speaker 1: Now, sometimes, because of the nature of the offense, the heinous offenses, in multiple shootings and brutal killings and things like that, the community may be outraged and say how can they possibly try this person as a child and upon conviction, limit the penalty until they reach the age of twenty-one years. And I'm reflecting on--and this, unfortunately, has led to something I remember from the juvenile court [of the King County Superior Court]. I had a case in the juvenile court with a fourteen year old who was a gang leader. And this was--it had to have been about 1971 and 1972. And he had his older cousins, and they would go and rob grocery stores late at night. And in one instance, the grocery store clerk played the hero. And this fourteen year old shot him and killed him. And there was a woman customer in the store who was traumatized by it. And the fourteen year old said to his sixteen year old cousin, "Shoot the old bitch." That case came before me in the juvenile court. And I had to decide, treat him as an adult, treat him as a child? My conclusion was, using the principles we had to follow that, however horrible that offense may have been, he was a fourteen year old child. And so we kept him in the juvenile court. He was convicted, sentenced to the juvenile facility until he reached the age of twenty-one years, which meant six years. And the condition that I had was before he was released, the juvenile system had to report back to the judge to give an evaluation of the progress of the child in juvenile detention. I left the court in 1973, so I lost jurisdiction over--personal jurisdiction. I later learned that this young man whose name I know very well and remember, was successfully rehabilitated and he returned to the community as a responsible citizen, even though he killed a person and even though he was responsible for his older cousins who were part of his gang for--I, I don't remember whether the woman that he said, "Shoot the old bitch," died as a result of the shooting. But I know that the clerk who tried to resist the robbery was killed by the fourteen year old. And I--but that's the kind of thing that in retrospect is coming before the court more frequently now. It was unusual in 1971, '72 [1972] to have a fourteen year old who was head of a gang with weapons. Today, anybody is likely to have a weapon, and there are children of all ages running around with weapons who are committing all kinds of crimes. And you have to decide, can the juvenile system provide the necessary assistance for the child and the protection of the community. And when you weigh those interests, you have to decide, is the ju- is the adult system any better prepared. Now, that's where the real philosophical question comes in. Even if you had a child who is tried as an adult, convicted as an adult and sent to an adult prison upon conviction, what help is there for him? There's no help. There's no help even for the adults, but you have a child who is sent to a prison with other criminals, you are losing the child, and you're destroying him. You might just as well forget that child ever existed. So there are many philosophical reasons behind arguments against arbitrarily treating children as an adult, simply because of the nature of the offense and simply because the community has an outcry that says you must deal with them harshly. And dealing with them harshly does not mean treating them as adults. You can deal with them harshly in the juvenile system. But you have to make sure that the juvenile system has the resources to provide that strong, harsh, but proper treatment to help the child to develop into a mature, responsible adult. And so it's the subject of many books, many seminars, and there may not be any easy answers to it. And certainly, I do not have easy answers to it. I used to think I had answers to a lot of things, but at my age now, I've come to conclude that there are some things that are totally beyond my intellectual control.
Story_ID: 611189
Speaker 1: It's a question of judgment a lot of times and, and the case that you just gave us, you used your best judgment to figure out what was the best thing to do.
Speaker 2: Right, and I could have been wrong. You know, he could have become a notorious criminal, but fortunately, he did not.
Speaker 1: Have you ever heard of a case where a youth is tried as an adult and comes out rehabilitated from adult prison as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, I have really never followed and in the old days--and that was prior to the time I was on the superior court [King County Superior Court], and during the time I was on the superior court, we had many instances where juveniles were tried as adults. And, but I never did any studies on it, and I have, have really no recall of any particular case where it happened one way or the other. But as a practical matter, just using my general intelligence, I could not assume that any juvenile tried as an adult was helped by being tried as an adult, convicted as an adult and sentenced as an adult because I'm not convinced that the average adult who is tried as an adult, convicted as an adult and sentenced as an adult is helped by being sent to prison. I am not convinced that prison is the answer in every case. There are some people who are bad, and I don't, as a Pollyandy, walk around saying, well, there are no bad people. I know better. I know some very, very bad people. And I know some very, very bad people who ought to be locked up for the rest of their natural lives. But at the same time, in locking them up, it is not helping them. It does not help anybody to be in a cage. Even wild animals in a cage are disadvantaged by being locked in a cage. And human beings locked in a cage, in an eight by ten [foot] cell with iron bars and metal cots and open toilets, there's no way in the world that person can be helped by that experience. And there are a few people who write books and say they got religion and all these other things while in prison, but how much better it would have been if they were not locked in a cage, and how much better would it have been if there had been a program available to help them. And so the do gooders among us--and I'm sort of a reformed do gooder. I used to get involved (laughter) in every program that I thought would help somebody else. And sometimes I was right and sometimes I was not right. But prison is not the answer. And one of the most vocal opponents of incarceration in general is [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, the famous Angela Davis. I heard her speak a few months ago here in Seattle [Washington], and she is very vocal against prison for any purpose at all. I do not fully share her opinion on that, but I agree substantially with her that prison helps no one. And anybody who thinks prison is gonna help somebody, they need to have their own heads examined. And even though there are some people who gain some help while in prison, but they would have done so much better if they had not been locked up in prison, if they had the same resources available to them in the community.
Story_ID: 611190
Speaker 1: What about victims' rights, you know, the victims are most--well, people would argue that because we have a criminal justice system, it protects victims' families from having to, from being compelled to seek their own justice, I mean--you know, I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a perpetrator in a neighborhood or, you know, out in the--
Speaker 2: I fully respect the rights of victims. I think that in the judging field, at the time of sentencing, the judges should allow the victims to express themselves. And this is the pattern in Seattle, King County [Washington], right now. It's not uncommon to see on television where at sentencing the judge has invited the mother of the child who was killed or this person or that person who has an interests in the outcome of the case. Now, that merely is a platform for expression. The real question is whether the result of the case, the sentencing is going to protect the victims against further intrusion into their lives. And so you have a person who is convicted of killing someone. What's going to keep that person from killing somebody else if the system does not take control, and the system does not punish? And so I'm not one who says we should not punish people who commit crimes. I simply say that the punishment must fit the crime. And the punishment must be based upon the person as opposed to the media attention to a crime. You get a person--one of my former students [Richard A. Jones] is now a federal judge, presided over a case [State of Washington v. Gary Leon Ridgway, 2003] of a man [Gary Ridgway] who confessed to and pleaded guilty to killing forty-eight women. And he allowed any person connected with those young women who were killed to appear in court at the time of sentencing to express themselves. And when he sentenced the defendant, understandably, he sentenced him to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. And I think he sentenced him to forty-eight life imprisonments without the possibility of parole because the prosecuting attorney had bargained away the death penalty, which is appropriate. I'm personally opposed to the death penalty. So I was pleased that even a heinous crime like forty-eight killings, admitted killings, and he may have killed some others. But at least he admitted to killing forty-eight women, that the only appropriate sentence was life imprisonment without the possibility of parole, which he did get. And that case has become a classic case of disposition of a serious crime where the victims were allowed to express themselves, and where the judge did reasoned consideration and made an appropriate disposition. And so it's possible for good judges to do good things. And this judge, who was a King County Superior Court judge at the time, but he's now on the federal court [U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington], and he's gonna do similar good things on the federal court as well, good judgment, sensitivity, humanitarianism, respecting the rights of everybody, the defendants who come before him on the court, the victims involved in criminal--his victims of criminal cases and all of that, and intelligent sensitivity on the part of judges is the standard and is what we hope for. And we would like to be sure that every person who sits in judgment of somebody else is intelligent, sensitive, humanitarian and fair. That's the millennium, and we haven't reached it, but we're working on it. And those of us who work in the field of judicial education try very hard to promote it as a standard so that we would have, throughout the country, in every jurisdiction, there will be judges who meet that criteria.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what you just described, would you consider that to be your judicial philosophy, I guess?
Speaker 2: I would like to think so. And, of course, this is self-commendation, and I am somewhat reluctant to tell you how great I am. I want somebody else to tell you how great I am. But in all seriousness, I would like to think that the principles I have just referred to are principles that guided me. And if I were to sit as a judge again, they would still guide me. I have no intention to sit as a judge again. I've had my fill of being a judge. And, but I can still teach. I can still counsel. I can still advise. And I have the good fortune of having many of my former students who are now judges, who share my philosophy.
Story_ID: 611191
Speaker 1: Have you ever had a time when your philosophy was strained by the circumstances of a case where you just said, well, I don't know, you know, and it made you question your--I mean when your own emotions are getting in the way of--
Speaker 2: Well, not so much, in direct answer to that question as it has been put, but the question is, have I had second thoughts about decisions I have made following my principles? And if the principles are intelligence, sensitivity, humanitarianism and fairness, there's no way that one can go wrong. It's the sensitivity aspect of it that creates the problem. And I had before me on the superior court [King County Superior Court] as a trial judge, a young woman who was convicted of passing a forged document. She had a boyfriend who had a forged check that he gave her to take to the bank and cash. And she cashed, and she was charged and convicted. The background, I always insisted in criminal cases that I had, of having a thorough background by the parole department, the--to do the investigation. So before I would sentence a person, I would have to know as much about them as I possibly could, including a complete background report. And I learned that this was a single parent with four children, unable to get a job and who was conned by her boyfriend into cashing this forged check. So my determination as a sensitive, would be psychiatrist, would be social worker was, there's no way I'm going to send this woman to jail. So I arranged with the Seattle Urban League [Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle, Seattle, Washington] to give her a job, and put her on probation on the condition that she would work at this job. She stopped reporting to the job. It was reported to me--I brought her in on a probation violation. And her response to me was, "I was better off on welfare without a job than being off welfare with a job because the job does not pay me enough to take care of babysitting expenses. And I'd rather go to jail." Now, how does one with sensitivity deal with that? And, of course, what I did was, one, not violate her probation and two, release her from her obligation to work for the Seattle Urban League. And I then began to understand that however do gooder I may have been, there are some things that I don't understand. And even though I thought I was doing the right thing, it wasn't the right thing. I was intelligent, I was sensitive. I was humanitarian, and I was fair. But it was the wrong thing. And so if I had to do it over again, I would have a much greater awareness of what I was trying to do and how it would affect the person I was supposed to be helping. And so the real problems becomes one, when a person of power thinks that they know what is good for somebody else, they're gonna do it for them regardless what the other person thinks. And so judges have to be certain that when they're doing good things for people, that it is consistent with what the people need, what the people want, and what the people can tolerate.
Story_ID: 611192
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now, in the '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s], you were, you completed a two year term as president of the American Baptist Churches. Tell us about that. Now, so far we haven't mentioned the church.
Speaker 2: Okay, the American Baptist Churches USA is the successor to what used to be called the Northern Baptist Convention as opposed to the Southern Baptist Convention. It is the second largest Baptist denomination in North America. I was on the general board of the American Baptist Churches in the early stages in nineteen sixty- about 1965 and was part of the reorganization of it from its earlier incorp- it's earlier incorporation into what is now the American Baptist Churches USA. We--in the early days, we had a board that consisted of twenty persons, and I was one of those twenty. In the reorganization--and I was part of a commission for reorganization of it, we created a, a program that is based upon the congressional method of elections from districts. So that instead of having a twenty person board selected by itself, we ended up with a two hundred person board elected by election districts, thirty-eight election districts throughout the United States. My concern, as then one of the few persons of color in leadership in the American Baptist Churches was that we needed to recognize the existence of African Americans--we used to call ourselves blacks, Latinos, where we used to call them Hispanics, Native Americans--the American Indians we're talking about really, and Asians of the various different Asian groups, principally, Chinese, Japanese ancestry. But there was not inclusion in the American Baptist Churches. And so part of my emphasis was to push to bring this about, including such things as linguistics. I felt that with the large population of Spanish speaking people in the American Baptist Churches, we should have materials published in Spanish and English that when we had public meetings, we should have deaf sign language interpreters. And so this kind of thing was part of my platform to the extent that I had one, but as a member of the general board, I was asked to serve as president of the American Baptist Churches, which was nomination and election. And it was not competitive. There was nobody running for it. You know, it was sort of one of those things where a board nominating committee would come up with a slate. And I was nominated to be the president of the American Baptist Churches. And so I was elected at our convention in Atlantic City [New Jersey] in 1976. And it was a two year term, so I served as president for that two year term. And at the end of the two year term, I returned to the board, not as president, but since that time and also, again, historically, there had been one black president of the American Baptist Churches who preceded me. And I was the second, but the first, under the reorganization. And so part of the reason I was urged to accept the, the election as president was you got us into this mess; you have to get us out (laughter). And that was the reorganization. And so, and, of course, I, I recognized that I had a responsibility to be a part of the change. And so that's essentially what I was doing during those two years, including traveling abroad to study our programs around the world, including the old Soviet Union [Russia] and the--there were all kinds of things that were part of that activity. And it was more than merely presiding over meetings. The principal responsibility, however, was presiding over meetings. And we have biennial meetings and my--I presided over the biennial meeting in San Diego [California] in 1977 which was my swan song, you know, my time of departure.
Story_ID: 611193
Speaker 1: And so the American Baptist Churches [American Baptist Churches USA] claims membership of around 590,000 people. We have in the fellowship like 2,500 churches. And throughout--and it's not geographical. We--American Baptist Churches has churches in other than the northern states, but so do the Southern Baptists [Southern Baptist Convention], Southern Baptist. We have Southern Baptist churches in Seattle [Washington], and we have American Baptist Churches in Seattle. And so it's really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The National Baptist Convention church [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] is in Seattle too--
Speaker 1: That's right. And on, on that, you see, you have the National Baptist Convention, Progressive National Baptists [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --which are the black Baptist churches. But the--we have--with the American Baptist Churches, we have what is called dual alignment. And a black church could be dually aligned with the American Baptist Churches by paying a fee of fifty dollars a year.
Speaker 2: Okay. So they would--if they were in the Progressive or the National Baptist--
Speaker 1: Irregardless, yeah, if they are Baptist, they can become members of the American Baptist Churches, but if you were not one of those, the black Baptists, and you have a church, it costs you money to be a member and a certain portion of your income, a percentage of it and with special collections and all of that. And our church is Seattle First Baptist Church [Seattle, Washington], which is not a Baptist church [sic.]. And I've been a member there for fifty-four years. And, but the--it cost, I guess our contribution to the American Baptist Churches will run in fifteen to twenty to twenty-five thousand dollars a year. Mount Zion church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Seattle, Washington], which is a black church can be a member of the American Baptist Churches by paying fifty dollars a year because of the dual alignment. Now, on the one hand, that's paternalism and some of the younger American Baptists have been upset over the fact that this is another form of second class citizenship. But it's working itself out, and I'm, I'm not sure that dual alignment still is just fifty dollars. But there was a radical change in the composition of the American Baptist Churches after the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the blacks who were participating in the American Baptist had their own caucus, and they were sort of a shadow group and were never integrated into the organization itself. And so part of our reorganization was to correct that so that there would be full participation and full integration. So since I was president a hundred years ago (laughter), there have been all kinds of people as president. You know, you've had black men, black women, Asian men, Asian women, Latino men and so it is not now the reservation of white male person. And for all too many activities in our American society, things have been under the control of white male persons. And so recognizing the status of women becomes part of it. Recognizing the status of persons of color is a problem. Recognizing linguistic diversity is a problem, of what America is all about. And so my generation is going off the scene. And I do not expect to reach a utopian level of inclusion in our great American society during my lifetime. But I hope that my grandchildren, who now range in age from four to twenty-one, will have the benefits of what I had hoped for and did not witness during the course of my lifetime. And there will be a point where gender does not matter, race does not matter, language does not matter. In our American society, we are all equal, and this is what it's all about. And this is what the current election is all about, is recognizing the status of all persons as equal participants in our human society.
Story_ID: 611194
Speaker 1: Now, from '77 [1977] to '85 [1985], you participated with the National Integration--I'm sorry, the National Interreligious Task Force on Soviet Jewry and the monitoring of compliance with the Helsinki Accords. Now (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Now, this was an activity, I, I think nominally I was involved in that activity in my role as president of the American Baptist Churches [American Baptist Churches USA]. But there was a--the taskforce consisted of a nun, a Roman Catholic priest, a Methodist minister, a Catholic theologian professor, a rabbi and me. So we traveled around the world to different meetings of the Helsinki Accords, it was on the Helsinki Accords. And what we were doing in the early stages was agitating with the old Russian government to allow Jews to emigrate from Russia to Israel. And we would, in the Helsinki Accords, the--which was an American institution, but it met in different places around the world. And they representatives from different nations including the old Soviet Union. And so we would attend these meetings and we were recognized as a NGO, a non-government organization which our state department [U.S. Department of State] characterizes. And we would meet with the representatives of those various groups, but in particular with the Soviet delegation and urging them to allow Jews to emigrate from the Soviet Union to Israel. And in the course of those activities, we also got involved with Amnesty International and one year, when we were in Rome [Italy], they had some hearings, and they needed judges. And because I--even though I was not then sitting on the court, my status is that of a judge. So I was drafted to sit as a judge in the hearings, the Amnesty International hearings on something. I think it had to do with Jews in the Soviet Union. I can't remember the precise details, but that was a kind of thing that I would do. And so our task force--and we, we would meet at the Vatican [Vatican City], and we would meet with the--one of our issues was getting the Vatican to use the power of its political clout to bring about changes for the condition of Jews in the Soviet Union. And the Vatican had a particular office that dealt with Soviet Jewry. And we would meet with the head of that office. It was sort of a pseudo-diplomatic approach to things, but the interesting thing is that we operated on the diplomatic level. The representatives of the Vatican would only speak in Italian. And it would have to be translated even though the speaker was thoroughly conversant in the English language. Some representatives would only speak in French. And it would have to be interpreted. And even in these informal activities such as ours, we had no authority or power or anything, they were very careful not to have direct communication. And if a question was asked, it's translated into Italian, they'd have time to think about their answer. And they'd give their answer in Italian. And by the time it was translated in English, you would have this long sequence of timing between the question and the answer. And so that was, for me, a fascinating experience because I had not dealt in the diplomatic arena before that time. But it was, for me, a learning experience to know how diplomacy actually works. And we were not dealing at a governmental level. We were dealing at a non-government level.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you did that until 1988, I believe, or so.
Story_ID: 611195
Speaker 1: Okay, in '86 [1986], you retired from the Marine Corps Reserve [U.S. Marine Corps Forces Reserve] with the rank of lieutenant colonel, and eighty- from '87 [1987] to '88 [1988], you served as chairperson of the Seattle Mayor's Panel on Disparate Employee Discipline.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Dispart- I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Disparate, disparate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, disparate.
Speaker 2: And I don't have a clear recollection of it, but I know I did.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And the, the issue at the time was different treatment of persons of color in the employment system for the City of Seattle [Washington], and I conducted hearings and studies and did a report or something like that. But it was in the context of the many things that I did. It was somewhat incidental as opposed to being a significant thing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as I recall it.
Speaker 1: That was under Mayor Schell, right [sic. Charles Royer]?
Speaker 2: Does it identify it in there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says Mayor Paul Schell.
Speaker 2: Okay, Paul was the mayor then--
Speaker 1: The former mayor--the former Paul Schlachtenhaufen (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know that, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they have it down here.
Speaker 2: Oh, so that didn't come from me then.
Speaker 1: No, no, it didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, whoever did the research took the time and determined that--I had not remembered that Paul had appointed to me that. I thought it was somebody else.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in, now, in--okay, it said you served as chairperson of the Supreme Court Minority and Justice Task Force [Washington State Minority and Justice Task Force] from '87 [1987] to '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's the Washington State supreme court [Washington Supreme Court]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And that is now the Washington State Minority and Justice Commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the original chairperson of the taskforce from '87 [1987] to '90 [1990], and it was converted into a commission which is a different status. And I have continued as chairperson of that even to today, so for the last twenty years. I have a co-chairperson who is a current member of the supreme court. And we have been co-chairs of it for the last five years. But up until that time, I was the chairperson, and I continue. And, but it is now the functioning Washington State Minority and Justice Commission as opposed to taskforce.
Story_ID: 611196
Speaker 1: Now, in 1988, you were appointed to the position of justice of the Washington State supreme court [Washington Supreme Court]. That's July 13th, 1988. Now, well, we can see a progression towards something like this, but tell us about how it happened?
Speaker 2: How what happened? I got appointed to the supreme court (laughter)? I had turned down an appointment to the supreme court in 1981. The governor who was a personal friend of mine called me and said, "There's a vacancy. I'd like to appoint you to it." And I said, "I'm not ready for it." I was doing something else. So seven years later, a new governor--my friend, the governor, was a Republican. And historically, I had been a Republican. But the Democrat governor called me and said, "I understand--," he called and asked if I would come to his office. And I went to his office and there was a vacancy on the court by reason of the resignation of a member of the court which left a two year vacancy on the court. And the governor who I knew, but was not a personal friend at the time said, "I understand if I offered you this position, you would turn it down." And I said, "Why don't you offer it to me." He said, "I'm offering it to you." I say, "Okay, I'm ready. I'll take it." And that's the way I got appointed (laughter) to the supreme court. But in the meantime, the public relations of it was entirely different. The governor's office had announced that it was considering different people who were named, and I'd get a call from the governor's office saying that, "We're gonna issue this news release tomorrow. Is that okay with you?" I said, "I don't care," because he had already offered it to me, and I'd already accepted it. So the public thought the governor was considering some other people. And it came as a surprise to a lot of people when the governor announced my appointment to the position. But that had to do with the public relations of the political system more than anything else. The governor didn't owe anybody anything. He didn't owe a political party anything. And in the State of Washington judges, by law, are required to be nonpartisan. And it makes no difference what their political affiliation might have been. It makes no difference the politics of the person who appointed them. We are required by law to be nonpartisan and under our code of judicial conduct, it is illegal in the State of Washington for a sitting judge to publicly acknowledge that they ever were a Democrat or ever were a Republican. It's a no, no. You just don't mention it so that I had been appointed to the superior court [King County Superior Court] by a Republican, Governor Dan Evans [Daniel J. Evans]. I was appointed to the supreme court by a Democrat, Governor Booth Gardner. And that confused a lot of people. In fact, I run into people, so called friends of one kind or the other, who comment about the fact that I really know how to manipulate the system, appointed by a Republican governor to the superior court and appointed by a Democrat governor to the supreme court. But the interesting thing is I never applied for either. And I was recruited by Dan Evans for appointment to the superior court and I was recruited by Booth Gardner for appointment to the supreme court. And I had the luxury or the privilege of saying, yes, I'll do it or no I won't do it. And so it never concerned me at all that it came about that way except that I have the satisfaction of knowing that these appointment came to me, and I did not apply for them. And I have been fortunate in whatever I have done in not applying for things. It is my preference not to apply for things. And I say somewhat with tongue in cheek, if you're worth a damn, somebody will find out and they will come to you. And you don't have to go to them. Now, that's an over simplistic remark, but to me, it has worked. They come to me because they think I'm worth a damn, and I think I'm worth a damn. And they say, "You're it," and I say, "Okay." And that's the way it happens. And so a door opens, and they pull you in and say, "You're it," and you decide, "Yes, I am," or "No, I'm not." That's the way I think it should be. But not everybody has that luxury.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 611197
Speaker 1: So what were the highlights of your term on the supreme court of the State of Washington [Washington Supreme Court]? And I don't know if that's the best way to ask it, but what happened there? What were the significant events, I guess, for you?
Speaker 2: Well, the--it's, again, an interesting thing. I was on the court for fourteen years, and I wrote 350 opinions. And the most--and I cannot remember any particular one. You know, if someone called one to my attention, I would remember, but the collegiality on the court, we have nine justices on the supreme court, and you either get along with them or you don't get along with them because everything is done by group. All opinions are based upon the consensus of the group, so that even though I might write an opinion, and I recommend it to the others, they have to vote on it. And if I write an opinion and we take a vote on it, if I get five votes, then that becomes the court's opinion. But if I don't get five votes, it shifts. And it's not my opinion anymore. But the--it's sort of like, I guess, a fencing game. It's parry right, parry left, and you touche and you (laughter), you win your point by scoring. And with a supreme court such as ours and most supreme courts operate in the same way, it's a matter of intellectually convincing your colleagues of a position that you take on a particular case. Our cases are preassigned. And so at the beginning of a term, I knew, which cases were assigned to me, but they weren't assigned to me because of background. They're randomly assigned. Someone in the clerk's office pulls a, literally pulls a name out of a hat and says, this goes to Smith [HistoryMaker Charles Z. Smith], this goes to this person, this goes to that person, so that at the beginning of a term, I would get my assigned cases. So I had two judicial clerks, law clerks who worked with me doing the research, reading everything relating to the case, the briefs and other documents and things like that. Then I would prepare a presentence report, which was distributed to the other judges prior to the hearing. And then we would have the hearing where the lawyers would appear. And then we would go into recess to consider a case based upon the prehearing memorandum, prepared by the judge responsible for the case and the arguments presented by counsel. And then a recommendation is made for a result, and then the vote is taken. The chief justice presides over those meetings. So that's the way it would go. I found that, that experience was a good experience. I had some non-good experiences on the supreme court, but it had nothing to do with the routine process. And I have threatened to write a book called 'The Dark Side of the Temple,' and the Temple of Justice [Olympia, Washington] is where our supreme court is located. And the word dark has many meanings. I'm not white. Therefore, I am dark. As the junior justice on the court, I was assigned the worst courtroom, worst chambers in the building, next to the helicopter pad, and little things would happen. And then there was a cabal, C-A-B-A-L, against me from five of the nine justices, the chief justice and four of the others on a committee that ostensibly was based on seniority. And I had seniority over two of the people (laughter) in the group. But they were making decisions that affected me, and, and I chose not to make an issue of it while I was on the court and decided after I retired I would write a book. But I haven't had the time, energy nor inclination to begin writing the book yet. But when I write the book, I will tell of the negative experiences I had on the court. But--and they had nothing to do with race, which is very interesting. And I think it had to do with, one, my credentials, and two, my arrogance. I, I never took a second seat to anyone from an intellectual standpoint, and nobody on the court had my credentials. The highest ranking [U.S.] military person on our court was a first lieutenant in the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. And none of them had been law professors, and I was a full tenured law professor (laughter). And so I came to the court with a lot of credentials. My international activities, all those other things were unique in the sense that compared to other members on the court, who were provincial. And so these things created an atmosphere of resentment against me.
Story_ID: 611198
Speaker 1: All right, we're still in the supreme court [Washington Supreme Court]. So what--were there any--you just kind of gave us an idea of how it's structured, and how it's--and you said you had, your difficulties, if any, had nothing to do with race. It had to do with qualifications and other things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were those difficulties?
Speaker 2: Well, there's such a things as declaring an opinion moot, M-O-O-T. I was at a meeting in New York [New York] and got back and found out that while I was away, they had met and declared an opinion I had written moot without consulting me. You know, that's an offensive tactic on anybody's part, and the very least they could have done was to have waited until I returned. I was just away for two or three days. They--
Speaker 1: Now, what year was this or what issue was it? Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember what the case was about. It had to have been about 19--about 1992.
Speaker 1: And this was--now, you had been on the bench for a while then, right, you know, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I had been on the court since '88 [1988], but, and--
Speaker 1: So did the issue, I mean did the issue itself surprise you that they would--I mean opinion that they declared moot, were you surprised that they would do that?
Speaker 2: Not really, because I knew the personalities of my colleagues, and the--simply because I was on the court did not mean I had to accept them on a totally equal basis intellectually and psychologically. And so they were not the kinds of persons that I would want to put in charge of my personal life. And so their approach to relations with colleagues and my approach is entirely different. And their sense of ethics was entirely different than mine. And they had preconceived notions or prejudices that were entirely different than mine. And so it was sort of like oil and water, not being able to mix. And it was combination of many different things that are sort of hard to identify verbally, and if and when I write my book, I will analyze it and come up with some insights into what was going on and why they were doing what they were doing.
Story_ID: 611199
Speaker 1: I guess, do you think that most of them were political appointees by, you know, I mean is that why we ended up with, with that kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think--just--
Speaker 1: --a crew? Was it because of a certain politician that appointed them or what?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure it was not--of the five member of what I call the cabal, they were all appointees, but so was I.
Speaker 1: But were they appointed by the same person or the same party or did they have anything in common in terms--
Speaker 2: One of them was appointed by the same governor [Booth Gardner] who appointed me. And I don't think it had anything at all to do with the politics of the appointing authority. It had to do with internal attitudes and operations. The, and sort of--again, because I haven't start writing my book, but a disrespect of--for example, I was changing a taillight in my BMW within the view of the office windows. And one of the law clerks for one of the judges said to me when I got back in the building, "You were out working on your car for eighteen minutes. What were you doing?" And I'm a supreme court justice [on the Washington Supreme Court], and this is a law clerk for (laughter) a supreme court justice. And I thought to myself, who does this person think he is? But he was reflecting, obviously, some kind of attitude that was prevalent in the building among such persons as the judge for whom he worked. And I knew the judge for whom he worked, who was part of the cabal. But that kind of disrespect does not happen on the spur of the moment. It had to have some kind of history behind it. And so the--one day I had been out of town--I travel a lot so it doesn't really matter. But I had been out of town for a few days, and when I got back the clerk of the court said that my personal files had been in the photocopying room and he had his assistant remove them. And I said, "What happened to them?" He said, "Well, she shredded them." Now, what was interesting about that was, number one, I was the only judge in the building who had a shredding policy. I was the only one who did not allow documents from my office to go out, and they were not to be removed. And so the mystery of allegedly my personal documents being in the photocopying room and retrieved by a staff person, but I never saw them and never knew what they were. And the staff person disposed of them in the three days that I was away. And, again, this didn't happen by accident, and I'm not paranoid except that I felt these are stupid people. And I have to live with them and work with them. And so this was the clerk of the court who was not part of the cabal. He was a former judge, but not a supreme court justice and a really good person. But I had a law clerk who had parked--he had a motorcycle, and he parked his motorcycle in my parking space when I was out of town. And somebody in the building had his motorcycle towed away because they said they didn't think he had permission from me to park his motorcycle in my parking space. Pure and simple harassment. And so instead of asking him whether he had permission to park his motorcycle in my parking space or asking me whether he had permission to park it, they had his motorcycle towed away. You can multiply these by maybe a hundred instances, and the question did it have anything to do with race? I say, absolutely not. Was there some other reason behind it? There had to be. What was that reason? I do not know, and when I write my book, my concluding chapter will be, this is why it happened.
Story_ID: 611200
Speaker 1: I mean just listening to this, I don't--was this, did any other justice suffer the same kind of indignities or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --as you?
Speaker 2: No. I was the only one.
Speaker 1: And you're the only black one, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, you know, I don't know. I'm not mathematician, but I would (laughter), I mean it seems like it adds up to a racial motivated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and--well, I, I would not say that those instances like the law clerk and the removal of files, I don't think those files ever existed because I'm not aware of any of my files being misplaced. But at any rate, its rumors and myths that occur and whatever their purpose may be. And I had one instance and, you know, this is, as I indicated, I mean hundreds of instances, but the administrative assistant who is the secretary for one of the justices had told my administrative assistant that when letters for me came to her justice, she would put them in the wastebasket and not give them to him. I went to the judge and told him about this. And he didn't think it was anything to be concerned about. And so from that point on, any letters that I sent to that justice in my own court in the same building, I would always seal them with scotch tape and initial them. And so he just didn't--he thought I was unduly concerned about something that wasn't important. And he was defeated in the election, and ran again, and was defeated the second time. And he died about four weeks ago. But only he knows why he did not respond to my report to him that his secretary had reported that any letters from me would be put in the wastebasket, and he would never see them. Now, this kind of thing--that had nothing to do with race. There was some other reasons behind it that I don't presently know and don't really care at the moment.
Speaker 1: Well, it may not be just race. I think, but I'm, I'm thinking here that you, from what you described of your life and your training and what--and your philosophy, was it, do you think that your philosophy was--well, there are nine on the supreme court [Washington Supreme Court], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you say, five, that's a majority. Did those five share your philosophy or were or would you--
Speaker 2: It wasn't philosophical. I don't think my opinions reflected that. You know, periodically, I would come up with something, for example, there was a murder case out of an area that is principally Latino populated. And a prehearing memorandum was written by a staff person. We have a staff of lawyers in addition to the law clerks for the court who had a footnote on the case that while this man had a Spanish name, he was actually black. And I saw that memorandum, and in conference, I called it to the attention of my fellow judges. I said, "This is absolutely insane. A name and a color has nothing to do with each other. There are black people who are Spanish." I said, "I'm Spanish. And it doesn't make any difference, and for a lawyer who is hired to write opinions for the supreme court to have a stupid footnote that says, while his name was something, with a Spanish name, he was actually black." As it turned out, he was a black Latino. And so, you know, to the extent that I have insights about things, you know, I would do, I recall, but that was, didn't worry anybody. I think that they thought that I was some kind of nut. But, you know, and not to the point that the cabal would do something destructive.
Story_ID: 611201
Speaker 1: I had pretty much finished with minor observations of what at worst was harassment, except that when the cabal would get together and make decisions, that was entirely different, such as mooting my opinion or firing one of my law clerks, you know, that kind of thing. And on our court, the judges hired and fired their own law clerks, and nobody else did. And for five of my colleagues to presume to fire a law clerk without my participation or permission, now, that kind of thing. And, again, it had nothing to do with race. And there were other reasons, and I, I don't know what the reasons were. I'm going to analyze it. Of the five people, one, two, three--four of the five are now dead--no, three of the five are now dead, and two are still alive.
Speaker 2: What was the glue that bound this cabal together?
Speaker 1: Well, it was called the executive committee, and the executive committee theoretically consisted of the chief justice and the four next senior justices.
Speaker 2: So these were the oldest, I mean the longest served (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The longest term except that one of the five was junior to me. So I was not on the executive committee which was appointed by the chief justice.
Speaker 2: So he bypassed his own rule and appointed someone--skipped over you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, bypassed the rule of the court [Washington Supreme Court] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --by establishing an executive committee that consisted of four of the senior judges and one of whom was junior to me. So theoretically, I should have been on the executive committee and excluding me from it meant that they could play games with me. If I had been on the executive committee, they could not have done it. So at any rate, it's, again, I don't think it was political. I don't think it was racial, but I don't know. And I know that of the five of them, two were mentally ill, and one an alcoholic. And one who may or may not have been an alcoholic, and then the fifth one, the person junior to me, was over ambitious. And so analysis of human behavior can be very complicated, and one can do as I sometimes do, I play psychiatrist, I play social worker (laughter), I play psychologist and I come up with observations and conclusions of my own. As long as they don't affect somebody else, it doesn't make any difference.
Story_ID: 611202
Speaker 1: And for me, when I get around to writing my book, the conclusions that I reach about the cabal will be my own conclusions. They don't affect anybody else, and it's not gonna help anybody else. And so that's part of the reason that I'm not sure that I particularly want to write the book, although I have been on record as promising to write it. And I run into people who keep asking me, "Have you written your book yet? When are you gonna write it? Have you started writing your book?" So I have a public waiting for me to write the book. But if I write the book, I may not get a publisher. If I get a publisher, it may be published and nobody will buy the book, and if I get publisher and nobody buys the book, and they have them on sale for ten cents, I would be humiliated. So line of least resistance is not to write the book, but that really is not my serious intention. I do intend to write the book, but when I have the time to do it or the inclination to do it is something else. But my children remind me that I'm not getting younger, and that I may get sick. I may die or I may develop dementia, and I need to write it now. And so I have promised myself that I'm gonna sit down at my computer and start writing and put it on disk, so that it will be available for subsequent publication either during my lifetime or after my lifetime, the book will be published. And I think the public needs to know what goes on behind the doors of the august Washington state supreme court [Washington Supreme Court]. Now, with the current composition of the supreme court, that would not happen. Everybody on the court now are highly principled people who do not do dirty tricks. And this cabal was sort of the dirty trick phenomenon in the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] sense of dirty tricks, during the Nixon administration. These were dirty tricks in the supreme court, and as close as I could come to analogizing it with other forms of behavior, it was a pattern of dirty tricks exercised against one individual which happened to be me. And whatever their reasons were, and, again, I was, at the time, I was the only person who had never had a contested election, you know, the--what is it about Charlie Smith that makes him a target for that kind of activity? I do not know. But there's a Spanish word called celoso, which it means jealous, and I think in the middle of the night, you know, why did it happen? Celoso, celoso. And, but why would they be jealous of me? And maybe they sensed that I thought I was better than they. I don't know, but if you ask me, I was better than anyone of them. And so, better in what sense? You know, I'm brighter than they are. Sure, I am (laughter), and I admit that. But other than that, it's not the reason to harass or to try to bring a person down to your level. And that's part of what it was about. So if you ever see publication of a book called 'The Dark Side of the Temple,' look to see if it's written by [HistoryMaker] Charles Z. Smith.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And if it is, be one of the few people who would buy it (laughter), who wants to read it. And I, I do not flatter myself to think that anyone is interested in reading what I write. And if I write it, it would be mostly for my grandchildren, and so that they would say, this is my grandfather who wrote this book.
Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like it'd be an interesting book.
Story_ID: 611203
Speaker 1: Now, you've operated on three different levels; local, national and international, around a number of issues. You mentioned association with the, some of the activists in town like [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett and the Dixon brothers or the Black Panther Party, and others, that you, that you know them fairly well. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community here in Seattle [Washington]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think Larry Gossett is probably the best example of what can happen. Larry was an alleged radical in his college days. He was one of the principal sit-in demonstrators in the president's office at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] during the early days of the Civil Rights Movement. He is now a member of the county council [King County Council]. I think he's the president of the county council. And Larry has been elected and reelected without opposition. I think this is his third election without opposition. And he is a highly principled person. And he came up through the ranks of protests and while he nominally a member of the Black Panthers, if he was a member at all, and I don't think he was a member of the Black Panthers, but he was part of that generation of young protesters. Aaron [HistoryMaker Aaron Dixon] and Elmer Dixon [Elmer Dixon III] were the visible leaders of Black Panther movement and they also are highly respectable members of the community. So out of protests comes change, and change can be positive or change can be negative, and I think that aside from the unfortunate deaths that occurred during the period of protests in Seattle area as well as other communities, the fact of the protests has been responsible for change and the change has been positive because leadership emerges in the process of protests movements. And so as long as we don't have hot heads that say burn baby, burn, that kind of thing that are leading mob groups into destructive activities, and that can easily happen in any protest movement. As long as the protest is a positive protest that is calling attention to wrongs that need to be corrected and taking leadership to bring about the change that is a positive thing for protests. And I think in our own community, in the Seattle community, we are realizing that. And from among the, what I call the young leaders because they're so much younger than I, are these persons who in their younger years were part of very serious protest movements, including the Black Panthers. And, of course, because I knew the Dixon brothers and was not disassociated from their activity as Black Panthers, they're in my neighborhood. They had their headquarters next to the barbershop that I use, and I knew them both as kids. And so all this to me means that even though the protest of itself may be radical and may be frightening under some circumstances, if the established systems will allow the protests to occur, it's going to emerge into a very positive thing. And it is the suppression of the movement which creates the problem, the problem with law enforcement, the problem with the courts and to say to a person, you cannot march down the street because you don't have a permit to march down the street when the purpose for marching down the street is a perfectly valid one. And, again, I will not take your time and our time on this interview to go into details, but I could tell you some horror stories about suppression of protests in the wonderful Seattle community and overreaction by police authorities, overreaction by merchants in the community and things like that, that fortunately, are not happening now. And the reason is that we have moved from a gut reaction to protests to the recognition that protest has value. And so I am, myself, very much encouraged by protests in any appropriate form, and, for me, it's appropriate as long as they're not torching places, as long as they're not urging people to kill, as long as they're not urging people to burn things, protests can be a beautiful thing. And it works when it is done right by persons with principle.
Story_ID: 611204
Speaker 1: I had to ask a question now about the North American Free Trade Agreement meeting that was here not too long ago, what, about five years ago--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) five or six years ago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was five years ago [sic. World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1999].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a big--do you have any observations to make about that? That was--this isn't the Panthers [Black Panther Party]--
Speaker 2: I really don't--
Speaker 1: --this is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I really don't because--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the groups that engage in radical protests are uncontrollable, and while I think the Seattle Police Department overreacted and they now acknowledge that, at the same time, some of the forms of protests were outrageous and inappropriate and they should have been controlled. The question is how they should have been controlled and what could have been done. Conferences with the protesting group to set up guidelines for their behavior during the course of the meeting, instead of saying, you cannot protest. This is off limits and once they started protesting, hitting them over heads with billy clubs, that should not have happened. And so we are embarrassed over that experience. And good judgment would dictate that at a future event, because all of these things are not suddenly developed, you know that they are coming. And for--if I were the chief of police, for example, I would invite leaders of the group to meet with my office and discuss it and see what it is you're concerned about and where can we, as law enforcement officers, assist you in completing your process of protest. And good leadership and police agencies now would do that, but back, even, even though that's relatively recently, it did not happen. And we made a mistake and it's a blot on the integrity of the City of Seattle [Washington] that it happened the way it happened.
Story_ID: 611205
Speaker 1: We were just talking about the World Trade Organization [WTO] meeting here [Seattle, Washington], and I think that was in 2000, I believe, or 2001 [sic. 1999]. At any rate, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you've done that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Not really, I'm quite satisfied in analyzing the things I have done during the past fifty years. A few minor things I would do differently, like misjudgment of a set of circumstances, such things as control of prostitution. I used to--when I was on the municipal court [Municipal Court of Seattle] many, many years ago, I handled all the prostitution cases in the City of Seattle [Washington], and on Thursdays, I would have what I call ladies' day because that was prostitution day, but I remember one young woman who would constantly come before the court in the revolving door. She would get convicted, sentenced and would be bailed out and she came to me one day in a nurse's uniform, and said, "I appreciate so much your giving me probation. I've gotten my life straightened out. I'm now studying to become a license practical nurse." And I thought to myself, what a wonderful thing I have done for this poor, young woman. She's now headed in the right direction. I got in my car and drive home, and she's holding up a building (laughter), selling prostitution on the street that same afternoon that she was in my office in her nurse's uniform to tell me how grateful she was for the wonderful opportunity I had given her to straighten out her life. And I then came to realize how naive I was. And I believed that all you had to do was to be nice to somebody, and it would change their lives. And it doesn't happen that way (laughter). And so as I look back, it is a realization over a period of time that naive beliefs as a do gooder are not real and one has to be very realistic in decisions that one makes, that particularly affects the lives of other people. And so, that's a non-specific response but that one incident reminds me of the fact that although at the time I did things, I thought I was doing the right thing, I now realize in retrospect that it was not the right thing because of my error of judgment or my lack of understanding in depth of the situation that I was dealing with. But other things as far as court decisions are concerned, I have no regrets or wish that I had done something differently. I may have sentenced a few people to prison whom I should not have sentenced to prison now that I'm more mature, and now that I have a better understanding of what was going on in their lives. But again, at the same time, if you accumulate fifty years of experience, there's not very much that I would do differently than I did then.
Speaker 1: But, you know, I was listening--well, thinking about the first story you told about the prostitute, I mean is it something that the criminal justice system can really change anyway. If you sentenced her to time, would it have made any difference, you know, if she did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --like the amount of time that's prescribed by law--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --would she still be a prostitute?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean I don't know if it would have made any difference either way?
Speaker 2: I don't think it would. If I had sent her to jail, she would get out of jail and go back on the streets. I gave her probation because she was enrolled in this nursing program (laughter), and she was conning me. And I learned that there are people who are real con persons, and the best person in the world to con is a judge who can make the difference between your freedom and your lack of freedom. But at any rate, there are many stories like that that I could regale you with in a relaxed time when you were not on an assignment and tell you some of the things I remember after fifty years.
Story_ID: 611206
Speaker 1: Now, do you, do you think, I mean in terms of what the criminal justice system can and cannot do, I mean do you, do you get excited when you read about the efforts of people to form educational or not-for-profit medical organizations, I mean focused organizations to do good in the community, I mean trying different techniques, you know, retraining people, drying out addicts and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: In a broad, general sense, the answer is yes because I was part of a lot of these early activities in drug rehabilitation and prison reform, and post-prison release programs and things like that. You name the good program that was established in the last fifty years, I was probably a part of it. But not to claim credit for the success of programs, what I enjoy reading about is programs, new programs or existing programs where these things are being done. I think the public is becoming more aware of the need for supportive services to counteract the problems in our society, whether they're crime problems, health problems, whatever they happen to be. And so I applaud the emergence of these programs and more programs. As society advances, we discover new diseases like HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], for example, unheard of in the time when I was in the court system. I would have blood tests made to determine the presence of syphilis, but HIV/AIDS, totally unheard of in those days. But programs that need--we need to have a continuing development of programs. It's easier for me to read about something and say this is not new or they're reinventing the wheel. And I can mentally think that, but I would never actually think that because you can never do too much of a good thing. So any rehabilitation program which may be an absolute duplication of something that I was involved in thirty or forty years ago, is good in the year 2008 because it is happening now. And we have a new generation of people who are concerned about it, whether in the community at large or whether in the medical community or whether in the social work community or whether in the legal community. And so I am, myself, encouraged by the development and continuing emergence of programs that have for their effect improving conditions of people who need some help, who cannot do it themselves.
Story_ID: 611207
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: In a simplistic sense, I would use an old cliche, "It's not his fault because he sure tried," (laughter) but in all seriousness, I would like to think that my legacy is a demonstration that our public systems are capable of rendering humane attention to the problems of its people and that humane assistance must come from the top. Even though it's participated by grassroots participation, it can only be successful if the persons at the top with the power are willing to bring the change up, and this is not only in the court system, but outside the court system. And so, every good thing deserves success. And anyway, if I have a legacy, it is to demonstrate that, that it is possible for change to be brought about by persons of goodwill whose intention is to improve the condition of all persons in our society.
Story_ID: 611208
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us a little bit about your family. Now, we mentioned before your--you've got a wife [Eleanor Martinez Smith], you've got some children, right, and some grandchildren now.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, we, we have four children, three sons. My eldest son [Carlos Smith] is a computer engineer for the federal aviation agency [Federal Aviation Administration]. My number two son [Michael Smith] is an astronautical engineer with a company in El Segundo, California. My number three son [Stephen Smith] is in the academic field. He is recently appointed as vice president of a community college, and my daughter [Felicia Smith Gittleman] is a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we have six grandchildren, a twenty-one year old granddaughter [Mahealani Smith] who is a junior at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.], a sixteen year old grandson who's still in high school, a fifteen year old grandson who is still in high school, a thirteen year old grandson who's in middle school, and a four year old grandson who is still a toddler, and, but they constitute our immediate family. And we're still a reasonably intact family. One of my sons has been divorced, but that does not mean it's not an intact family. But they, with the exception of my son who lives in California, they all live in the Seattle [Washington] area. So we're able to see them regularly and to have them periodically drop in and visit and so we have access to our grandchildren, and we have access to our children and their spouses. And so it's a wonderful world for us to live in in our immediate family, and, of course, there's expanded families, all of that.
Story_ID: 611209
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to deal with before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think not. I think you've pretty much covered the field, and so if you--be careful of your last question that you don't open up a recitation period for me for one hour because once I start talking, it's hard for me to stop.
Speaker 1: But that's all right, that's all right. Now, you've received many awards and many--I just wanna, anybody that's interested, I mean they read the literature in the boxes, you've been recognized a lot for what you've done. But, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person of integrity who had a strong sense of responsibility to humanity and that's a concise statement of how I would like to be remembered. And if it is a, an inscription to be put on a tombstone, I would use my personal motto which is, truth, justice, freedom, and those are the hallmarks of my entire life, is the discovery of truth, the administration of justice and achievement of freedom.
