Story_ID: 300465
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dr. Sudarkasa [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa], we're going to begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C. on Thursday, January 13th, 2005.  Now, if you would please for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it please.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Niara Sudarkasa, N-I-A-R-A, S-U-D-A-R-K-A-S-A.  And for the record I say I was born Gloria Albertha Marshall.
Speaker 1: Thank you.   And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born August the 14th, 1938, in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an anthropologist and a former university administrator, former college president and have had other administrative positions as well as professorial positions.
Story_ID: 300466
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better.  So I ask you to give me short answers to these questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hm.  Now most people can come up with something, right?  I, I like fruit of various kinds, but grapes may be my favorite.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth tones, tans, browns, you know, those colors.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: You favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere where there's a beach.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hm.  Well, I don't know that I have a favorite saying, but I'm always reminded of the biblical saying, "To everything there is a season and a time to every purpose under the heaven" [Ecclesiastes 3:1].
Story_ID: 300467
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where your mother grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name was Rowena Marshall.  She's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Could you spell Rowena?
Speaker 2: Rowena is R-O-W-E-N-A.  Her maiden name was Rowena Evans.
Speaker 1: And where does--where was she born and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She was born in West Palm Beach, Florida, grew up in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and her parents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans] are Bahamians, were Bahamians, who moved from the Bahamas to Fort Lauderdale, I mean, to, you know, South Florida.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk to you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Florida?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was quite young when I was born.  She wasn't, I think she was going on seventeen or had just turned seventeen, so I knew a lot about what her life was like both from her, as well as from her parents, and from other people in the area.  Unfortunately, my mother was born in 1921 and during that time, blacks in South Florida didn't go to school year round when she was a girl.  They had to pick beans for a good part of the year to help their parents, so life for her was not too pleasant as a young woman because she was very bright.  All of her teachers who were also my teachers, but especially her math teacher always used to tell me, say, they say, you know they used the term smart in those days.  They say that you're a smart girl, but you're not half as smart as your mother was, so she would, she would have been a good student, you know, had she had the opportunities that I later had.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, she's a very attractive woman and I do have at least one or more pictures of her that I'd like to you know, include among the pictures.  She was an excellent swimmer at a time when girls in South Florida didn't swim very much because they didn't have any swimming pools.  They went to the ocean, so usually the girls went out to the ocean and jumped waves, whereas the boys, you know, learned to swim and would swim out, but my mother was a good swimmer.  In fact, she was a very strong woman who considered herself to be able to do as she would say anything that a man can do.  She was very self-reliant.
Story_ID: 300468
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father, starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] was a teenage mother.  She was not married when I was conceived.  My father, my biological father's name was Alex Jarlton [ph.].  He's also from Fort Lauderdale [Florida], although he, his family came from South Carolina, so our family, our, I mean my mother's family, coming from the Bahamas, was sort of different from my father's family who came from South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did you, did he ever talk about his childhood and what his childhood was like?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't live with him ever, until, well at one time briefly when I was in high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] I stayed with him and his wife for about a summer or part of a summer.
Story_ID: 300469
Speaker 1: But I know much more about my mother's [Rowena Evans Marshall] family because until I was about fifteen years old, I spent most of my time with my maternal grandparents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans].  My mother had us living in the home of her parents while she worked and then eventually she moved to New York [New York], when I was about twelve years old.
Speaker 2: What kind of work did your mother do?
Speaker 1: My mother was the first woman in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] to own a cleaners, a dry cleaners.  She was in her early twenties when she opened this cleaners, so while she was in Fort Lauderdale she was in that business and then when it didn't offer enough opportunities for her to make money, she was thinking about well, sending us to college, et cetera.  I had three brothers [George Marshall, Ralph Marshall and Reese Marshall (ph.)] younger than myself, so she moved to New York, and I think I was twelve then and we stayed with her grandparents, her parents, my grandparents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 300470
Speaker 1: And just going back to your father [Alex Jarlton (ph.)], how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Oh he was very entrepreneurial.  Everybody in town knew that.  Even as a young man he was a go-getter.  My father was in the [U.S.] Army in World War II [WWII], you know, when I was a little girl so the first time I saw him to really know the difference between him and one of his brothers who looked just like him, was I think about 1945 or '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Was the first time you saw him?
Speaker 2: Not the first time saw him, but I used to see him and a brother of his, but I didn't know the difference because they looked very much alike and so when he moved back to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] after being in service, then, I began to know him.  And for a while he worked in Fort Lauderdale hotel [ph.] which was at that time I think about the only hotel in downtown Fort Lauderdale, and he was the person who did cleaning and I guess everything, like an all-purpose hotel attendant, but, because, of course, blacks didn't work in any of the front office type, or he couldn't have been even a porter who, or a doorman, I would put it that way.  They weren't allowed to have those jobs.  But soon afterwards, my father opened his own business.  He worked for about three or four years, and then he opened a what they called a bar, but it was more than a bar, it was a check-cashing place that cashed checks for black male workers who worked on the garbage trucks and so forth because again, there were no places in our part of the town where they could get that done.  But he had a package store, all of those things.
Story_ID: 300471
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, again on my mother's [Rowena Evans Marshall] side, not through any efforts of mine, but several of my cousins have done quite a bit of genealogical work on our family because my grandmother whose name was Tryphenia Evans, her maiden name was McNeal [ph.], you know, and she was born, as I said in the Bahamas, in Andrews Island [Andros Island, Bahamas].  Her ancestors were from, well I hate to even talk about this because it makes, so many African Americans talk about their European ancestry rather than the African ancestry, but anyway, I'm just telling you what my cousins had researched.  There, my grandmother's grandfather was named Colby, and they all called him Von Colby [ph.].  He was Scotch.  They had intermarried with the Seminole Indians [Native Americans] who left Florida fleeing from the wars [Seminole Wars; Florida Wars] which was going on between the Seminoles and, well I guess they were British or Spanish, I've forgotten which country now, but anyway they went to Andrews Island so my grandmother on my mother's side and again it's, it sort of shows up in her appearance, had, in addition to her African ancestry which she couldn't really trace.  When I asked her had she ever heard of the Gold Coast [Ghana], had she ever heard of Ghana, you know when I was going to do my own field work there.  Had she ever heard of Nigeria?  She had heard of the Gold Coast she said, but they didn't emphasize the particular African countries or ethnic groups from which they came.  But they knew about the Europeans and the Seminoles because the Seminoles were so prominent in Florida history and as they went back and forth between Florida and the Bahamas, everybody would talk about them and they knew the names of some of their ancestors and so on. But since I'm an anthropologist who specialized in Africa, when I went to the continent, I tried to see if there was any way that I could trace our ancestry as far as the African side was concerned.  Unfortunately because I didn't know anything about my father's [Alex Jarlton (ph.)] parents, I didn't know where to really start looking.  I have a feeling since there were a number of West Africans still coming to the United States late into the, well into the 19th century, he very well could be related to people from either Nigeria or Ghana.
Speaker 1: In terms of your grandparents, you told us your grandmother's name.  What was your grandfather's name and how did they migrate to Florida?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My grandfather's name was Alpheus Evans, and again this was kind of an interesting story.  My grandmother actually was married twice.  She came to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] with her first husband whose name was Clarence Bain [ph.], and Mr. Bain and she came to Fort Lauderdale in the, around 1913 or '14 [1914].  And she had children, her earliest children were Bains, but her husband died unexpectedly.  He worked at the icehouse.  You've heard about the old icehouses, right?  Well, he, evidently a block of ice fell on him and he developed pneumonia.  You know, he wasn't in the hospital or anything, and died.  So then she married my grandfather, Alpheus Evans, who had actually migrated to Florida a little bit later.  I, I don't know exactly when he came but it was sometime in the late teens, and both my grandmother and grandfather came from Andros Island in the Bahamas and I think they, they had known of each other if not having known each other when they were growing up, but again, interestingly, you know most women marry older men, right?  My grandmother's first husband was older than her, but my grandfather was quite a bit younger than she.  In fact, he was eight years younger than she.  Now that was very, very unusual in those days.  I guess even now, it's unusual.  But my grandfather was, my grandmother was born in 1892, and my grandfather was born in 1900.
Story_ID: 300472
Speaker 1: You spent a lot of time with your maternal grandparents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans], now did you know your paternal grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandfather died when I was quite young, before I started school.  But I knew my paternal grandmother.  In fact, I used to visit her from the time I knew myself, I knew who my actual biological grandparents were, just as I knew my father [Alex Jarlton (ph.)], even though my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] had remarried and I've always been known officially as Marshall.
Speaker 1: And what was your paternal grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I'm just trying to remember.  Was it Louise?  Wow.  I'm not certain.  I think it was Louise Jarlton [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they called my, see 'cause everybody just called her mama, and I've just forgotten now.  I think it was Louise.  She had a daughter and a granddaughter by the name of Louise, and I think they were both named after her.
Story_ID: 300473
Speaker 1: And so you were pretty much, when your mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] went to New York [New York], you were raised by your maternal grandparents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans]?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived with them all the time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --even when my mother was in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  My brothers [George Marshall, Ralph Marshall and Reese Marshall (ph.)] and I were sort of based in my maternal grandparents' home.  In fact, it was almost like my mother's home too, because even though she had different places where she lived, it's hard to describe.  You know in those days, the extended family was a reality for everybody in Fort Lauderdale.  And as long as your parents were living, their home was your home base, so my mother always spent a good deal of time in my grandparents' home and we lived there.  Maybe just a few times in my growing up do I remember sleeping anywhere other than in my grandparents' home.
Speaker 1: And what was it like?  Actually, let me ask you this.  Tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in what used to be called the country, outside of Fort Lauderdale.  Actually, I wrote a little story about that, I'm beginning to write about growing up in Fort Lauderdale, and the end of what was called Colored Town was more than a mile east of where we lived and we lived near what was then the, quote graveyard, the colored graveyard, so I remember a house and all the other houses in our little community being very isolated.  There were a lot of palmettos.  Do you know what a palmetto is?
Speaker 1: Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Palmetto is a palm and I guess it comes from the Spanish small palm, and they grow in clumps, used to grow in clumps all over South Florida.  They look like the wide palms that you see on palm trees but they grow very close to the ground.  And I remember lots of palmettos.  I remember most of all, as I said in one of the stories I wrote, the very hot sand, because we lived in an area where there was very little grass.  You know people couldn't afford to plant grass and water it in order to keep it growing, so the only grass that grew where we lived was something that was called Bermuda grass, very hardy, very sturdy grass, but it didn't grow in a lawn-like pattern as you can see in South Florida in these days.  So in the summertime, in particular, but all during the year in Florida, the sand was very hot, and we didn't wear any shoes.  So one of my earliest memories was walking in this very, very hot sand.  It was pure, pure white.  It looked almost like silicon because of the whiteness and the shininess of it, and so I remember, you know, the days that we played outside in the sand.  We used to make mud pies and all that.  We had a great big tree, which might have been a ficus tree, but we called it a fig tree at the time.  A very large tree with great branches and leaves and roots that actually grew above ground so we had swings that were made in the trees and so on.
Story_ID: 300474
Speaker 1: Actually, can you give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, I'm the oldest.  I was Gloria [Gloria Albertha Marshall; HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa].  My brother George [Marshall] was born in 1939.  I was born August 14, 1938.  He was born in 1939, in December.  Then Ralph [Marshall] was born in '41 [1941] and Reese [ph.] in '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what daily life was like for you in your [maternal] grandparents' [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans] house.  What, did you wake up in the morning and--
Speaker 2: You mean before I started school?
Speaker 1: If you can remember.
Speaker 2: Un-hm.  Well, you know, most kids don't do anything but play all day before school starts, you know we would get up.  Our houses down, well let me talk specifically about ours.  It was one that has come to be called a shotgun house.  Shotgun because they say if you stand at the front door, aim the gun, the bullet would go out the back.  That was the way the house was when I first remembered it.  We had a front porch.  We had, from the front porch, you go into the living room.  Now this, it wasn't exactly a shotgun house because we had a bedroom off the living room when you go into the dining room.  And then there's a bedroom off the dining room and at first it was just a big kitchen at the back.  That was the extent of the house.  We had a bath, those tin tubs.  My grandparents would put those in the kitchen for us to bathe in at night.
Speaker 1: Did you take a bath every night?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we took a bath every night because it was very, I mean you just got so sandy down there and sweaty, but of course, we would all be piled in the tub together and we woke up early in the morning again because the sun would really wake you up in the morning and my grandmother was basically a stay at home mother, no a stay at home grandmother, so we would just do whatever she assigned us to do during the daytime.  My grandfather had a farm.  He grew beans and bell peppers, green peppers for sale.  Beans meaning string beans, but down in Florida we didn't call them string beans, they just called 'em beans.  But my grandfather also worked as a longshoreman, and whenever there were boats to be unloaded and the, quote colored gangs, as they called them, the groups of longshoremen who worked together, whenever they were being used, my grandfather would work there and worked as a farmer, you know, in addition.  Later on he became also a minister, but that's, I guess, that's another story.  My grandfather would go to work and my grandmother was at home.  She had regular days for doing certain things.  For example, washing.  I can't remember now whether it was a Tuesday or a Thursday, but it was one day of the week.  She always washed on that day.  And that was the day that I liked best because I would get up and you know, then she'd put her boiler outside on the wood, sitting on top of the sand and put a big tub on top of the wood so that the water would be boiling hot.  And the first thing she did was take all of the linen and scrub it, you know, on the wash board and then put it in the boiler, so the linen was always so white, you know.  We didn't have any colored sheets.  Everything was white and boiled and I just loved walking around behind her.  I never did anything.  She always said that the only thing I could do was read and go to school.  But I loved to be outside with her on those days because I would tell her stories that I made up, and then she would listen and then she would tell me things, you know, in answer to the questions that I might ask her about people in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] or what was this and why did we have that.  We lived right near the westernmost railroad tracks that went from north to south.  It was called the Seaboard [Air Line] Railroad and I used to love the train to come by with the, you know, horns and so I would make up stories about traveling on the railroad and I would tell my grandmother where I came from.  Any name that I heard I guess from the radio or people talking, I would think about it and the name that I settled on was Grand Rapids, Michigan.  Don't ask me why, but I used to tell her stories about life in Grand Rapids, Michigan during her wash days.
Story_ID: 300475
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood, and remind you of growing up [in Fort Lauderdale, Florida].
Speaker 2: Well, the sound of train whistles, but you don't hear them very much anymore.  Many nighttime or nocturnal insects, you know, 'cause we could hear crickets and other chirping type noises at night.  When I went to Africa, for the first time in '61 [1961], it was very interesting because I ended up living in a small town or small Yoruba town in a house that was a little bit isolated from the town, but at night, because it was surrounded by palmettos.  They didn't call them palmettos.  It was clump, clumps of these green palm-like trees, I guess you would say, or, or, they're not trees because they're not tall enough to be trees but anyway, yeah, I would listen and I heard a lot of the sounds that I used to hear, you know, growing up in South Florida.
Speaker 1: What smells?
Speaker 2: Mainly, night jasmine, various fruits.  We had lots of, you know, guavas.  That's definitely a smell from my childhood and people don't know the guava that much.  Mangos, we had many, many, many, many mangos.  All varieties. Avocados, oranges and limes, lemons, grapefruit.  Most of the fruits that people associate with the West Indies, really grew in South Florida as plentifully, I guess, as they did there.  So, when I go into what they call Caribbean market, I feel at home because I know everything that they're selling there, even though I didn't go into the Caribbean until much later.
Story_ID: 300476
Speaker 1: Because I guess the most, one of the most important ones that I haven't mentioned is the smell of the ocean [Atlantic Ocean].  Because we lived, I would say a good seven or eight miles west of the ocean, but we went to the beach quite often, and all the time I was growing up, we had as you could imagine the colored beach and the white beach, or beaches, for them because they had great choices, but we loved going to the beach, and I love being near the ocean to this day.  When I went to West Africa, it was so interesting.  When I first got to Nigeria I went straight from Lagos [Nigeria], which is on the ocean to Ibadan [Nigeria], some ninety miles north, and I didn't really go back to that area for almost a year, or if I went, I was only in the city, I didn't really go to the beach in Lagos, and in the, about a year after I had been there, a friend of mine drove me to Badagry [Nigeria].  Badagry is one of the legendary, quote slaving posts in West Africa, and as we neared Badagry, I just, it was over, the sense of being or of approaching the ocean was so overwhelming, I was really transported back to Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  They had reeds growing because it was very marshy going to Badagry and we didn't have that in Fort Lauderdale, but I would say, you know, miles away before you get to the ocean, you could smell the ocean.  I was so excited and I loved Badagry, and once I had been there, then every time I went to any place in West Africa, I would always make a point of spending a lot of time by the ocean.  And this is what's interesting about this is that, as I told you, most girls didn't learn how to swim, and many of us don't spend as much time on the beach, as tourists.  Either, both black tourists and black settlers, but I just loved to be near the water.  I always thought that I would love to have a home on the ocean.  Of course, I can't afford it, but I would still love to have one there, despite the hurricanes.
Story_ID: 300477
Speaker 1: Can you tell us the name of the street that you lived on and kind of describe your community [in Fort Lauderdale, Florida] for us a little bit?  I know you said that it was like in the rural area outside of the city, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)But that was when I, when I, my earliest memories.  In 19-, well in that area, there were no streets.  There were just dirt roads, or in some cases, gravel roads that the cars could drive on because as I mentioned, this is outside of the city limits, even the black city limits.  So when, when we, when I was growing up what I saw around me were open spaces with the white sand, and then clumps of palmettos.  When we walked to the store in town, as we called it, we had to go through paths, through the palmettos and we would see tiny little houses.  I guess people might call them shacks now, where some of the people who lived out there lived because not everybody had properly built houses.  I mean a lot of people lived really in these little one-room places that they had built almost flat on the ground.  Our house and most of the quote, proper houses, were set on, stone pillars.  I don't think they were poured cement.  I think that they were made out of cement block or something, but everybody's house was at least three feet off the ground, but there are other people, sometimes si-, old, elderly, single men and single women who lived in these very small houses that were just in the bushes.  We used to refer to the palmettos as the bushes, you know.
Speaker 1: How was your [maternal] grandfather [Alpheus Evans] able to farm with so much sand around?
Speaker 2: Oh no, he didn't farm where we lived, there's a lot of what's called muck in that part of Florida.  Zora Neale Hurston wrote about it, you know, over on the lake she called it.  In fact, that's what they all called it because my grandparents, no not my grandparents, but my grandparents' friends, many of them lived over on the lake during those major storms that Zora Neale Hurston wrote about in 'Their Eyes Were Watching God,' but anyway, he had his farm plot in the areas that was much more, much blacker, muckier, very, very fertile soil, so they were some distance away from the house and they would have to drive there in their automobiles or trucks.  And he didn't have a big farm.  I imagine it was only a few, maybe ten acres or five acres.  I don't know how big because I almost never went to the farm.  I only remember going one time.
Speaker 1: Did your brothers [George Marshall, Ralph Marshall, and Reese Marshall (ph.)] have to go?
Speaker 2: They did when they got old enough.  And, of course, that meant that my grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans] would be going too because they went with her, that meant on Saturdays, and then she would leave me at home allegedly, supposedly to clean up and come home and find that I hadn't.  Oh, she considered me to be very lazy.
Speaker 1: What would you do with your time when she had left you at home to clean up, what would you do?
Speaker 2: Play, with my friends, go visit, talk, you know, we didn't really have a library to go to, but I did a lot of reading.  I had a lot of books that I took from school and later books that people would give me or lend me.  I loved reading.  So if I wasn't visiting or playing with somebody I would be on the porch reading, and when she came home.  Well see, every week she wanted the kitchen and back porch scrubbed.  Now she herself would mop the house.  It was, cover, the floors were covered with linoleum, but, their sense of cleanliness was just, you know, exceptional I thought.  Every week you have to do all of these things to the house, and to me I never could see the difference.  I really couldn't tell whether the floor had been mopped or not.
Speaker 1: But I bet your grandmother could tell couldn't she?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, because when she came home and found that I hadn't done it, that was, you know, a good, what would she--tell me off, you know.  She didn't, she didn't, I'm sure that we were not exempt from corporal punishment, but not, not often did we get a switch to us, that's what they called it.  Go out and get me a switch, that's what she would say.
Story_ID: 300478
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the story in your life where your [maternal] grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans] told you, you could be like Mary McLeod Bethune.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was a little bit later.  I had, I started to mention to you up until about 1945 we lived in the country.  Maybe, yes, I think it was '45 [1945] or possibly '44 [1944], but at some point, my grandparents decided to move our house and we had a, some property on 8th Avenue in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], that was really sort of in the heart of the black community, and they decided to move the house from out in the country to 8th Avenue.
Speaker 1: To literally move the house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was put on the back of a flatbed that was pulled by a truck and it took about, I think two days to pull the truck.  I mean to pull our house from where we lived to where they set it up on 8th Avenue.  And I grew up on 8th Avenue.  Our address was 423 Northwest 8th Avenue.  Now the interesting thing about this is that two weeks ago I got a telephone call from a woman who had been one of the people who lived out in the country where we lived.  In fact, their house was right across the dirt road from our house.  Her name was Judy Goldsmith or Judy Bowls Goldsmith [ph.].  She lives in Chicago [Illinois], came from Chicago to Fort Lauderdale and called me up, said that she had made contact through like one of my cousins and we were so glad to see each other again, I mean to make contact, because I hadn't, I hadn't, I had known her throughout my elementary [Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] and junior high school [Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].  So she came and told me about, she said, "Oh, I was so upset when your grandparents moved your house."  Now can you imagine?  She said, "Why are they doing that?  Why are they moving the house?"  She told me something that I never knew.  She said that my grandfather and her grandfather, she was living with her grandparents too, had a falling out about something, but you know if I had realized I would have to retell this, I would have paid more attention to what she said it was about.  But she felt that our, that my grandparents moved to get away from their family because my grandfather didn't want to have any acrimonious relationships, you know, with her grandfather.  So we moved and she told me, she said the first night they put your house on the flatbed and they moved it so that it was almost side-by-side with our house and that meant it was closer to the graveyard and then they moved it on.  Everybody in Fort Lauderdale came out, you know, along the way, to watch and see what was going on and we were in the house.  I remember my grandmother and my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] holding the china closet because they didn't really unpack anything, and they had to sort of keep the china closet from falling over.  I think, I don't remember them packing the dishes out of it, but maybe they did because nothing actually broke, but we had to spend a lot of time, or at least the adults did, stabilizing things in the house as it moved along--
Story_ID: 300479
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about, let's talk now about elementary school.  Do you remember the name of your elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  It was only one school.  Dillard, it was called Dillard High School and Dillard Elementary and Dillard High School [Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].  It was all one location on Northwest 10th Avenue and 4th Street and see we lived on 8th Avenue near 4th Street, so I was very close to the school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers at Dillard?
Speaker 2: Yep, all of them.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher's name was, at the time that she was my teacher, she was first Miss Davis, Esther Davis [ph.].  Then she got married to a Howard, so she was Esther Davis Howard in first grade and then later on she became Esther Davis Howard Martinez [ph.].  And her, her first and only son was by her husband whose name was Martinez.  But I, I could name all of my teachers.
Speaker 1: Name them for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, we had Esther Davis and then Miss Nichols [ph.], and then Mrs. Way [ph.], and then Miss Nimmons [ph.] and Mrs. McCord [ph.].  Well she was Miss McCord at the time but she became Mrs. Mosley [ph.].  Now that was fifth grade and then Miss Pettis [ph.] in sixth grade.  Now I, I started school one year early.  I started when I was five, so when I got to sixth grade with Miss Pettis, that means I'm already a year ahead, right?  And they called, she called me, she said, "Gloria [Gloria Albertha Marshall; HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa]," she said, "we think that, we think that there's no point in your staying in sixth grade, so we're gonna give you a test."  I said, "Okay."  So I took the test and she said nope, she said you know everything that we could teach you in sixth grade so we're gonna put you in seventh grade.  Now seventh grade, there's a big juncture between sixth and seventh because that's the beginning of junior high, even though it's the same physical area.  They had classes, they changed classes as we used to say instead of having all their work with one teacher.  And I, that was the most miserable time in my life.  As I look back on it, oh, I was so unhappy.  I went from being the youngest in my class in the sixth grade and fifth grade to being not just the youngest person in seventh grade, but hated by the seventh graders because I was the youngest one in the class.  And my personality changed.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: I became very rebellious, very ill-mannered as they used to say.  That was the term that they used in those days.  I was such a model student as an elementary school student.  Teachers loved me in elementary school, and in junior high, they stated writing in my report card, "Oh Gloria is just doing so well, but she's unruly, she's, you know," those kinds of things.  But anyway my homeroom teacher in seventh grade was Mr. Bailey [ph.].  I think he was my homeroom teacher in seventh and eighth, and then when I went to ninth grade, Miss Harris [ph.], who later became Mrs. Vaughn [ph.] was our homeroom teacher from ninth, tenth, and eleventh and then I didn't graduate, I went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] on an early entrance, Ford Foundation [New York, New York] scholarship.
Story_ID: 300480
Speaker 1: Let's back up a little bit, and I wanna ask you during the elementary school  years [at Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], now can you tell us the story that your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About my [maternal] grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about your grandmother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know I have a visual, very clear visual picture of when she said it, where I was, but I don't remember what lead up to it, except that this must have been in the, still I, I was probably in no higher than seventh grade, maybe fifth grade, and my grandmother used to talk about Miss [Eleanor] Roosevelt and Mrs. [Mary McLeod] Bethune.  She just thought they were just the greatest women, you know, in the world.  The fact that they were friends and everything, she would tell me, you know, what Ms. Roosevelt was doing to help black people as well as other poor people and how Mrs. Bethune had started a college [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] and everything.  And then just one day I was sitting on the couch in our living room and she was standing and I don't remember what our conversation was about, but I remember her saying to me, well you know, one day you can maybe, not, she didn't say maybe you'll be, she said one day you can be another Miss Bethune, and I, it's so amazing what an impact that had on me because here was this woman that my grandmother always talked about, but she talked about her with such reverence and such distance, you know, that well my goodness if she's way above my grandmother, how could I ever aspire to be like her, but she felt that education was so important.
Story_ID: 300481
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, the grammar school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, not ones that took me beyond, much beyond high school, because my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] who, according to our teachers who knew both she and I, always said she had been a very good student and she was determined that all of us were going to finish college, not just high school.  Now the interesting thing about that though is that she never talked about college in the early years, she talked about finishing high school, get your diploma.  Everybody, they used to say diplooma [ph.]. (Laughter) Make sure you get your diplooma, and the great fear for mothers and particularly my mother since she was a teenage mother herself, was that maybe I might be a teenage mother so she would always tell me about how I had to really, really, really, stay focused, you know, that's today's terminology but that's basically what it was.  So, I felt it was very important to, you know, live up to my mother's aspirations and my teacher's.  Because everybody used to talk about my accomplishments as a student.  In fact, when I went back to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] in the early part of this century, I think I moved back fully in 2002, but I had to make some speeches in Fort Lauderdale in the late '90s [1990s] and early 2000s and one of my teachers, Mr. Williams [ph.], who just passed, was one of the speakers going before me on a program that we had in '95 [1995] called All Arrive in '95.  All of the people who had graduated from Dillard High School [Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] from the '20s [1920s] on up to the present were invited back for an all-class reunion and as he was introducing me I was just amazed at the things he told the audience about what I had done as a student, a young student, because I had forgotten them, but when he reminded me of them, I remembered.  He, he said for example, that when I was in seventh grade and I had just, you know I told you I skipped sixth, he gave me a math test and I sat in the front, no I sat somewhere else, did the math test, turned it in, and I didn't have any mistakes so he thought that I had cheated.  So he then asked me to come and sit in the front of the class and gave me another test, and I sat in front of the class and this time, because I wanted to get out of there and go play, I did it real fast and I gave it to him.  So from that point on he was just amazed, but I had had a wonderful fifth grade math, I mean, teacher and she loved math and she instilled that in me, and so I used to do a lot of what they called statement problems, if, this, this and this happens and that, but we didn't, we didn't learn algebra, we just had to do it all by regular arithmetic, but nowadays I find that when students are solving those problems, they don't call it arithmetic, but because I had done so well in this test, then he took me, and I had forgotten this, to every class in, I think the students must have been like in the eleventh and twelfth grade, he said now you see this little girl here, she, (laughter) give her any problem that you can't solve, and she'll work it out.  So anyway, because the teachers had such hopes for me and my mother had, I always assumed that I would finish high school and then as I got into eighth, ninth grade, then my mother starts talking about college.
Story_ID: 300482
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well quite frankly, I had no clue as to what it would be like.  I only knew a few people who had gone to college.  I mean teachers, but you know, not, I didn't know them well, but the students whose, who had gone to college in our town weren't in our community, they were, they lived a little further away from us and so I didn't associate with their younger siblings on a day-to-day basis.  The first family I knew that had somebody in college and, was the Williams [ph.] family and they lived down the street from me.  So, I used to look at their big sister and try to imagine what must be going on in college.
Speaker 1: Did you know that college cost money?  Did you know that then?
Speaker 2: Well my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] made us aware of it because she, one of the reasons she said she was leaving Fort Lauderdale [Florida] was to try to get a good job in New York [New York] and save money for us to be able to go to college.  So, I knew, but I had no idea how much or, you know, what would be entailed in it.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of, so you went to Dillard High School [Fort Lauderdale, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Dillard Elementary [Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] and then Dillard High School.
Speaker 1: So what was that last year like for you in high school?
Speaker 2: Before I left?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well it was an ordinary year.  I was in eleventh grade and by this time, although I remember I was fourteen, but I had gotten over the problem of being a young student in the class because all of my classmates accepted me as one of the students in the class by that time.  I don't think anybody thought about my age anymore.
Speaker 1: What type of fourteen year old were you?
Speaker 2: Tall.  That helped a lot because I didn't look fourteen, and I have a granddaughter who is just like that now.  She's thirteen and she's my height, or a little, she might even be a little bit taller than me.  But I haven't grown, well, there's one person who has known me all my life and she says to me, you know you haven't grown since you were twelve years old.  So, I have to take her word for it.  I think I did grow one inch.  I remember I was 5'6" most of my junior high school and high school years, and then all of a sudden then I'm 5'7", so I did grow some.
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, what were some of your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, I loved English and working on the newspaper.  My homeroom teacher, Miss Harris [ph.], who became Mrs. Barnes [ph.], was also the adviser to the Panthers Paw [ph.], which was the name of our school newspaper, so from the time I was in eighth grade onward, I worked on the paper in various capacities.  I didn't exactly know what it meant, cause I did everything, but they had, you know, there was a copy editor and a this and a that and I remember most of the time I functioned as a copy editor because that was the last person who, along with the teacher, worked on the paper before it went to press and I always thought that I would like to be a journalist.  When I went to college though I honestly didn't know what I was going to, I didn't know about majors or anything, but one of the men who was a social worker in West Palm Beach [Florida] was moving down to Fort Lauderdale or helping our YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  By that time we had a YMCA in town.  It was both YM and YW [World Young Women's Christian Association, World YWCA], but it was one of the important gathering points for young people and he said to me, "Well Gloria [Gloria Albertha Marshall; HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa]," this was after I had gotten word that I had the scholarship--
Story_ID: 300483
Speaker 1: Well, let's back up a little bit.  What year did you graduate from high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't graduate.
Speaker 1: Did you earn your diploma?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get a high school diploma until I was in my thirties (laughter) and they gave me an honorary diploma, but--
Speaker 1: Why didn't you get a high school diploma?
Speaker 2: Because I was in high school, I mean in eleventh grade in 1952- '53 [1953].  Wait a minute.  Is that right?  '53 [1953], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: You're fourteen.
Speaker 2: So um, one day one of my teachers, and this is the kind of thing you say, "Well Gloria [Gloria Albertha Marshall; HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa], we're gonna take you to Miami [Florida] to take a test."  She said, "There's going to be a test to see whether or not you can get a scholarship to go to college."  So, of course, you know, I was very excited about that because I knew that that would help my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] in terms of paying the bills and so on.  And the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], along with some other foundations, were sponsoring these tests all over the country at that time identifying what they came to call gifted children who might go to college early.  Now this was something I believe was started at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and it might have been started maybe a couple of years before, but I know it was started in the '50s [1950s], or I believe it was, so I went to Miami in the classroom with a lot of other kids I didn't know, took this test and it turned out that I was one of those offered a scholarship.  Now we were asked to choose the school we would like to go to and I didn't know but one of the black schools on the list.  I had heard of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I didn't know the others because you know, not every black college [HBCU] was a part of this program, so I had checked Fisk and then they, my principal called me and, "Said oh, girl," you know he would call us oh girl, he said, "you know you're going to be going to college, you're going to leave us."  I said oh no, not again.
Speaker 1: So you were fourteen?
Speaker 2: I was fourteen when I took the test and I was, because my birthday is in August, I'm always, you know, the whole year I'm always the same age so I left Fort Lauderdale [Florida] in August, which was the year that I turned fifteen, for Fisk in September.
Story_ID: 300484
Speaker 1: You decide to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was it like?  You arrived at Fisk fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: But you remember, I'm not the only fifteen year old there.
Speaker 1: You're not?
Speaker 2: No, this was a program that the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] sponsored at the various institutions, and at Fisk it was called, well it was officially early entrance honors program or something, but it was called the Basic College Program.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They had it designed so that if you came out of the tenth grade you would spend five years at Fisk to get a B.A.  If you came from eleventh grade as I did, and several other people did, you would spend only four years, but we didn't live with the freshman.  They had special dorms for us, one for the girls and one for the boys.  And we had special hours.  We had to be in at 7:30 p.m.  When I tell people that, they were amazed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It wasn't like the true college experience.
Speaker 2: Not the first year.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No they didn't throw us into college so to speak, but people, well it had its disadvantages because we were all living together.  All the rest of the students called us the babies, and they hated us because they said we pushed up the curve.  They said I don't want to be in class with these BCs [Basic College Program students], you know that was--that was, we were a very close group.  In fact, we still are friends and stay in touch (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many of you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, in our group there were fifteen girls and fifteen boys.
Speaker 1: From throughout the country?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh, pretty much throughout the country.  I was gonna say lots from the Chicago [Illinois] area, but not lots, but a few from the Chicago area, Texas.  I can't remember, oh yes, in my class there were two of us from Florida.
Speaker 1: And what were--
Speaker 2: Four actually, two boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: What was your mother's [Rowena Evans Marshall] reaction to the fact that you had gotten the scholarship?
Speaker 2: Oh she was very happy.  She was very, very happy that I had made it through high school, because she didn't, there was a point in high school [Dillard High School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] when I would, I was having a boyfriend who was quite a bit older than me.  So she promptly went to his mother and told her that she should tell her son that I was too young for him and that he should leave me alone.
Speaker 1: He said, "But mom, she doesn't look fifteen."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Fourteen.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  No.
Speaker 1: So, so you were at Fisk from '53 [1953] to '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 300485
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you decide to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leave?
Speaker 1: --transfer?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't actually intend to transfer.  I went on an exchange program to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], but once I was at Oberlin, I decided to, it was a very heart wrenching decision.  I liked Oberlin because it was harder in some ways and easier in some ways.  Academically, I would say for me Oberlin was tougher because students at Oberlin really studied.  I mean we used to work at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], but it wasn't so hard for us, and since we were the ones setting the, I would say, the curve, there was nobody to say well, they're gonna be better than we are, so we have to work, work, work.  But at Oberlin, well I still had my Ford Foundation [New York, New York] scholarship, because they had a scholarship program too, but they had the students mixed in with everybody so you didn't exactly know who was an early entrant at Oberlin.  But the students spent six hours in the library?  That was unheard of when I was at Fisk.  So the first semester I was there, I did, I did okay.  A lot of people would have been very happy with their grades because I got all Bs and B pluses.  I think I had, I might have had a B minus in one subject at Oberlin my exchange student year, but I had B pluses, so overall it was a high B average.  But I felt well I could do this, you know.  If I were here I would, I can make the same grades that I made at Fisk.  So a lot of the reasons why I transferred was to challenge myself to do as well at Oberlin as I had done at Fisk.  But I also felt that socially it was easier at Oberlin.  Now that's ironic--
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: --because it's predominately white.  But Fisk had a lot of upper middle class students, especially the girls.  They used to say that all the women at Fisk were there to marry Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] men.  So their parents used to spend a lot of money on their clothes and I didn't, I didn't have that.  My mother [Rowena Evans Marshal] didn't have it, you know, so even though I had wonderful friends at Fisk and some of my friends didn't even know until after I had left there and I told them about how I responded to it, they were surprised.  But you always had nice clothes and you always did this.  But I felt the pressure of being a girl from a working class, low-income family at Fisk with people with so many fur coats and evening gowns and this and that.  You know the whole time I was at Fisk I never went to a football game because everybody dressed up to go to the football games.  So on Saturdays, I would just do something else.  Because I didn't want to ask my mother to buy me this or buy me that, and one time I asked her if I could get a mouton because that was the coat of choice of the ordinary students in those days, you know.  The ones that could really afford it might have a fox or this or that, but moutons, they were just commonplace.  And my mother said I can't afford to buy you a mouton, and I felt so bad that I had asked her because then, she bought me a very nice coat which I, which was quite unusual.  Since she worked among garments all the time, she had very good taste.  Maybe that's why the kids say you always had nice clothes because my mother could buy clothes that looked good at a reasonable price but you can't get blood out of a turnip as she always said.  So you couldn't buy a fur coat if you didn't have the money.  But when I went to Oberlin, we wore jeans almost all the time.  And there was no emphasis whatsoever on dress.  So I just felt well, let me stay here.  But, I missed, in the end I was kind of sorry, I mean looking back on it, no I said there are certain things I would have had if I had stayed at Fisk that I sacrificed at Oberlin.
Story_ID: 300486
Speaker 1: What year did you earn your degree?
Speaker 2: At Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Oberlin.
Speaker 2: In '57 [1957], yeah.
Speaker 1: And you earned your degree in what?
Speaker 2: Anthropology, sociology.  Or sociology, anthropology, and English (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why--?
Speaker 2: Well, see I was an English major at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], but with a sociology minor because this man, as I was telling you before, had recommended to me when I told him I wanted to go into journalism, he said well you can major in English and have a sociology minor.  So I thought, well that solves it.  I'll just tell 'em I want to major in English and minor in sociology, but when I got to Oberlin I had enough credits.  I would have had by the end of my senior year in sociology, to major in sociology.  But for English I would have had to spend an extra summer or something like that because I think they required like thirty-six credits in English and fewer credits in sociology for the major.  So then I just switched them around and I majored in sociology and anthropology because it was one department, and I actually learned to really like anthropology at Oberlin.
Speaker 1: How did you become interested in anthropology?
Speaker 2: Well, I took a course on the, it was called Negro in the New World, and it was all about African influences in the Caribbean.  My teacher had done his research in Jamaica.  He had studied with Melville [J.] Herskovits, who was one of the most, in fact he was the leading anthropologist focused on African influences in the Americas.  So when I started reading about that, I found that one of the institutions that we read about was a savings association called Asusu [ph.], and that was an institution that I had known from Florida.  It was one that my [maternal] grandparents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans], especially my grandmother belonged to.  Say you get twelve people or ten people and they decide to save their money by putting in ten dollars a week say, if you have ten people.  So each week the hundred dollars goes to one of them.  It's like interest-free savings and they called it Asu [ph.] and when I discovered that Asu was a Yoruba word, then I said, oh, I have a history.  You know it wasn't as if you, Afr-, the African background was just and a depersonalized concept, and so I then became interested in learning more about the link between Africa and African Americans, as well as Africa and people from the Caribbean.  So that's how I got into anthropology, not so much because of the theoretical constructs associated with anthropology but because of the historical linkage between Africa and the New World.
Story_ID: 300487
Speaker 1: After you earned your degree at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] you decided to further your education--
Speaker 2: You mean at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, at Oberlin, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and that was mainly because I hadn't--see one thing about Fisk that I knew I missed at Oberlin, if I had stayed at Fisk I would have had professors giving me a lot more guidance as to what to do later.
Speaker 1: Career guidance?
Speaker 2: Career in terms of scholarships because I didn't have a scholarship to Columbia at first.  And all my friends at Fisk who were, and I was, I would have been at or near the top of my class at Fisk, and I'm sure I would have had a Fulbright or some other fellowship because they would have said, you can apply for this, but nobody did that at Oberlin.  So here was I coming to the end of my senior year, and the other thing I didn't do was the Phi Beta Kappa [Society] rules at Oberlin, states, stipulates that by your, you had to have three semesters at Oberlin before you could be considered.  But see I didn't have three semesters until I was graduating and I was so upset because there were some Phi Beta Kappa in our class whose rank was lower than mine by the time I actually finished because I had done exactly what I said.  The first year I was there, as I told you, I had Bs and a high B average.  Then the next semester I had three A's and three Bs, but they were high Bs.  And in the last semester I had all A's and one B.  So I was, I, I was doing well academically, but I didn't have the academic rewards to show for it that I would have had if I had been at Fisk.  So I felt that, and I still think today that the historically black colleges [HBCUs] pay more attention to the students because they know what it takes, you know, to get there, and if you can get there, they want to make sure that you get the best possible opportunities.  And I don-, I mean the people at Oberlin liked me and all that, but I just think they just didn't pay attention, and I didn't know how to be self, how to guide myself, you know, self-directed in terms of graduate school, but I went to Columbia and I did get a scholarship the second semester, so the, so it turned out that it was not a full scholarship, I had a scholarship and a work, something that would be considered like work study, but I worked in the registrar's office which paid more, and I was able to get through graduate school.  I didn't owe any money because from that point on I was getting fellowships to finish up my graduate school.
Story_ID: 300488
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in New York [New York] at Columbia [Columbia University]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] lived in New York and that was the reason that I chose Columbia over Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] where Herskovits [Melville J. Herskovits] was because I said well if I live in New York, I can stay with my mother, I don't have to worry about finding that money, and people there said, live with your mother, how could you, don't you want to have your own apartment?  They had a totally different perspective than we did.  I said why should I have my own apartment?  I can live with my mother, she can cook for me and do, take my laundry.  It was just, you know--she lived in the Bronx [New York] by this time.  She had lived in Manhattan [New York, New York] before.  And she had a big apartment, by New York standards was a big apartment, and so I stayed with my mother all through graduate school.
Story_ID: 300489
Speaker 1: And then did you go immediately on to get your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well that was, I never stopped.  See I did a, I was at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  I finished my preliminaries pretty early because I didn't stop.  I mean, you know, I had, I got my master's [degree], let me see, at nineteen and then I think at the time I was nineteen, or maybe I had, maybe it was a semester after I turned, I can't remember whether it was nineteen or twenty, but anyway, then the next semester after that I took my prelims, so by 1961 in January I was going off to do my research for my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: In Africa?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: So that was 1961?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what Nigeria was like in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Oh it was totally different from anything you hear about now.  I mean it was incredible.  First of all the people were just amazed that my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] was allowing me to go to Africa at that age and by myself, da, da, da, but she was always very supportive, you know, and she felt well if she said she could do it, it's okay, you know, and she would give me her pep talks about being careful.  Mothers always do that.  But, when I got to Lagos [Nigeria], well first of all I went by ship.  I went to England for a semester to get a background in the language and just do some studying with anthropologists at The London School of Economics [The London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] and that gave me a good transition because I met a number of students from Nigeria in, and from Ghana, in London [England], and they, especially one young woman who was studying law.  She took me under her wing.  She considered me almost like her daughter, or her younger sister I should say, when I was, we lived in the same hostel, and she told me a lot about what to expect--
Speaker 1: In Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, especially from the men.  She was teaching me about how not, don't fall for this, now everybody gonna tell you he's a prince, don't believe it--
Speaker 1: Now, were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but when I got to London, to Lagos on the ship it took us two weeks.  We had a great time, it was just like being on holiday, but the first thing that surprised me was that Lagos was so like South Florida.  Now you don't notice it as much, but all the plants that I knew from South Florida, I found them in Lagos, you know, bougainvillea and flamingos.  You know those great big yellow flowering trees, lots of crotons.  I don't know if you know what a croton is, but it's a flower that doesn't have any buds but the leaves are different colors, multi-colors, and everything, hibiscus.  All the plants that I knew, all the plants I found in Lagos I knew them from South Florida.  The only thing was that the soil was reddish clay-like, such as you have in North Florida, but the ocean was there and I thought well no wonder, the people from, you know who came over to the states as enslaved Africans, they must have felt sort of at home if they went to South Carolina, and they had moss hanging off trees.  It was just a very familiar tropical environment.
Story_ID: 300490
Speaker 1: --But in the early days, I mean, people didn't lock their doors. This is Nigeria.  Well you wouldn't know the impact of this if you haven't never been there where everything is, has these prison-like bars on the windows and inside the houses now people have locked sliding doors, you know such as you see in front of stores.  People might have those in their houses between the lower level and the upper level like across the stairways and I would panic when I went back in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s].  I said how can you lock yourself in, supposed the house catches on fire, how can you get out?  There's no way to escape because the [Nigerian] Civil War had so convoluted life in the, in the whole country.  Robberies and murders, I saw enough of that in the early '60s [1960s].  In fact, whenever I see my friends who knew me then, you know, we talk about that, how I lived in a small town about a hundred and twenty miles north of Lagos [Nigeria] and it was a little north of Ibadan [Nigeria] too.  Ibadan is about ninety miles north of Lagos and I was another thirty miles beyond that, and I was in a house that had just been built for the landlord.  It was going to be his little summer cottage to go to his village or his small town where he lived, but another person per-, persuaded him to rent it to me.  So I lived in this house, very nice house.  It was kind of out from the town so the town gave me a night watchman, since I didn't, I lived there by myself with the young woman who was my translator and research assistant.  We would actually lock the door if we were going to Ibadan or someplace out of town, but when we were in town, we just closed the door and if I locked it, it would be because there was nobody around there.  But in the town proper, nobody locked their doors and when I went to Ibadan to visit friends at the university [University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria], when they took me into the town around their parents who lived in the town, everybody's doors were open.  You know, there might be a little latch on the door, knock on the door and go in.
Story_ID: 300491
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of African women?
Speaker 2: Well, I got to know them primarily as workers because I was studying market women for my dissertation, and these were just very, very, very tough women.  When I say tough, I mean in the sense of resolute, in the sense of independent, hard working.  They were just unbelievable and most of them were poor people, the ones that I was studying because, you know, they weren't in the cities with lots of money.  They were primarily rural market women, but they were very, very generous to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they receive you, well?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.  I could've, if I didn't want, if I wanted to take advantage of their kindnesses and friendship, I could have done that.  If I wanted to live there the whole time I was there, which was more than a year, and just live on the people, I could have done that because they brought me foodstuffs all the time, they sent their children to do things for me.  They were just wonderful.  And I, I soon understood though that reciprocity is one of the key values I see in Africans, probably everywhere.  You need to give back, you know, and so I had a car.  I was one of the few women who had, who drove a car so I repaid them in many ways by taking them places, even to the market, although most of the time they left before I did on the lorries and then I would come behind them in my car, but when they were going home and they had done their work, a lot of them, I mean not a lot because I had a Volkswagen, but you know two or three of 'em would ride back with me.  But the women were mainly, you know I thought of them as older than I, but when I really went back and examined it some of those people, some of them were younger than I was because I was what twenty-three when I went to Nigeria I believe, wait no, '38 [1938] to '61 [1961] is how much?  Yeah, twenty-three, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-three, twenty-four, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was twenty-three.
Story_ID: 300492
Speaker 1: So after you completed your research you came back to the states and accepted a position at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No, when I first came back, I was going back to finish my degree at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  So I taught at Columbia while I was working on my dissertation.  Actually I didn't do much that first year.  I was thinking about it, but I taught in Columbia College [Columbia University, New York, New York] and that was the first time that Columbia College had ever hired a black woman or man, as far as I know, definitely woman--
Speaker 1: What did you teach?
Speaker 2: I taught anthropology, introduction to anthropology.
Speaker 1: Was this in 1965?
Speaker 2: That would have been, No, no that would have been in 1962.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I left in '61 [1961] in January and I came back in '62 [1962] in September, and then so '62 [1962] and '63 [1963] for about nine months I was at Columbia.  And then in '63 [1963] I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I got a fellowship to the, participate in this new nations committee [Committee for the Comparative Study of New Nations] at Chicago which was a, one of the most prestigious of their social science committees.  Clifford Geertz and Tom Fallers [sic. Lloyd A. Fallers] and Edward Shils, a lot of well-known social scientists were there and I was in that group for a year and that's when I finished my dissertation and I came back to Columbia and I got the job at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: After you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I got my Ph.D. in '64 [1964] in May.
Speaker 1: And went on to teach at NYU?
Speaker 2: NYU and that is September.
Speaker 1: And did you stay at NYU until you went to the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Michigan, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you were there from '64 [1964] to '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you went to the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: And that's really where my academic career was spent, except, you know, when I became an administrator and went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], but all of my professorial years were at Michigan.
Story_ID: 300493
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your book, `Where Women Work[: A Study of Yoruba Women in the Marketplace and in the Home,' Niara Sudarkasa].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Published in 1973.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the book?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, ironically, this was a revision of my thesis and it was supposed to have been published in '68 [1968], the year after I went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  It was accepted by Mouton [Mouton de Gruyter; Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin, Germany] for publication in '67 [1967], no '66 [1966].  It was supposed to be published in '67 [1967], and I just, I don't know, I think I squandered an opportunity but I said, well who knows why things happen, but it would have been published as  Gloria Marshall [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa] then, and so maybe it wasn't meant to be.  But that book is a very descriptive picture of the life of the women in the town where I lived [in Nigeria].  It talks about women and their families, their roles as wives, as mothers, sisters, daughters.  It talks about women in the marketplace and, in fact, the subtitle is 'Where Women Work: Yoruba Women in the Marketplace and in the Home,' and I tried, and it has held up well, because I don't think there has been a ethnographic description of women and their total way of life since that time.
Speaker 1: Did those women remind you of your mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] and your [maternal] grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans] in some aspects?
Speaker 2: In some respects, yeah.  Some respects, especially their self-reliance and, I always that the idea of being strong women was a very positive thing.  I didn't know until later that people consider that to be a negative attribute, but my, my grandmother, you know, was physically larger than my mother.  She, she and I were the same height.  My grandmother, maybe she was even about an inch taller than me, but my mother was an inch shorter than I am, so that means that her mother is two inches taller than she is, so my grandmother was always a very formidable presence wherever she went.  She was just imposing and I met a lady in Nigeria who reminded me so much of her in her physical commanding of things, you know.  She just took charge.  And this lady adopted me just as I adopted her, so she really reminded me a lot of my grandmother.
Story_ID: 300494
Speaker 1: You were at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] for a year, and then tell us a little bit about the fellowship that you received.
Speaker 2: When I left, as I said I taught at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] for three years, and at the same time, you know, I haven't said anything about the fact, the other important fact in my life was that my son [Michael Sudarkasa] was born the same year that I started teaching.  That was another whole side of things that really changed my life around because one of the reasons that I left NYU was that I really couldn't deal with having a young son in New York [New York] commuting from the Bronx [New York] to the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] to teach.  The lady who kept him I felt was not very nice to him.  She felt like he should have been like her granddaughter.  He wasn't properly toilet trained early enough, you know, I said, well, anyway when I moved to Ann Arbor [Michigan] in a, more of a town rather than a city setting, it was to make my own life easier, and Michigan had a great reputation, a terrific anthropology department at the time, but I was saying that I only stayed there one semester before leaving so that meant that I wasn't grounded at Michigan until I came back from '69 [1969] onward, 'cause the '68 [1968], '69 [1969] academic year I was in Ghana.
Speaker 1: Did your son go with you to Ghana?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  He was three I think, cause he was born in '64 [1964], and when, when I came back, the country was changing.  Remember the so-called Detroit riots [Detroit Race Riot; 12th Street Riot] took place in '67 [1967] and the murder of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Were you in the states in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: I was, I was at Michigan.
Speaker 1: You were at Michigan?  Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I have to look for it and find it sometime.  That was the most, I mean it was indescribable, the impact of his death, his assassination.  On me, on so many people, but that day I had a class and I stayed up the whole night writing my lecture for that day and it was about King and the responsibility that I felt the country had for his death and so forth.  And the students were upset because they felt that I was blaming them, which I was, just, I mean I saying the country, you know, not just this class, but that the theme of my message was that if more people of good will had paid attention, I didn't mention his name the whole time, I just talked about this Montgomery [Alabama] preacher might be alive today, but I left shortly after that, you know, for, for Ghana, and I think, I can't remember when Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] was killed, but I was in Ghana at that time.
Story_ID: 300495
Speaker 1: So when I came back, the impact of the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] assassinations, the impact of the Black Panther Party and the general militant, how can I say it, the enhanced militancy of the black movement was sweeping the country, you know, because the Civil Rights Movement I feel personally as Dr. King was leading it, died for a while.
Speaker 2: When he died (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, people still associated with it and so forth, but the, the impetus I think for change in the country, switched over to a different group, and nobody had to feel guilty about being nonviolent.  They said, see we told you, this country forces you into violence, but anyway, at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] then I became involved in the movement that the students began which was the Black Action Movement [BAM], and they needed a spokesperson from the faculty, you know, to advocate, and speak up for their, I mean to advocate and to emphasize the justness of their causes.  So it's funny they went to the people who were the older professors there, who had been there.  I don't mean necessarily in age, but I guess they were older than I, but I said sure, because I believe that they were only advocating that the university open up the doors to more African American and other minority students.  They were particularly concerned about the black enrollment, so I jumped right into that and became, I would say, one of the three leading faculty and spokespeople for BAM which is the Black Action Movement, and we shut down the university early in '70 [1970] for over a week, which was unheard of.  I mean the whole university had to shut down and then, you know, we had negotiations with the administration and so forth and so on.  And I think that sort of defined a new role for me at Michigan because as much as I was an anthropologist, I was primarily an advocate for black students, black faculty, affairs and I became much more involved in the Center for Afro-American and African Studies [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  You know when I first went to Michigan I was hired in anthropology which was interestingly different from the way most people went to those predominately white institutions.  They went in African or Afro American studies, and got affiliated with a department.  Well I was hired in the department, but when, after we had the strike, and the center became a more firmly anchored academic unit on the campus, then I switched my appointment to half anthropology and half Afro American studies.
Story_ID: 300496
Speaker 1: Who was enrolling in your classes?  Who was taking your classes?  Was it predominately African American students?
Speaker 2: In the Africa courses, the courses that related to the black family and African cultural heritage, Africans in the New World, most of those courses were taken by predominately, were predominately black in enrollment, but at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] there's always gonna be some white students in the classes, but in the anthropology classes, and I still taught introduction to anthropology sometime, or some other cultural anthropological type courses.  Then the enrollment would be mixed maybe predominately white, and when I, the first year that I was there was predominately white enrollment because I was teaching introduction to anthropology classes and, you know, the new person on the block always gets those courses.
Speaker 1: Did you notice that it changed over the years in terms of the enrollment?  Who, more white students taking--
Speaker 2: Black--
Speaker 1: --black studies?
Speaker 2: Um, well to be quite honest, I don't remember that the enrollment changed a lot.  There were some professors, because of the nature of what they taught who were, you know, in the Center for Afro-American and African Studies [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] who had a lot of white students in their classes, but it's largely a function of, I think, the topic of the course.  For example, Ali Mazrui, who taught African politics and comparative politics, well, his, first of all he's a fantastic lecturer so he's very, and a prolific author, scholar.  But his classes were always full of black and wh-, I mean white and black students, and predominately white because the university is predominately white.  Some of the sociology professors given what they taught.  Now, I remember when Aldon Morris came and he, he offered the course on civil rights, and, Civil Rights Movement, and that course was popular with the white students as well as the black students, but the more courses that focus on black culture such as what I would be teaching for example, the black family.  Almost all my students were blacks and the interesting thing is that there, other people were teaching courses that included information about the black family from a different point of view and some of my students told me that they were, their perspectives were diametrically opposed to mine.  For example, where I would try to emphasize what I understood to be the African origin of black families in America, they were being taught that the, the black family had its roots in slavery, which, of course, was E. Franklin Frazier's point of view, so I didn't notice personally a great change in the composition of my students.  By the time I might have noticed a change, I was going into administration because I, I was in central administration for three years before I went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  By that time, I wasn't really teaching any more.
Story_ID: 300497
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  How did the opportunity to lead the helm at Lincoln University come about?
Speaker 2: Well I was associate vice president for academic affairs at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  That was, there were three people in that position.  Each of us had a special responsibility.  Mine was for certain programs that had to do with tenure.  I mean, not, not, I was responsible for helping to guide the university's policy on tenure.  I think that's the most appropriate way to put that because we had something called the tenure issues committee in academic affairs and I was the, the chair of that committee.  I was also the person responsible, and this was really the reason I think I was hired in there, responsible for helping the university study its policy toward African Americans and other minority students. See the university had promised during the BAM [Black Action Movement] strike, 10 percent African American enrollment.  That was the goal.  We never got it.  Now from 1970 to 1980, the highest enrollment of blacks at Michigan had been in '76 [1976] when we had about seven point x percent and then it started going back down.  And course, most of the administrators in the affirmative action office and so on, they were all white persons, and the person who was in charge of the affirmative action office was a white female lawyer whose, I think who was mainly responsible for shifting the emphasis, from an emphasis on increasing black enrollment to minority enrollment.  Of course, she had responsibility too for women's issues because that fell on affirmative action, and so Michigan started saying how successful it had been in minority enrollment.  It had over 10 percent minorities by, you know, 1980, and in fact, in the mid-'70s [1970s], I think, they had gone over 10 percent, but our point was, you weren't talking about minority enrollment in '70 [1970], this was a commitment to enhancing black enrollment.  And so when the academic affairs VP said that he wanted to put someone in academic affairs who could look at this from an academic prospective, then I was one of the persons nominated and, in fact, I was interested in the position, so I really worked for my three years in academic affairs to help the university understand why it had failed and to make some suggestions about how it might do better.
Story_ID: 300498
Speaker 1: Just, skipping ahead a little bit, were you disappointed with the affirmative action case [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003] involving the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and were you disappointed after, you know, spending so much time there and working so hard on this issue?
Speaker 2: Well, you know (laughter), what happens is that, as time changes, as time marches on, your goals change, you can sometimes see, what do they say, you can either snatch victory from defeat or defeat from victory and what happened in the case of the University of Michigan is that everybody was so eager that it not be a total failure that they not completely reject, the use of, or the appeal to race in admissions policy that the [U.S.] Supreme Court said, well diversity itself, is a, has value in the academic context and so long as you don't have quotas and you can justify that you're not insisting that any particular person be enrolled because of racial criteria that we set up.  We'll go along with that.  Well that seemed, that was proclaimed as a victory.  My own feeling is that, affirmative action is, affirmative action as we now define it, I think is no longer a viable policy in the U.S.  People never did want it.  They never did want to do what affirmative action had intended to do.  When Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] talked about affirmative action, he was talking about a policy that would enable people who had historically been denied access because of their color, who had worked from the time of enslavement to the present, without access to the opportunities that the majority had, he said we must have affirmative action to give those opportunities to these people.  Now he didn't say it was because diversity had value, he said we owe them.  That was essentially what Johnson said in his Howard University [Washington, D.C.] speech, and that was how the policies to increase African American enrollment were first crafted.  But what happened is that it wasn't even two or three years after the education bill [Higher Education Act of 1965] which offered the TRiO programs and all these other programs to African Americans.  People said no, no, no, no, no, but we got women, we got other minorities and so the pie became increasingly sliced, you know, nuanced or whatever, and I think that the focus on any single group, whether it be an ethnic group or so called racial group or whatever, the focus on a single group in America is not viable anymore.  There are too many people who can lay claim to disadvantage in their backgrounds.  Now from my point of view, there is no comparison.  They're not even the same, we're not even talking about the same issues, but at the same time, we're not the ones who gonna make the decision as to what's fair and what's not fair.  So I'm just saying that to say that, you ask if I was disappointed, I wasn't disappointed because I hadn't even expected that they would come down at all on the side of, they didn't come down on the side of affirmative action, but on the side of quote diversity and supposedly, you now, trying to accomplish the same thing.  So, I like the rest of the people, started talking about this as a, a victory, at least a partial victory because you know the undergraduate case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003] lost.  But, I'm not hopeful about the goals ever being achieved.  The goals of what we were, the goals that we were articulating the '70s [1970s], I don't think they'll, we'll ever see those come about.  Certainly not with the remedies that we were envisioning.  Maybe somehow something will happen, but I don't see African Americans having the same kind of opportunities as newer immigrants.  I don't see them as having the same economic opportunities, job opportunities, or educational opportunities.
Story_ID: 300499
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about affirmative action versus legacies?
Speaker 2: Oh well, I mean legacies are, that is a form of affirmative action for people who have been privileged all their lives.  If your father is George Bush, [President] George Herbert Walker Bush, and you happen to be George W. [President George Walker Bush], it doesn't matter that, what'd he say I'm a good solid C.  Well, that's questionable.  But at least we know that whatever his grade point average was, whether he would have gotten into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] on his own or not, he didn't have to worry.
Speaker 1: But do you think that too much emphasis is placed on affirmative action, looking at how many students are admitted to colleges and universities as part of affirmative action and not legacies, because I had read somewhere there were actually more students admitted to college as legacies then there are students admitted as part of affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Well see first of all, affirmative action has never been responsible for a great many blacks getting into college.  Most of us have been enrolled despite affirmative action, despite the barriers and that's what people kept saying, that this, it's not as if this is a program that has just opened the floodgates.  You know I said that Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] at its best enrolled something like seven point six percent.
Speaker 1: And a lot of those were the best of the brightest in terms of, in the African American community (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And that, there was never much emphasis placed on that, it was just these black students, but that these black students were black students with high SAT scores and high grade point averages and who were the best of the best, and could have gone to any college they wanted to.
Speaker 2: Well, they certainly could. Many of them could have gotten into Michigan anyway, but they didn't have the money.  The one thing about the, what were called race-based scholarships, in the early years of the '70s [1970s], the opportunity scholarships.  What was important about them was that they did provide the financial wherewithal for students who had the academic ability, but didn't have the money.  And then when the pressure to divide the money among increasingly large groups or pools of students came about, then those students were denied scholarships.  You know, they start giving them grants that they had to repay or, I mean they stopped giving them grants, start giving them loans that they had to repay.  And many of them couldn't succeed in the environments in which they were placed.  But in the meantime, everybody was saying well you just here because of affirmative action.  Now even though some of those students may not have had the GPAs or the SAT scores of some of the white students who didn't get into Michigan, they had to realize that these students had so many more obstacles to overcome.  This is where I think LBJ's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] initial emphasis on affirmative action made a difference.  They didn't come out of the same environments. If they had come from truly equal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A level playing field.
Speaker 2: --exactly, a level playing field, the story would have been different--
Story_ID: 300500
Speaker 1: I wanna move on a little bit and the one thing I wanted to ask you is you had, when we talked about you leaving Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] to go to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], had said that you felt like you know at black schools they were a little bit more nurturing and really cared about the individual student.  Just what are some of your thoughts today about what's happening to HBCs [historically black colleges] we you know, see Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] no longer and a lot of HBCs struggling and what are some of your thoughts?  Do you think that there's still the HBCs that you knew when you went to Fisk?
Speaker 2: Well you know as a president of Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], I had a chance to really see that environment from a, from the top and I think that the commitment to promoting the success of black students was always there, never changed.  Even when I was looking at it from the point of view of an administrator, I can see that we were doing, we meaning the HBC community now, far more with much less than the majority academic community was doing for black students.  And it was, the proof is in the, in the graduation rates and in the particular majors that our students have.  Most of the science majors, for example, come out of the black colleges.  And they didn't even have the type of curriculum or technical support for those students that white colleges have, but if you look at who was preparing the engineers, who was preparing the scientists, most of 'em were coming out of black colleges.  The black issues in higher education put out a, an issue each year looking at the producers of degrees for black students, and on two different occasions I did an analysis of those, in fact, in an, in an article that was just published in '99 [1999] although it was seditiously written in '95 [1995], and then revised in a journal, I mean a book the anthropologist put out called 'Looking at Academia of the Future' [ph.].  The question, the title of my article was 'Will Inclusion Be More than an Illusion in the Academy of the Future' [Niara Sudarkasa].  And one part of that article looked at the white institutions and black institutions that produced the most black degrees and we saw that in the top fifty, most of the degrees were being produced by, the highest proportion of the degrees were being produced by black colleges.  Now, or they were colleges situated such that they could enroll a lot of black students.  For example, the urban institutions such as City College [City College of New York] in New York [New York] where the enrollment was maybe not totally open, but such that it had a fair number of black students and a good number of minorities overall.
Speaker 1: But there's no question that HBCs are struggling, some of them.  Does that concern you?
Speaker 2: Yeah actually, I guess I actually got off the question you had asked because just as the opportunities for individual blacks had been drying up, so too has the support for the historically black colleges.  You know, I think our best years were in the '90s [1990s], maybe the country itself had its best years in the '90s [1990s] and that's the reason why I don't know, but anyway, these institutions are mainly state supported or in the case of the UNCF [United Negro College Fund] institutions, they get their money from foundations and from tuition.  You know all of them get their basic core funds from tuition.  But you see the foundations are not as forthcoming as they were.  The government programs are not as available to these colleges as they had been.
Speaker 1: Is there less money now?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's been almost six years since I left Mich-, I mean since I left Lincoln, and I'm not sure exactly what the factors are, but it's clear that the government support, federal government support is dwindling and state support is dwindling.  So I can only assume that either there's less to go around or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or less commitment.
Speaker 2: --they're using it for alternative programs.
Story_ID: 300501
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what the climate was like at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] when you first arrived there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1986?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  It was actually January of '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I came in in the middle of the year, which is not a good idea, I don't think, but I think the college, once they hire somebody, they don't want to wait a whole year for them to start, but Lincoln had been a very prominent HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], through the '50s [1950s] I would say.  And in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], it was still well-known in certain circles, but not as overall.  I mean it wasn't as prominent overall as it had been.  Dr. [Herman] Branson, the president in the '70s [1970s], for example, had put an emphasis on science.  He was a quite a distinguished physicist and Lincoln was well-known for producing physics graduates and for its science recruitment programs and so on.  It was, it had been known in the '70s [1970s] and the '60s [1960s] for, as a point of entry for African students coming to this country.  It was a point of orientation and some of them stayed at Lincoln, others went elsewhere.  So, in the international area and in science, Lincoln was well-known, but the school itself was not one of the nationally prominent HBCUs anymore.  I found it to be a little bit, I would say without direction academically, and that's what I thought I could bring to the institution to help strengthen it academically and help to focus on those aspects of our program that had historically given us strength and that included science and it included particularly international affairs because you know Lincoln had been the leader of the black colleges in educating Africans and people from the Caribbean, particularly though from Africa.
Story_ID: 300502
Speaker 1: And why did you want the job?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting.  I wouldn't say that it was missionary complex, but to be quite honest, I did think of it as an opportunity to share some of what I had gotten at a big institution like Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] with historically black college [HBCU].  I thought that's a way of giving back, is a way of helping to use some of my energies to focus on black students.  I had always focused on black students because at Michigan, I didn't make any secret about it. I was concerned about supporting, about the access and success of those students.  So I wanted to go to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] as a way of sharing my talents and sharing my expertise.  But in some ways I think that was a little bit naive, because I've always had a professorial mentality and successful administrators have to have, be well-grounded in administration, even if your, your interest is primarily academic.  I think it's not any, it's not surprising that some of the black college presidents have been in place for so long.  You know some of the males they have kind of a paternalistic approach or their interest are primarily in those aspects of the college that focus on administration, making sure that both the physical plant and the finances and all are improved as a result of their being there, and so I think that the focus on academics by a president leaves you vulnerable, and I don't know that people appreciate as much what is done because a lot of people came to known Lincoln during my tenure there.  But I was better known in some respects to the outside community where Lincoln's history and its contributions and its potential were being touted by me than on the inside where a lot of the controversy over programmatic things were being handled by the president, when really they should have been handled, I think, internally, more by the academic VP.  So you can sort of insulate yourself from some of these discussions that inevitably take place when you are trying to move an institution.
Story_ID: 300503
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of in terms of your accomplishments at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was that, I don't know how to say this modestly, but I think that, that the institution was reclaimed and sort of revitalized, resurrected so that Lincoln's past accomplishments were thrust into the, you know, consciousness of the academic world once again, and we did quite a bit in terms of the emphasis on excellence, the numbers, both the numbers of students went up dramatically, and the quality of the student body improved quite a bit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The number, enrollment was?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Enrollment, I think, when I went to Lincoln was about twelve hundred or so, no, not even, about that let's say, and it was well over, well over two thousand on a sustained basis all the time when I left.  And we didn't have any, we were at capacity because we didn't have any more room for on-campus students.  The other thing is that the SAT scores, if that's a measure, you know, of the quality of the students had improved very dramatically.  The average SAT when I first went there was like six hundred and something total.
Speaker 1: Combined?
Speaker 2: Combined.  And the average, we, we then average in the high nine hundreds, but now, in general though, you know, black students don't do all that well on the SAT, but whether you looked at GPAs or SATs, they had definitely gone up.  There's a report which I hope will stay with my files, there's a report on, that sort of gave a summary of some of the highlights of Lincoln under the Sudarkasa [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa] presidency, and I think student enrollment, improvement in the student quality, enhancement of the faculty and the technological conversion of the campus, those were a number of things that we accomplished.  We built, there were two buildings.  These were all, they were done with state monies, but the thing about it is that this big living learning center that we built had been on the drawing board for ten years and they were unable to get the governor to move and build it and I just made that a priority.  I said we're going to get this building and we did.
Story_ID: 300504
Speaker 1: You mentioned SAT scores and nationally SAT scores, African American students' SAT scores still lag behind those of whites.  Is that a concern for you as an educator?
Speaker 2: Well, it's more of a concern for me that at the lower levels in basic education, elementary and junior high school, students are not getting the kind of academic preparation that will enable them to improve their scores.  I think, you know, we, we always have focused on, when I say we, I mean many African American educators who look at the disparities.  We say, we know that SAT is not a predictor of success of these students because many of them who don't do well on the SAT go on to be very successful adults.  I mean in the world of work, professionals and we know that the GPA, the grade point average is a better predictor of whose going to succeed in college for black students.  But, in the past few years in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], I have been looking at the performance of black students on what Florida calls the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test, FCAT.
Speaker 1: Is that a state standardized test?
Speaker 2: It's a state-wide standardized test.  And our students do poorly as a group compared to other students on that, and what I see is that even if we can say that students can succeed later, we are not paying enough attention to the fact there are some fundamental basic skills that they're not getting in grade school, in high school, and that the reason that our students don't do well on these tests is only partly cultural.  You know we used to say the tests are cultural biased. Well to some extent they still are culturally biased, but the assessment tests more and more are designed to see whether or not you have mastered these skills and mastered the content that they're supposed to get in elementary school and middle school and high school.  And there is something wrong with the way we are approaching these students in these schools.  They are allowed to get away with too much.  That's what I think.
Speaker 1: Meaning?
Speaker 2: Meaning that the black students, the expectations are too low.  People just feel, well, they're not gonna get it, so why bother, or else they spend all their time just teaching them rote, you know here's the test, can you answer this question?  They don't know how to read.  They don't know basic math.  When I think about, you know I was telling you about what a grade teacher I had in the fifth grade [at Old Dillard High School; Walker Elementary School, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], and how much she taught us.  Not everybody may have gotten as much out of her as I got, but I was just so thrilled if I could take a test of hers and make a hundred.  You see what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But then who cares today whether the students make a hundred.
Story_ID: 300505
Speaker 1: How big of a role do you think environment plays in terms of how well students do on standardized tests like the SATs and like the Florida statewide test [Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)] you mentioned?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the environment inevitably plays a role, but I remember that our parents weren't held responsible for our achievement.  The teachers were.  They held themselves responsible.  My mother [Rowena Evans Marshall] couldn't help me get an A past a certain level because she hadn't gone but so far.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans] was totally out of it after reading.  She taught me how to read I remember and then because she had a different accent you know she spoke like a Bahamian or Nassau [Bahamas] as they used to call 'em, I didn't want her to teach me anymore because I wasn't pronouncing the words right.  So, it wasn't that they said well, the parents are not doing what they should do, it's true that now parents, some parents are in a better position than my parents were to help their kids.  And they need to know that even if they can't teach them the content, they can instill in them what our parents instilled in us.  That is the drive that is the desire, the determination to succeed.  And I, I, for example, don't agree with Bill Cosby in everything that he says in his analysis, but I think that in, in saying that parenting matters, he is emphasizing the fact that if you put your, put, put in what you can put in, in terms of seeing to it that people do their homework, or finding out if they have any homework, where they're going, whether or not they are putting any time into the work that they're supposed to do in school, all those things make a difference.  Now, I, you know, the rest of it as far as whether they should be spending this money on sneakers, you know, how much money could they be spending on sneakers.  They don't have but so much, but I think that the home environment is an, is a good, how can I say, the teachers pass the buck too easily and I feel, and interestingly enough the new research that's going on now shows that the best predictor of success of students is the classroom environment, whether the teachers are motivating or giving students the skills, giving them the feedback and everything.  I said oh well, we could have told you that a long time ago.  In fact, all black people that I know in my generation have always said that.
Story_ID: 300506
Speaker 1: But do you think that nowadays teachers have to deal with a lot of different social issues in the classroom that they didn't have to deal with once upon a time?
Speaker 2: There's no question but that they do, and it's also no question but that, they don't get the support from the parents that our parents gave our teachers.  I mean they were, they just assumed that if the teacher said you were wrong, you are wrong, whereas here if you try to tell a parent that her or his child is wrong, they gonna jump in your face as they say, and you know, get off my case, don't get on my child's case and so, and in that respect I think parents really need to re-examine their perspectives.  It doesn't help to have a parent upholding wrongdoing on the part of the child.  So it's true that the teachers have more to deal with, but I think that just as the parents have to make changes, the teachers have to also make changes.  And I think just caring about the students makes a difference.  You know, I don't know, I don't think, I don't know if it has anything to do with race at all since I grew up in an all-black school situation, but, and I know a lot of the teachers now who are just giving up on our students are black teachers, so I don't think it's a racial, it's not something that can be delineated along racial lines, but I think that when you show students that you really care and you want to encourage them and you want to point them in the direction of success, it makes a difference.  So I started all this to say that, I, I think we're just gonna have to take more responsibility for preparing students for any kind of testing, whether it's the SAT, the FCAT [Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test], the ACT whatever.  Not because we think the test is so important, but because we want them to understand that they can achieve in the same arenas that other people can achieve in.  I think one of the difficulties are, or one of the unfortunate results of the kind of approaches that people like myself took was that it made many of our students feel, I think, that they didn't have to achieve in the arena of standardized tests, because after all the tests were biased and they hadn't had the same opportunities and so forth.  Well at a certain point, if you want to make it, you're going to have to say whether I had the opportunities or not, I'm gonna have to try to equalize the playing field myself because nobody else is gonna do it.
Story_ID: 300507
Speaker 1: When you left Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in 1998, you went to the African-American Research Library and Cultural Center [Fort Lauderdale, Florida] in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah, first, I had, I had a short, I had two different stints as a visiting professor at FA, Florida Atlantic [Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida], but the primary work that I was to do there related to the for-, to the academic support of the African-American Research Library and Cultural Center.  So that's where I have been based, really, since I left Lincoln.
Speaker 1: And why did you leave Lincoln after eleven years.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a very big, I would say, confrontation between the Lincoln University lawyer who had been a friend of mine and myself.  My perspective on what happened is that The Barnes Foundation [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is a multi-billion dollar institution that you may nor may not have read of, was the catalyst of what happened.  The founder of Barnes, Mr. Albert Barnes, was friendly with Horace Mann Bond, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond's father, who was the president of Lincoln.  And I'm really curtailing a lot now because I know we have to finish, but the, Dr. Barnes, left Lincoln the responsibility for naming four of the five trustees for The Barnes Foundation.  As I said, this is a multi-billion dollar art collection that was left in a building Dr. Barnes built in Merion, Pennsylvania.  And when I came to Lincoln, right in the first two years that I was there, that responsibility for naming the trustees materialized because the older trustees who were supposed to serve until they either died or otherwise left, were just in the process of leaving, and our chairman of the board, Franklin Williams, was the first Lincoln appointed chairman of The Barnes Foundation than Richard Glanton, the lawyer, succeeded Franklin, and at, there was so much stuff that went on that I can't possibly talk about of it, but in the final analysis, the other members of the board, and you know we're only a five-member board, and I was on it, decided that Glanton's embroiling of the foundation in legal matters was just hampering us from making progress either on the front of The Barnes Foundation, and by implication, Lincoln, so we wanted him to resign as the president, and with a small board like that, you know, two-three all the time and he was depending on my, being his supporter to remain in the position, and when I defected, then he said well, this is my interpretation now, I'm not going down without a fight and if I have to go, she's going first.  And so there was a lot of stuff, just total, total, total fabrications about the university.  For example, they were saying that I was spending an enormous amount of money on quote the President's House [President's Residence, Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  Now we all call it the President's House, but the outside world think that that is, that they were talking about a house that I owned.  It was the university's house, and over a period of almost twelve years that I had been there, let's say for a decade, when we added up what had been spent on that house, it was miniscule, but it came to head at a time when we were doing a major renovation of the basement.  The house was, the foundation was literally crumbling and the key to the controversy was the fact that my husband [John L. Clark], who was a builder, had been the physical plant director and he was the one who actually designed the renovation of the basement and all that.  So it was well, her husband is overseeing the work so he's not, he's not reporting to the vice president he should report to, he's reporting to her, da da da.  So eventually, the controversy just became too much.  You cannot have a university, regardless of who's right or wrong, when you become embroiled in that kind of you say, I say in the paper every day.  The trustees are not going to want to stand for it, and any president who has any sense knows that you can't succeed like that, so I resigned from Lincoln.
Story_ID: 300508
Speaker 1: But the unfortunate thing is that, and I didn't find this out until much later, the trustees who were, there were some trustees supporting me and some weren't, but they did a very terrible thing, by, you know we had an agreement under which we would announce my stepping down from Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and I found out that later when I was not serving as the president and when there was an acting president [HistoryMaker James Donaldson] and, not acting.
Speaker 2: Interim.
Speaker 1: Interim, they had passed another resolution which made it appear as if they had forced me to resign.  No not that, that may appear as if I had been fired as opposed to resign.  It didn't say that exactly, but then the new president [Ivory V. Nelson] put all of this on the Internet.  Now, you, I mean it may sound weird that I didn't find this out until 2004, or was it late 2003?
Speaker 2: So I'm--
Speaker 1: So I'm, I'm just, you know I didn't go on the Internet to look at the Lincoln website, or even to look at my own name, and when I found out that this president had put resolutions of the board that related to my presidency on the Lincoln website, I just couldn't believe it.  Because you know there are all kinds of conditions under which presidents leave institutions, but they leave and they just let it go, but, I'm saying all that to say that I felt that for my, I was very happy that they had done a report on my presidency, which could be circulated.  In fact, it was supposed to have been sent to every trus-, every alumni and all of our supporters, but I later found out that they didn't mail that out either, but I circulated it because I have lots of copies of it.  At least there is a record of what was accomplished that can't be denied because all of the documentation is there, and I also was pleased that I wrote a rebuttal to the audit which they had, which the state claimed demonstrated, you know, the misuse of funds on the house and so, as I said, the documentation is there, but it was very demoralizing and also it was very, how can I say, debilitating because here I felt that the institution had had, and everybody knew they had, such an outstanding renaissance in the '90s [1990s] and here it was going into the 20th century and now I was being, you know, I was the pariah president instead of one who should have gone out, you know, with a kind of success story that so many others had.
Speaker 2: But, several years after you left in 2003, you were awarded the President's Award--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for outstanding contributions to the university, did that help vindicate you?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: ---it helped some, but I mean, the main thing that I think it's still coming, I'll just put it that way.  Because it could never totally make up for what had happened because when I left Lincoln ordinarily I would have probably gone into another presidency or into some other kind of administrative job.  The unexpected death of my husband [John L. Clark] coupled with the, with the flak I would say that came from that, made me think about just changing directions altogether.  I just did not want to see another presidency where I had to get up at, you know you have such long hours, fourteen hour days, fifteen hour days, and I said no.
Story_ID: 300509
Speaker 1: Dr. Sudarkasa [HistoryMaker Niara Sudarkasa], oh, let's talk a little bit about after you left Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and the work that you were doing in Florida--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at the African American Cultural Research (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Research Library and Cultural Center [African-American Research Library and Cultural Center, Fort Lauderdale, Florida], yeah.  Well I, the first thing that I did was to organize the inaugural year program that sort of set the tone for the academic side of the university, I mean of the library.  We had a program that I called Bridging Great Divides and we had people come in and speak about, for example, bridging the religious divides.  We had a session, in that one we had a rabbi, someone from the Muslim, it wasn't an iman, but someone from the Muslim community and African American Baptist preacher.  They talked about what had been done in Florida to try to bridge the divide, and then we had the--
Speaker 1: What's the goal of the center? What's the--
Speaker 2: The goal of the library--
Speaker 1: Library.
Speaker 2: --in addition to just providing, you know the regular library facilities and the center has meeting rooms and a auditorium and so and so, a lot of programming that emanates from the community going on there all the time.  But the library itself wants to become a repository for information about African Americans and other people of African descent who live in Florida particularly, but those who live in South America, or the Caribbean, who relate to Florida, so that's why it calls itself the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] of the South.  It wants to be a repository and one of the first things I did was to give them my collection of books and papers and it still is, we still haven't gotten it accessioned yet, but I, I gave them quite a lot, about, well, close to four hundred boxes of books and papers, and that's because I felt that as a scholar coming from Fort Lauderdale [Florida], later on if somebody comes by and they see well, [HistoryMaker] Niara Sudarkasa did this, and this is where she came from, then I should be able to do it too.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it's important to know where you come from and to know your history and your roots?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, [Marcus] Garvey and so many other people said it, if you don't know where you've been, you don't know where you can go, or you have to know from whence you come in order to know where you can go.  I think that people need to know that not all success is rooted in success, because you can have your roots in quite humble circumstances.  Your parents don't have to be professionals.  You don't have to grow up speaking standard English.  Ebonics was the language of the day when I was growing up, we were, my, we always said we were multi-lingual, we could speak black English, regular English and anything that sounded like English, so I think that it's important to me that our kids see that no matter what their circumstances are, if they have the desire to turn their abilities into success, they can do it.
Story_ID: 300510
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you, and why?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the support that I got from my mother [Rowena Evans Marshall], my [maternal] grandparents [Tryphenia McNeal Evans and Alpheus Evans], my teachers.  I think they are, they're just responsible for where I am today, and I am so thankful that I had the opportunity to go to Africa early because without even, you know, without thinking about it, I, I know that I'm grounded as far as the continent is concerned.  There are certain things about Africa that people can't say to me and expect to walk away without being told, you know, wait a minute, that's not true, it's not accurate, da da da.  And I believe that historically, Alex Haley did a great favor for us when he published 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family]' because he more than anybody else I think in the 20th century was responsible for our consciousness of the connection with Africa.
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: Ooh, so much.  I can't believe it sometimes, I said do you realize how old you are and you're still, especially in writing.  You know I told you that I started a series of essays on growing up in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  I want to do that.  I want to do a book on the African family.  I want to--there's one more institutional contribution that I feel I could make, but I just don't know exactly where it is. I'm truly not interested in a presidency, but if there is something I can do that relates to Africa and the diaspora, I would like to do that.  For example, I was one of those invited to the recent Dakar [Senegal] conference [First Conference of Intellectuals of Africa and the Diaspora] sponsored by the African Union on black intellectuals from Africa and the diaspora.  And, I know that on the continent now they trying to set up a number of committees and forums and so forth by which Africans there and Africans abroad would be able to make a connection and I really want to take part in that.  You know and I just before we go, I have to say I can't imagine that I have spent all this time and I haven't said anything about my most precious gift to the world I think, which is my son [Michael Sudarkasa] and his children.
Story_ID: 300511
Speaker 1: Tell us about your son Eric [sic. Michael Sudarkasa] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I have only one son, Michael Sudarkasa, who lives in South Africa now.  He's been working there, and he has five children.
Speaker 1: He lives in South Africa?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: You said he lives in South Africa?
Speaker 2: He lives there now.  He is there.  And working on the continent.  He's a lawyer, but his main interest is in entrepreneurial and business linkages between Africa and the rest of the world, so he's one of those people who facilitates that, and so on.  And he has children.  They're wonderful, wonderful, wonderful children.  My granddaughter who is thirteen, the oldest one, is coming to stay with me for a while.  She'll be here this academic year.  And so, they represent a link to the continent for me because with Michael being there, they are growing up, I said they're South Africans now.  They're not African Americans anymore, you know, their speech and their interests and so forth are like the kids there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's that gonna be like for you having your granddaughter live with you?  Will it remind you so much of what your [maternal] grandmother [Tryphenia McNeal Evans] gave you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll see.  That's what I say to myself, okay, now it's your turn, but I mean, your turn.  But you see I'm in a different position than my grandmother was because I think I can help her so much more, at least academically and professionally and, you know, they don't understand what a boon it is to have a grandmother who has been a college president and is an anthropologist.  Imagine that.  My grandmother didn't even, I didn't know she definitely didn't finish elementary school in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: Well, sometimes I imagine that I could have done something differently, but then I don't dwell on it too much, because I say well, you know, I'm here where I am and look at all the things that I would have given up had I chosen another path.
Story_ID: 300512
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope my students remember me as somebody who helped to open their eyes to their own potential, who helped them appreciate their history, who helped them take pride in their roots, and who helped them understand that achievement is the watch word.  I used to say that at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], you know, and excellence is something that we should all expect of ourselves.  I don't, I don't, I think that one's greatest contributions are always to the next generation, so I don't worry too much about what my peers think about me, but I worry, I mean I care very much about what those who are coming behind think about me.
Story_ID: 300513
Speaker 1: This is 1953, Houston, Texas, Mrs. Robinson, E.B. Robinson, I think, and myself at the New Homemakers of America [Family, Career and Community Leaders of America (FCCLA)] conference.  I was elected one of the national vice presidents at that conference.
Speaker 2: This is my [maternal] grandmother--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: --Miss Tryphenia [McNeal] Evans and my grandfather, Mr. Alpheus Evans and myself.  The picture was taken about 1942.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Niara Sudarkasa, Gloria Marshall then, taken after my junior prom in 1953.
Speaker 1: That's Niara Sudarkasa, Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  That must have been 1950.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that's my mother, Rowena [Evans] Marshall and I after our junior/senior prom.  Parents used to go to the prom in those days, 1953.
Speaker 2: That was taken at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  Those are some of the girls who went in with me in the early entrants program [Basic College Program].  That's Niara, Gloria Marshall on the, seated on the left.
Speaker 1: That's you right here?
Speaker 2: Seated down here?  Seated down here.
Speaker 1: Right here?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's me.  And the rest of them are some of my classmates.
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: That was 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that's one of my trips to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and I'm not sure what year it was, but it was, had to be in the '90s [1990s].  I was on the President's Commission on, the White House Commission on Presidential Scholars.
Speaker 1: This is Niara Sudarkasa, Nelson Mandela on the left, my husband John [L.] Clark on the right.
Speaker 2: And what year?
Speaker 1: And this would have been 1993.
Speaker 2: Oh boy.  This is Hillary [Rodham Clinton] and Tipper Gore, Hillary Clinton, Tipper Gore and myself.
Speaker 1: That must have been the first administration because she had big hair.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was I guess around '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: This is 1990, approximately.  The president of Namibia, Sam Nujoma and a Nigerian friend of ours, Isyaku Ibrahim is on the left.
Speaker 2: And this is the president of Ghana in the center, then Jerry Rawlings and his wife Nana Konadu [Agyeman] Rawlings and myself on the left.  That would have been 1994, I believe.
Speaker 1: This is my husband John Clark and myself at the, Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] second inaugural, and the date is January 1997.
Speaker 2: Niara Sudarkasa.  This was taken in, what year was this?  It was taken in 2003.
Speaker 1: This is 2001 when I was made a chief in Nigeria.  With me are my son, Michael [Sudarkasa] on the left and four of his five children, Jasmine [Sudarkasa (ph.)] in the center, then on the first row, Mariel [Sudarkasa (ph.)], Jonathan [Sudarkasa (ph.)] and Mya [Sudarkasa (ph.)].  Then we have an insert of the baby, Nigel [Sudarkasa (ph.)], who was too little to come to the inauguration at that time.
Speaker 2: Niara Sudarkasa and Bishop, Archbishop [Desmond] Tutu leading a line of march for the commencement program at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  I believe that was 1991.
Story_ID: 300514
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Niara Sudarkasa.  I believe that was '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture with Chinua Achebe, the Nigerian author.  He's well known for his book 'Things Fall Apart.'  That was at a writers' conference at Ibadan [Nigeria] in 1975.
Speaker 2: This is year 1961 I believe.  I was at the University of Ibadan [Ibadan, Nigeria] and they had something called the Havana Night and I, the man with me and I won the dance contest.  He was dressed as a turtle as you can, a tortoise, excuse me, and I was dressed with a calabash on my head (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: He would have been a frog turning into a prince.
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of me in my regalia as a chief of the Univer- of the kingdom of Ife in Nigeria in 2000, the year was 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Bottom is, oh okay, Niara Sudarkasa and John [L.] Clark, 1979, in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] in front of our old house.  That was where I grew up, 423 Northwest 8th Avenue.
Speaker 2: And that's my three brothers and me at the same time on the side of the house.  George [Marshall] is on the left, Ralph [Marshall], the oldest one is George, the second to him is Ralph in the center and Reese [Marshall (ph.)] is the youngest of all of us and I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Last name Marshall?
Speaker 2: Yes, all Marshall.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and Niara Sudarkasa at the 1993 March on Washington, the commemoration of the march, thirty years after, and at the bottom is then Governor Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] of Virginia, and myself at the same march.
Speaker 2: The bottom is my friend and soror, Betty Shabazz, the late Betty Shabazz and two of her friends.  We were at a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] Founder's Day Program in New York [New York] in the '90s [1990s], I don't know, I can't remember the exact one, but if you want me I can look it up and send it to you.
Speaker 1: 1990s is fine.
Speaker 2: Okay, and um, at commencement at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] after commencement.  This is Niara Sudarkasa with Governor Douglas Wilder.  Next to me, Mrs. Rosa Parks, and Morris, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Calvin Morris.  They were three honorary degree recipients that year.  And that would have been in the early '90s [1990s].
Story_ID: 300515
Speaker 1: Top is a part of the president's delegation to the African-African American Summit that was in Zimbabwe.  President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] named this delegation.  We're a part of it.  It was led by Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and another person.  They aren't in the picture but it's Coretta Scott King, Joseph [C.] Wilson, whom you've heard so much about, Ambassador Wilson, whose wife [Jacqueline Wilson] was turned out because you know, over the Iraqi Oil Crisis, [HistoryMaker] David [N.] Dinkins, former mayor of New York City [New York, New York], [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height, our grand dame of the Civil Rights Movement and a friend of hers Mr. Hall [ph.] with [HistoryMaker] Niara Sudarkasa in the center.
Speaker 2: And a picture of myself with Dr. Height and C. Delores Tucker.  The top picture was 1996, I believe, and this would have been around '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], Wole Soyinka, Nobel Laureate from Nigeria, Chinua Achebe, the great writer from Nigeria, second writer from Nigeria, and myself on the right.  And these are friends from the '60s [1960s] when I first went to Nigeria.
Speaker 2: What year is this one?
Speaker 1: That was taken in 1980.
Speaker 2: This one says 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick and I at one of the luncheons given by the National Political Congress of Black Women [National Congress of Black Women].  What year?  You said 1995?  Okay.
Speaker 2: This one is 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1962, Niara Sudarkasa on the left, then Gloria Marshall, and the wife of my landlord, Mrs. Ikento Kum [ph.] and the Nigerians have the habit of dressing alike.  They call that family dress.  She and I were wearing the same, her husband gave me those clothes.
Speaker 2: Now that's Niara, that's Gloria, George [Marshall] in the middle and our neighbor, Jackie Bose [ph.] when we were living out in the country.
Speaker 1: About what year was that you thing?
Speaker 2: That had to be around, oh boy, '40 [1940], about that.
Speaker 1: These are, this is at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio].  My three roommates, Dottie [ph.], Nancy [ph.] and Linda [ph.], and this was taken in 1957.  Dottie, Nancy and I had just graduated.
Speaker 2: That's also a picture, 1957, at Oberlin.  I'm standing in my graduation gown.
Speaker 1: This one has 1958 on it.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my mother and me taken in the Bronx, New York in her apartment, 1958, Rowena [Evans] Marshall and me, Gloria Marshall at that time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Mya Sudarkasa [ph.].  She is the third of the grandchildren.  This is Mari Sudarkasa [ph.].  She's the fourth.  Jonathan Sudarkasa [ph.], the second, Jasmine [Sudarkasa (ph.)], oh that's Nigel Sudarkasa [ph.] who is the fifth, the baby, Jasmine Sudarkasa.  All of these pictures were taken in 2004.
