Story_ID: 14165
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Reginald Thomas, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, T-H-O-M-A-S.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Lenard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-N-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not Leonard, it's Lenard.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Lenard.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, yes.  And most people don't my nickname, but it's Ouka.
Speaker 1: Ouka (laughs).  You got a spelling for that?
Speaker 2: O-U-K-A.  And it's one of those Geechie slang things--Floridian things, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as a child that's what they called me, Ouka.  And no one calls me that now.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).  All right.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth--1957, October 21st in Lake Wales, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how do you spell Lake Wales, Florida?
Speaker 2: L-A-K-E, W-A-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a fashion designer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Now you caught me off guard.  Today's date is the 28th, the seventh month, 28th day, zero four year [July 28, 2004].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 14166
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food--I would have to say soul food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, winter.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My bed (laughs). It's the truth.  Europe.  I love Paris [France].  I love Milan [Italy].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I can't think of one right now, but--not really.
Story_ID: 14167
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: You're asking a lot from me.  Her full name was Alma and her maiden name was Williams, A-L-M-A, W-I-L-L-I-A-N-S, M-S, rather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'm really not sure.  Before, prior to this interview, the person that would have all that information was out of the country, so I know it's back probably in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's your sister, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Dothan, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know how to spell Dotheran?
Speaker 2: No, D-O-L, no D-O-T-H-O-N [sic, Dothan, Alabama], something like that.  I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: My mom's side--it was a mixture of Indian and black.  From what I was told my grandfather [Johnny Williams] was a very stylish man.  He was a sharecropper, and he always wore three-piece suits.  I don't know why, but he was very, very fashion orientated from what I was told.  My grandmother [Lonnie Williams] was more of a, a very conservative woman.  She raised over a dozen children.  She lived to be about a 102, I think.  And, basically, she was just the powerhouse of the family.
Speaker 1: Now did she--did they live the balance of their lives in Alabama or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to visit when you were little?
Speaker 2: As a child I remember a few visits.  I remember one more getting up and the smell of catfish and grits and biscuits for breakfast because I guess that was something--it was a southern breakfast.  And it was kind of odd for me as a kid because I was used to having, you know, corn flakes and things of that nature for breakfast.  So whenever went to grandma's house it always something extravagant and, you know, filling.  It was just a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, were there any stories about--way back that your grandparents told or your mother told about, you know, people in the nineteenth century about slavery or reconstruction or any of those kind of things?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily about that, but I remember when my parents were dating, it was a color issue.  My mother came from a, a line of people that were very fair skinned, straight hair.  My father [Alee Thomas], on the other hand, was more Negroid--he was very African, very extremely dark, wiry hair.  And their parents were really not happy with them dating.  And they tried everything to not let that happen.  But it happened.  And that's how I got here.  But, yeah, that was one of the stories that I do remember about that time.  And as far as my, my earlier goings, I remember the segregated fountains and things like that when I was a child.  And Florida, because Florida was still very segregated, when I was between the age of six and eight I, I recognized that--the difference.
Speaker 1: So there were no like stories about your great grandparents or anything like that, your--or--?
Speaker 2: Not from my knowledge because at that time I was the last of my family and then when my last parent died, my sister brought me to Chicago.  And I didn't really get a lot of information because we're very, how can you say--I lived a cloistered life, a very recluse.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause your one parent died when you were five and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the other when you were nine, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your mother died when you were nine years old.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.  Right, right.
Speaker 2: So I didn't have a lot of information about that particular time period.  Even though now I'm beginning to ask questions because at one point I was running, and now I'm running towards our--I have a interest in knowing some of my past and my family's past.
Story_ID: 14168
Speaker 1: Give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: His name was Alee Thomas, A-L-E-E, T-H-O-M-A-S.  And he grew up as they say down the road from my mom [Alma Williams Thomas].  I guess they were teenage sweethearts.  As far as his line, that part like I say, that part of my family were more African Negroid and then--but that's the strange part of that family.  Most of his brothers and sisters married all whites.  The majority of them did that.  And--.
Speaker 1: And they married them down there or do they move up--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, they married whites down in the South and then some move, migrate to California and the Midwest, East Coast.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well, do you know much history about that side of that side of the family at all?  Did they ever--?
Speaker 2: All I know is that he didn't like banks, and he buried a lot of his money in the backyard (laughs), which is something that was common practice back in the days.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, that was down South.  That was in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they really didn't have banks and it was a rural area, very rural.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure.  My sister probably did some, some writing, but I just knew that they were, they, they met at a very young age and they started dating and they eventually married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But was opposed by her family.  She didn't--they didn't--.
Speaker 2: Yes, it as opposed by her family.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know at what point and why they moved to Florida 'cause you, you were born in Lake Wales, Florida.  So, you know, did they--?
Speaker 2: I guess they moved there for job reasons, to get more work I would imagine.  And it probably had something to do with the migration, people moving out of the South or moving to points where they know that it was a better place to live and whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know exactly why they ended up in Lake Wales.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But were there any other relatives in Lake Wales other than, than your immediate family?
Speaker 2: I think there were a few aunts, but mostly at that particular time most people lived in Miami and Tampa, most of my relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is Lake Wales situated between Miami and Tampa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about maybe a two, three-hour drive, I would say.
Speaker 1: From Miami?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a bus ride.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it along the coast or is that like--?
Speaker 2: Lake Wales was central.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was inland.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so your parents are living in Lake Wales.  I mean, what--tell me about what you know.  I know they died when you were young, but from what you know what, what did they do for a living and what kind of personalities did they have?
Speaker 2: Okay, my father from what I was told he was a barber.  And he picked oranges in the orange groves.  Because I remember as a child the, the groves were all around us.  It was a wonderful experience to be able to just wake up in the morning and go pick an orange.  My mother was a maid.  She always pride herself--I remember as a child fragments--she always made sure that her hair was in place.  She always had a, a purse.  Back in those days women had gloves, purse, hat.  That was the most important thing for them.  And I remember that part, and I remember her taking us to church every Sunday.  Every Sunday we were in church.  And I remember the mills.  I remember the family gatherings.  It was very, how can you say--a normal-type family situation.  And I was the youngest at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your, your--okay, so you don't know, remember much about your father, I guess?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Story_ID: 14169
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember walking home on clay streets.  I remember going to school every day that was--the school was built in the middle of a orange grove.  And some of the other fragments--I remember, instead of doing my work, I was always drawing pictures of women's faces, cars, anything that stimulate me.  And I used to get in a lot of trouble as a young child because I didn't really want to pay any attention to what the teacher was doing because my interest was more in drawing something.  I didn't know the reasons why I would draw things like that.  I just knew that was something I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the--can you describe your neighborhood to us and describe maybe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Florida?  There were palm trees all over.  At one point of my life before my father [Alee Thomas] died we lived in a, like a little regular wooden frame house.  I remember my brothers used to have these large turtles, these land turtles, and they used to race them.  And I remember chicken fights.  I remember very large women with these cauldrons boiling sheets and killing possums and coons [raccoons] and cooking them and--just really--how can you say it--the simple life, very simple, very basic.  And every blue moon we would go downtown, which was the segregated area of Florida.  And the total difference in, in, in the environment.  I also remember at that time the movie theater was a, a shack with a large white sheet that they would show movies on Fridays.  And before there was McDonald's they would have little shacks that would sell crabs for like ten cents each that you can buy--seafood.  I remember the little candy store that was a shack also.  Like I say, it was a very rural area.  I rarely wore shoes.  Stayed in shorts and t-shirts, basically, for the large part of my life in Florida.
Story_ID: 14170
Speaker 1: Well, you said, you, your sister writes and you did a lot of drawing.  You drew women's faces a lot and--which was unusual for little boys, you know, to do.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea why you did that?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a connection until I started getting older because I really--it was like something autopilot.  And my whole life has basically been on autopilot.  Now that I'm coming of age, like getting near my fifties, I have more meaning to that.  But in the earlier stages I had no clue, had no idea.  People thought I was special.  They put me in a special department at one point because I just would not let go of that, that, that thing of drawing constantly and being creative and looking at things and researching things that pertained to art, fashion.  In that, in that instance, I think, it pushed me.  It gave me a drive.  But as far as knowing where it came from and stuff like that, no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were interested in art and fashion even as a, as a primary school student.
Speaker 2: Yes, when I was a child.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you inspired by the, the clothing that you saw around you at all or as you look back on it?
Speaker 2: I would say yes because I grew up in a era where women were polished as far as you wouldn't walk out the house without your hair being combed.  You always had to have a purse, gloves, hat.  Everyone had to be groomed.  The men wore--predominantly, they wore a shirt and ties.  Even if they were unemployed, they would have, they would groom themselves a certain way.  So, yeah, the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] was an era that, you know, there were dos and don'ts and rules and regulations of appearance.  So that affected me, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What--when you--so it's--you'd probably prep--you were primarily drawing with pencil and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, was paper hard to come by when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: No.  Always found paper.  I always found pens, pencils.  I would find anything, anything.  Sometimes I would draw in the dirt.  It depends on at that point in my life, you know, I was just very obsessed with whatever was in my mind, putting it on paper.  And I think that's what I was really doing or expressing myself.  That's how I did it every day.  And this was every day--and not every other day or every week, once a week.  This was basically every day.
Story_ID: 14171
Speaker 1: What was your personality like when you were growing up?  What kind of a little kid were you?
Speaker 2: Some people say I was irascible, a bully, bad--but, you know, not really.  I was a good kid.  I was very patient.  I would listen to people.  I would behave because I didn't want to get in trouble.  But kind of adventurous.  I was very curious.  I asked a lot of questions.  And, that's about it--a really, just an average kid, I would say, except that the drawing thing.
Speaker 1: Now you say you ask a lot of questions.  I mean, what were some of the things that intrigued you?
Speaker 2: Just a lot of the why questions, you know, like little boys when they get nine, ten, they go "Why?"  "Why is this?"  "Why is that?"  And those were just basic things that, you know, most of us go through, but I would ask questions, "Why can't I go downtown?" or "Why do I have to drink in this fountain?" and "Why don't we have a movie house like it's downtown?" and stuff like that.  And my, my family tried to explain those things to me.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 14172
Speaker 1: You were born in 1957.  This is a year after the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott, which is one of the first, I guess, organized blows against segregation in the South.  And Florida--I know there was a big, they had a big crisis around segregation in St. Augustine, I think, Florida.  But maybe in some other places, too, but I read about the one in St. Augustine.  But, now, did, what, do you remember any tension around that, that segregation when you were coming up other than having to suffer.  Was there any agitation to get rid of it?
Speaker 2: As I state, I was a very, very young, but I remember people talking about crosses being burned on lawns.  The, the, the thing that really stands out are the water fountain things.  I remember that distinctly.  Not being able to eat in some of the restaurants in the downtown area.  They were normal everyday living for people at that particular time because, you know, there was, was no other way of life.  I just remembered those things, basically.
Speaker 1: So I take it your neighborhood was all black.
Speaker 2: It was all, definitely all black.  And the, the wealth of, of the neighborhood was from poor working class.  You may have a doctor that lives on the corner.  You may have a nurse or a trained person, but it was basically a working class family because they were also limited where they could live.  So everybody, it was just a melting pot.
Story_ID: 14173
Speaker 1: You say your mother [Alma Williams Thomas] took you to church a lot when you--what church did you attend and what was it like?
Speaker 2: From pulling knowledge, it was a sanctified church--I remember that.  It was a lot of tambourines and a lot of shouting and very spiritual--something that later on in my life I changed.  I became a Lutheran because I didn't want to hear all the noise.  I wanted something more quieter and peaceful (laughs) in my life.  But I remember the hats and the purses and all that carrying on and the minister sweating and doing his sermon.  After that it would be the, the little social gathering after that and you would have supper--because you would have supper and then later on you would have dinner.  That's another thing that, you know, has lost as far as the different times of the day that you eat and things like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the southern schedule is, is a little bit different.  I mean, the nomenclature's different.  And they start off with breakfast, which is the same, but it's a full meal, usually, right?
Speaker 2: A very full meal.
Speaker 1: Then you have dinner, which is comparable, I guess, to our lunch, except it's a full meal, too (laughs).
Speaker 2: And some people call it brunch, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then supper is what people in North call dinner, basically, right?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And that's another full meal, right?
Speaker 2: So they, they centered their life around church, eating, the community, because it was a very tight community.  If you did something, believe me, your mother would find out in less than twenty minutes because it was just--everybody knew everybody.  So it was little room for trouble--very.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now did church--did you pay--I know church is one place where everybody always dresses up and they come through--was church fascinating for you from that aspect, from a fashion aspect?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  I mean sometimes my, my, my focus would drift and I would look at the ladies.  I would see what they have on.  I would see what type of suits the men would have on.  And, yeah, that did give me inspiration.  But at the time, I really didn't have a, a strong--I didn't know why I was looking at or sketching because, as I say before, I, I hadn't developed as far as knowing that I wanted to be a designer.  I didn't know that exist.  I just knew that I had a fixation for clothing and people--how they dressed and stuff like that.  I didn't put the pieces together at that time.
Speaker 1: Did you have any, any favorite styles in those days?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't start developing that stuff until after I was about ten--from ten on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I knew I was meticulous about what I put on and sometimes my sisters would dress me and then I would go and take it off and put on something else.  And, yeah, I did do that as a child, yes.
Story_ID: 14174
Speaker 1: What couldn't you stand to wear?  Or, what didn't you like to wear when you were--?
Speaker 2: I used to like to wear mismatched socks.  You, you know, your, like your favorite blanket, I had my favorite pair of pants.  I felt that I could wear these pants anywhere and everywhere.  And I was told, no, you can't.  They're not appropriate.  So, yeah, and I had my favorite t-shirt.  Just like any other young kid.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, now, well, tell me about--oh, the doll story.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: We have to tell the doll story.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: We're talking about dressing.  And you, when you mentioned your sisters I remembered the doll story.
Speaker 2: All of the--well, like you said, that particular time I was about three, four, maybe five years old at that time.  And, well--I asked my sister to do that, to write things about me when I was that young because a lot of that is blocked from me.  She explained to me that I really, really had this fixation with taking, after my sisters had dressed the dolls, I would take the dolls and redress them because I didn't like the way they look or I wanted them to look a certain way and all that kind of stuff, which I don't--I have fragments of memory of that but it was something else.  I was really shocked to read that when I read it for the first time last week.  I was like, what, really?  So I called my other sister and she, she verified it--yes, you used to take our dolls and change their clothes.  She said you didn't mother them, but you, you wanted to change their clothes.  And then after you changed the clothes, you put them back and you went on your way.  So, yeah, I am guilty of that (laughs).
Story_ID: 14175
Speaker 1: What was the name of the kindergarten you attended in Lake Wales, Florida?
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, I don't know (laughs).  I don't remember the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was a--we all know this is a segregated school, black school, all black school--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, it was segregated.
Speaker 1: --and probably, you know, the facility was probably below what the standard was because they--or maybe not, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I remember my kindergarten was in a church.  And I remember that because the lady had one arm and it was stub, and she would hit us with it.  And that was not (laughs) a great time in my life because I used to get hit a lot.  Grade school was actually a modern building they had just built.  It was a beautiful facility.  And then after that my mom [Alma Williams Thomas] had passed away, and then I was pulled and--.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember the name of the church that was, that the school was in?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or what kind of church it was?
Speaker 2: It was just a white shingled church, very traditional, like ['The] Color Purple'.  That's what it remind me of.  It was very rural.
Speaker 1: So you don't remember if it was Baptist, or--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) On bricks, standing up on bricks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was on stilts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite an image, but--.
Speaker 2: I was very, very young back then.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, it's--what grade school did you attend in Lake Wales?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of it either, but like I say that was a new development.  I, I went to--I think I--it was called Lake Wales Elementary and then from there I went to the new facility.  And then at the age of nine I was transferred.  I, I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, those are the--the ones here I do know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were nine, this is about 1966, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], yeah.
Story_ID: 14176
Speaker 1: How did your father [Alee Thomas] die?
Speaker 2: He died of a heart attack from what I understand.  And my mother [Alma Williams Thomas] died of kidney failure.  You got to realize if you leave it in content, it wasn't a lot of healthcare back then and it wasn't a lot of anything at all.  You were on your own.  And the nearest hospital was miles away.  And they sometimes did not take blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you've got two sisters, right?
Speaker 2: It was a total of seven of us, I think, yeah--no, six of us.
Speaker 1: Can you give us everyone's name and tell us--and you're the youngest, right?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of my parents.  The oldest is Nadine Williams.  Next in line was Gerry, Mae Cathrine, Joseph, and Joanna.  And then I came.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, well, what did you all do, you know, when your, your mother died.  How--I mean, who was taking care of you?
Speaker 2: What happened was my sister, Nadine--she was the first to be educated.  She had already made a life for herself in Chicago [Illinois].  So upon my mother's death, she came and got all the younger siblings and brought us here to Chicago.
Speaker 1: 'Cause some of your brothers and sisters were old enough to take care of themselves at that point?
Speaker 2: Cathrine and Gerry, yes.  Joanna and I were the youngest ones at that time.  Like I say, my parents waited to seven years and then they had me.  So Joanna was seven years older than--she is seven years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was in high school, I guess, or--.
Speaker 2: When we came here, no, I--yeah, or she--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was just about to graduate, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Getting, yeah, getting ready to go to high school, yes--more like eighth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were nine and you would have been in fourth grade and then she would have been maybe a freshman or sophomore in high school, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Or something like that.
Story_ID: 14177
Speaker 1: Tell us about the trip to Chicago [Illinois].  Was it exciting or a big deal for you then?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, my God.  It was frightening because I never in life saw an el [elevated] train, a skyscraper, or white people being around me (laughs).  Because you have to realize that I grew up in a very rural area.  Then all of a suddenly I was thrown into South Shore in 1966, '67 [1967]--no blacks in sight, fear of sleeping, scared constantly because I never had the experience--not even looking at a three-flat building.  That was a skyscraper to me.  So all the modern day of city life was just something totally different and new.  It was like an amusement park.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now South Shore is, is one of the more densely-populated communities in Chicago and one of the most urban in terms of--you've got a, an electric train running right down the tracks on 71st Street right in the middle of the street and there's a lot of taller buildings for a regular neighborhood out in South Shore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We had unusually--there were some mid-risers, on 71st and Jeffery [Boulevard] was a coffee shop that had a humongous coffee cup on top of it and it used to blow smoke.
Speaker 1: Is that where the foot sign is now with Tootsie--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right across the street from the Jewel's [grocery store], yeah.  And it was a total different life for me.  Like I say, it took me a long time to adjust to that.  And being chased home everyday because of my color--that took a lot.  Because at that time I would say at [Myra] Bradwell [Elementary School]--that was the first school I went to--it was maybe, out of the whole school, maybe two or three blacks.  So it was very difficult, very.  But it's still--in the flip side of it, it was beautiful because the beach was a block away from my house.  A lot of things that some of my other peers had lived in other parts of Chicago didn't have the type of things that I had in my neighborhood like boutiques and restaurants and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you live in South Shore?
Speaker 2: We started out at 67th Street--I think it was 67th Place.  From there we moved to 75th [Street] and Yates [Boulevard] and from 75th and Yates we moved to 72nd and Oglesby [Avenue].  So we actually always stayed in the heart of South Shore.  'Cause  most people say, "I live in South Shore," and they really don't.  It was a--that part of my live was a great experience once I adjust.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had the beach there.  And the community was a--it was a large Jewish community in South Shore in those days.  I know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was predominantly Jewish.  They had synagogues all over.  They, the, yeah, yeah, they had new synagogues because most of the synagogues there were built from let's say the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] because as we talked earlier it was predominantly a WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] neighborhood.  It was very WASP.  And then after that the neighborhood consisted of lots of activities for children.  Like they had a hobby shop that I used to go and race my cars.  They had plenty of movie theatres that we used to get dressed and go to on Fridays and Saturdays.
Speaker 1: Now how many--I know there was the Jeffery [Theatre].
Speaker 2: And the Hamilton [Theatre].
Speaker 1: And the Hamilton, right.
Speaker 2: I'll never forget that because that's where I saw 'Sparkle'.  I'll never forget that (laughs).  That was a great time in my life.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  The Hamilton--I think it's still standing.
Speaker 2: It's still standing, but it's not operating.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the Jeffery's now South Shore Bank, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Yeah, and South Shore Country Club was a feature of the neighborhood that--.
Speaker 2: I remember that because when they--at one point when they, when the hotel knew they were leaving and all the controversy of who's going to buy it--is the [Chicago] Park District going to take over it?  They let some of the, the neighborhood people--they handpicked people to come and actually see the facility because before that no blacks, no Jews, or anyone else was allowed in that except for the whites, and that's what it was for.
Speaker 1: And that wasn't until 1982, '83 [1983], or maybe '84 [1984] that they closed it down really and--.
Speaker 2: And it was a magnificent place from the, the--after I--'cause I had a chance to visit it right before the park took it over.  I mean, it was magnificent.  It was a beautiful place.
Speaker 1: And for those who are watching this who don't know it was the facade of the facility that they used for the big show in 'The Blues Brothers' was the outside of South Shore Cultural Center, I mean the South Shore Country Club then.  Now it's the Cultural Center.
Speaker 2: And you had kings and queens have stayed there.  It was Hollywood glamour-type.  Because back in the '30s [1930s] you had a lot of high-style, high society, high entertainment, especially up and down Stony Island [Avenue].  And you had the big band hotels, all of that carrying on, the jazz era.  So a lot of that were remains over there even in the '60s [1960s] after it had deteriorated.
Story_ID: 14178
Speaker 1: Now, you went to [Myra] Bradwell Elementary School in South Shore.  Now what was the adjustment like to a Chicago [Illinois] school.  And this is a, is a integrated school.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, it wasn't integrated at the time when I was there.  Like I say, it was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you were the only one integrating it, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was (laughs), yeah, me and two other people.  We were the only ones that integrated.  And like I say, we used to get chased home a lot.  I mean, that first maybe two, three years before the neighborhood started slowly changing because at one point it was still very much white.  And then before you knew it at a blink of an eye it had started turning black.  And some of the whites were moving so fast until they were throwing away heirlooms and precious items.  And they were fleeting.  And, unfortunately, I had a chance to see a lot of that change.  And I noticed a lot of change taking place during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you do in school?  Were you still drawing?
Speaker 2: In grade school, yes, I was still drawing.  I was still ignoring my teachers.  And, like I say, in that time of my life I didn't know the reasons why I was still drawing.  I didn't know the reasons why I wanted to dress a certain way.  Because I do remember going into from ten to maybe thirteen, fourteen years old, I would take my allowance and go to some of the clothing stores and buy things for myself because I wanted to dress a certain way.  When knickers were out, I wanted to wear my knickers.  I wanted to wear my marshmallow [platform] shoes and scarves and medallions because back in the early '70s [1970s] that was that mod revolution, I'm black and I'm proud, and all that kind of stuff.  So, I wanted to be a part of that genre as far as dressing that certain way.  And because of my family--they were so conservative, they wouldn't buy me those things.  So, what I had to do was actually save my allowance and purchase those things on the side and hide them (laughs).  That's true.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were really concerned about how you're dressing.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was very concerned about my appearance.
Speaker 1: So this is the late '60s [1960s], right, we're in?
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] the dress was--in the black community, were people in Chicago wearing Italian knit clothes and all that sort of thing when you got here?  I know they were doing that in Detroit and Dayton and other places, but--.
Speaker 2: I think we were being influenced by European fashions because--we as Americans have always looked around--even though Americans have--they create, we created the casual look.  That's where The GAP come from, Banana Republic.  We created the, the sense of we don't have to be tight and structured all the time.  We can relax with our fashions.  And at that particular time I would say bellbottoms were the, the rage.  Leaving your hair natural even though Afro Sheen and some of the great hair care companies were strongly advertising the straight look because our image as far as a black person--we wanted to blend in and be accepted by all.  So we wanted the straight hair.  We wanted to dress the norm.  But when that, that, that black power thing came in, I remember that very well because I started getting my hair braided and I was taking courses, special courses at the Field Museum [of Natural History].  And whenever the tourists would come, especially the Asian people, they would just snap my pictures all the time because they were so in awe of my braids--'cause I had very long braids when I was a child, I mean a young adult.  So that was kind of wild back in that day.
Story_ID: 14179
Speaker 1: Your sister [Nadine Thomas Williams] writes that the teachers at [Myra] Bradwell [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] didn't know what to do with you and decided to make you--they thought you were semi-retarded or slow or something, right?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes.  They actually thought something was wrong with me because my focus was so involved with my art until it was like I was in a, how can you say, a shell.  There was nothing important to me but my art.  And after a while they put me in programs to see as far as my skills and things like that.  And at one point they had told my sister, "Don't expect him to maybe get out of grade school.  There's no hope."  And my sister, of course, she didn't believe it.  And she never really made me stop drawing.  I guess she knew something was more to it.  But it was a point in my life I had to question myself--is something wrong with me? Because I had this strong urge to create, you know.  And that was basically the, the bottom line.  I wanted to create.  But at that time I didn't know what.  So I starting dabbering in different types of art.
Story_ID: 14180
Speaker 1: Now, what else did you do when you were growing up?  Did you watch TV or did you like music?  Did you play sports?  I mean, well, what else--what other kinds of things did you do?  And what kind of friends did you have when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Tell you the truth, I really didn't have a lot of people around me because at certain parts of my life, my brother-in-law who raised me as a child and my sister [Nadine Thomas Williams], they were quite sociable because he was the token black man, and we had to go to a lot of galas and parties and society things.  So I really didn't have too many friends.  I think I had one childhood friend and he lived across the alley and his father was a policeman.  And we used to trade coins 'cause at one time I collected coins.  And outside of that it was just simple.  But I was glad to, to, to come of age where I could say, "I don't want to go to any more parties."  That was the climax when I reach eighteen.
Speaker 1: Now your brother-in-law is quite a figure himself.  He's passed now, but he--Oscar--.
Speaker 2: Oscar Williams.
Speaker 1: Oscar Williams.  He was in finance, right?  He was a banker?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, he was in finance.  Like I say, he started out as working with SBC [sic, SBA, Small Business Administration]  They helped develop SBC [sic, SBA].
Speaker 1: The small business?
Speaker 2: Yeah, small business loan.  And from there he pioneered several other causes.  He was part of the Young Republicans.  We worked with Operation PUSH, [Operation] Breadbasket--.
Speaker 1: And this all fits, too, because [Richard] Nixon, who was the Republican President at the time, started the small business loans as part of what he called "Black Capitalism".
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother-in-law was part of that, a part of that movement.  It was about six or eight people involved with that in the beginning, and he was one of the people.  And I had a chance to experience that part of my life and seeing those type of things happen--like watching Barbara Proctor start her advertisement company.  He was one of the main people that--I think he was the m-, person that gave her her loan.
Speaker 1: And she became the top black--.
Speaker 2: She was the top and then after that Tom Burrell--fell into second place.  But, yeah, she was the--.
Speaker 1: Top black ad agency in the country, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Proctor and Gardner I think they called it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, Barbara Proctor, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I remember those sequels in my life--that and basically watching him go through politics.  We stuffed a lot of envelopes.  I think he ran for office one--at--I think against [Ralph] Metcalfe--I'm not really sure.  But at that particular time and watching Roland Burris and people of that nature constantly coming through our homes.
Speaker 1: And so you, you all were doing pretty well.  I mean, you, your sister and her husband were making pretty good money and had a high--.
Speaker 2: I didn't know (laughs).  I didn't really know because, yes, at that time I came from very humble--like I say, I used to walk home without shoes.  And then all of a sudden I was thrown into this situation whereas my sister raised me and then my brother-in-law was a very ambitious man.  He moved his way up through school and stuff like that.  He actually went to Lab School, University of Chicago [Laboratory School], and that's how he met most of his constituents 'cause they went to, he went to school with the Goldblatts and people of that nature.  And, basically, those contacts last him through his whole life.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, that's, that's significant.  Not everybody get chance to go to University of Chicago Lab School, you know.
Speaker 2: Especially growing up on 47th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] or somewhere like that.
Story_ID: 14181
Speaker 1: So this is significant, a significant connection, you know, in terms of social connection and, you know, money.  But at the same time, though, you're living in a community where you're in the minority and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were minorities.  And then, like I say, I started seeing our family structure change basically when he started developing SBA [Small Business Administration] and then all, after that he started doing special assignments for [President Richard] Nixon.  And then all of a suddenly he became president of the Muslim Bank and then our lives changed overnight from driving--what's those little Chevrolets with the little hatchback to driving a Mercedes Benz, having housekeepers.  Everything was scheduled.  And at that particular time--.
Speaker 1: Is that when you moved to 72nd [Street] and Oglesby [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 72nd and Oglesby.  And at that particular time I was kind of ashamed of my family's wealth because most of my friends didn't have what I have.  They didn't travel to Europe for summers or didn't have Marshall Field's and Saks charge plates in their, in their pockets.  And I tried to blend in until one day my favorite art teacher--we were going on a field trip and I forgot to get my papers signed.  And, you know, I'm the class clown and stuff like that and my instructor decide to put me in check that day and says, "Oh, by the way, class, you know, some of us are fortunate and some of us are not.  Reginald forgot to get his trip slip signed so I had to call his house and his housekeeper answered the phone and said it was okay."  And when she made that announcement everybody turned around and looked at me and said, "You have a housekeeper?"  And I said, "Yes."  And the cat was out the bag then (laughs).  All those years I had been--I never brought anybody to my house because I, I didn't want to--I wanted to blend in.  I wanted to fit.
Speaker 1: Yet, it seem like you had a, well, a lot of different, I mean, you know, a lot of things pulling at you as a, as a youth.  You know, you lose your parents [Alee Thomas and Alma Williams Thomas] and you move from being a sharecropper who walks home without shoes to and now the, a part of a family that's really politically-connected and, and associated with money and, and prestige, you know, in a all-white neighborhood, basically.
Speaker 2: And I just really never thought of it.  And it was just something that was just getting by because something in me--I, with--I had a drive.  And, like I say, I really didn't know what that drive was until in my, my, my--my youth, my adulthood, my young adulthood.  And I--and everything fit in once I, I got out of high school [South Shore High School, Chicago, Illinois] because I wanted, I, I still love fashion.  And, like I say, I would take my allowance and that would kind of fulfill some of that need.  But in the beginning my, my family say, okay, you, it's, "You're in high school now.  You have to start planning for your future.  You need to start, you know, thinking about a career so that you can take of yourself."  And in the back of my head I would say, "I want to be an artist."  And they told me, "No, you can't live off of that."  And prior towards that, I did summer camp where I was a camp counselor for handicapped and special children.  So I decided to please my, my, my parents, I decided to go to NIU [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois] and take up art therapy.
Story_ID: 14182
Speaker 1: Before we get you at NIU [Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois], I want to go back to South Shore.  But you, you had a art teacher at South Shore [High School, Chicago, Illinois] that was very helpful.
Speaker 2: Very, very helpful.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Mrs. Coffey.
Speaker 1: And at South Shore you were able to draw, paint, sculpt, take photography, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, South Shore was a place that really I started blooming.  It was one of the few schools in the city of Chicago that had a TV station, some of the top educators in art, photography, and things of that nature.  It was just a great learning experience for me even though it was a public school.  And it was a great learning experience.  And Mrs. Coffey at the time she was working on her Ph.D.  So everything that she had to do, her instructors were giving her, she made us do.  So when I--when it was time for me to college, it was really nothing they could teach me because I had already had exposure in tons of things.  And then the flip side of that--in photography I started taking college level in my junior year.  And I had photographs exhibit in Paris [France], Washington [D.C.], New York [New York], and most people thought I was going to be a photographer.  But I really didn't have a interest.  But I used to get in a lot of trouble because I used to do a lot of nudes, provocative nudes when I--.
Speaker 1: In, in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughs).
Speaker 1: Now, where would you, well--?
Speaker 2: I would get, I would get girls, I would get guys.  Now one time--I'll never forget this--was a star basketball, no, football player.  And I asked him could I photograph him and I think I made so much money off those photographs 'cause every girl in, in South Shore wanted a copy of that.  And that was one of the photographs that I won an award for.
Speaker 1: It was a nude photograph of this guy?
Speaker 2: It was semi-nude.  But the way I positioned, it looked like he was nude.  But I did a lot of--I loved erotic art back then and I, I had no idea--and I used to have a instructor, my--what do you call it when you have take a time in your--study hall period.  This one lady instructor, she used to carry a ruler.  And she would look at some of my work and she would always hit me across my knuckles because she said, "Something's wrong with you," because I used to draw a lot of nude drawings and stuff of that nature.  Like I said, I was trying to find out what type of art field, what was my drive and interest.  So in South Shore it really gave me, how can you say, a springboard to exposing myself to various things.  And, plus, my family--because a lot of times we would go to museums and galleries and things of that nature.  So, basically, a lot of that stuff rubbed off on me in my younger stages, yeah.  I used to do nude photography, yes, and sketch.
Speaker 1: Sketching is something you can do by yourself.  But you--you can actually talk people into--.
Speaker 2: I would do it in public, yes.  I would, yes.
Speaker 1: You could talk people into posing for photos or something..
Speaker 2: Just like Victor Skrebneski does (laughs).  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, in high school, now, you won the Kodak Award when you were sixteen if I remember correctly.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.  And that was a semi-nude photograph also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of a great friend of mines.  I never forgot.  I asked her--I said, "Laurie, please, do this, please."  And she did it and I slowly eased her out of a few garments and put a tam on her head, a turban.  And I photographed her and then I solarized it.  And it won me a prestigious award.  And, unfortunately, a lot of my work--my instructors kept a lot of my work.  They wouldn't give me my work back.
Speaker 1: Now, they couldn't have been interested in, well, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, some of them loved--even at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago], my, my, my one instructor, my painting instructor, he, he kept a large body of my work.
Speaker 1: That's something that seems to happen a lot for art students and photography students.  The school or the instructors keep their work and stuff and--.
Speaker 2: And he's the one that had some of my work exhibit in Paris and Milan [Italy] and some places like that.  Yeah, he showed my work to a lot of people.  And, actually, he thought I was a promising painter.  He thought I was going to be an artist because that was at the time that Jonathan Green and I were at school at the same time.
Speaker 1: It was the Art Institute (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, this is at the Art Institute.
Story_ID: 14183
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from South Shore High School [Chicago, Illinois]--.
Speaker 2: I went to Northern.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now why did you choose Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Because I went through the CHANCE [Counseling Help and Assistance Necessary for College Education] Program because my grades were--I think I was a C average student, and it wasn't too many places--I wanted to go to the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago] and I wanted to go to, to Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York], but something happened.  I didn't apply to the Art Institute.  I really wanted to go away, and I didn't get accepted at Parsons.  And I waited too late for Pratt [Institute, New York, New York].  So the next best thing was to just go to somewhere I knew I could get into and I--.
Speaker 1: A state school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I applied for Northern and they accepted me right away.  And I told my counselor that this wasn't the place I wanted to be, but it's a springboard, a starting point.  So I went there for almost, yeah, a year and a half, I would say.  And what happened was I was part of the black organization and I, I decided that on campus I started making women's clothing.  That's how it started.  I started making the women's clothing and I was complaining about money.  And my sister [Nadine Thomas Williams] told me, "Why don't you get a job?"  And I thought to myself, hmm, I could do something else.  So at the time I was dating this girl, and she would wear my clothes.  And that's how it happened.  And I started dressing a lot of girls on campus.  And I didn't need a job because I was making a decent living.  And that's how that happened in the beginning.  And then one day I had a light bulb moment.  I said, "Hey, since I'm doing this and I'm living well, let's go to a art school, let's go to the Art Institute."
Story_ID: 14184
Speaker 1: I forgot that lady that supported the Black Panthers, the white lady--oh, God, name on the tip of my tongue.  She had a place in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois] and she used to let the Panthers have meetings there--Lucille, Lucille Montgomery.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, very political.  And, well, she died a few years ago, but Morris, Morris Gary of--well, he works at Neiman Marcus, has a lot of info on her.  But she was one of the people that did a lot for the [Civil Rights] Movement.  As a matter of fact in her obituaries they had a picture of her, a shirtless Jesse Jackson, and he was--all these black men without shirts on going around her.  It was so bizarre.  Because she was very into the Movement and she loved black men (laughs).
Story_ID: 14185
Speaker 1: You were talking about designing clothes for some of the coeds at Northern [Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, but, did--you started at South Shore [High School, Chicago, Illinois] with a sewing machine, right, when you were still in high school.  You got a sewing machine and--.
Speaker 2: That's another--.
Speaker 1: --made some prom dresses I've read.
Speaker 2: When I turned, I think it was fifteen or sixteen, they asked me what I wanted for my birthday, and I told them a sewing machine.  And it was a big running joke in the family.  It was like, "Ha ha, he wants a sewing machine, ya ya ya ya."  So instead they built me this elaborate basketball court--and they still bought the sewing machine.  But they told me I couldn't sew in my room.  So, fortunately, I had a huge walk-in closet.  So I--taught myself how to sew from this little Italian man that had a cleaners on the corner.  I would come and sit and watch him sew.  And I would come home and sew in my closet (laughs) because I wasn't allowed to sew anywhere else in the house, so that was the only place I could sew.  So that's how I learned through trial and error how to sew, actually.  I'm self-taught, really.  And after spending, you know, hundreds of dollars on fabric during my youth and literally destroying it because I didn't know what I was doing--and at one point I was gluing clothes together because I had this fixation.  I really wanted to learn how to sew.  You got to realize, not only was I sewing, but at one point I was taking pictures and I was sketching and drawing.  I still was, you know, all over the board when it came to doing art.  So, yeah, that was my first learning part at that time.  I taught myself how to sew.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, back to Northern, you had your first fashion show at Northern.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: It was on April Fools' [Day].  At that time people still didn't know I knew how to sew.  My family was totally in the dark.  I had invited my family to come down because that was my last semester at Northern.  And I did a fashion show for this organization.  And we rented the room, which was in the, the tallest building in DeKalb.  It was on the campus--beautiful room on top floor.  And I staged a show.  And everybody was just dumbfounded because they couldn't believe that I put together something like that without training, without knowledge, without anything.  And we put together a full-fledged show.
Speaker 1: Now had you ever seen a fashion show before?
Speaker 2: Before that?  I've seen, you know, the shows that they do for, you know, organizations and things like that.  I'd never really seen what you call a trade fashion show, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what did you, what was your work like?  Could you describe your work that was in that show?
Speaker 2: Pretty much almost like what it is now.  I fell in love with knits because knits was the most difficult thing to sew, and I was really, really--I'm going to conquer this thing.  And I mastered knits at a, at a early age.  And my presentation was just predominantly knits, fitted clothes--you can say body-conscious, because I didn't really get into the plus-size thing 'til later on.  But, yeah, just sexy clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was like 1975, I guess, or--?
Speaker 2: No, we're talking about in--we're talking about Northern so that was seventy, between '77 [1977] and '78 [1978]--,
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --going into '79 [1979].
Story_ID: 14186
Speaker 1: Now, the disco era--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the disco era, which, of course, like most of my peers were out going to clubs and parties.  And at that time I wasn't into that even though I used to sneak into Dingbat's [nightclub in Chicago, Illinois] and see--what's his name--the, Mr. T.  He would be the door guard there, and I would go there, have dinner with my friends, and then afterwards we would hide in the bathroom and go out and party.  But that was about the sum of my disco era.  But, yeah, at that time I, I started developing when I was at Northern [Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois].  I developed my, my, my style for fashion, my eye for fashion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were you, would--did your clothes look like other '70s [1970s] kind of clothes in those days?
Speaker 2: You can say that, yes, but some of my stuff was more--and I don't know where that came from--I guess watching gangster movies, but some of my stuff was kind of retro, which was kind of different because everything was so flashy and lycra and tight back there.  And some of my stuff was really kind of like spin-off from the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, looser fitting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, looser or more suity, more structure, conservative.  Like I said, my brother-in-law [Oscar Williams] was a gangster movie fanatic, so we would watch tons of movies like that.  So, I guess some of that came from watching those movies.  So, some of that was my inspiration, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, but your, your friends at Northern encouraged you to go to the [School of the] Art Institute [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Actually, I just decided one day that it was time for a change 'cause I, I, I kept having a need and a urge.  And like I say, I realized that I really have to work because of my craft.  And I decided that I, I wanted to farther educate myself.  And I talked to my counselor, and she told me that they would never accept me, that I should just stay here at Northern and continue on in this program.  And what I did--I, I got my portfolio together and sent it to Art Institute and they accepted me.  And I left Northern and came back to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were at Northern Illinois University for what, a year or a year and a half?
Speaker 2: Almost two years.
Speaker 1: Almost two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I would say two years, two years I completed, yeah.  Then I came and Art Institute, which was a big, big move for me.  Because when my sister [Nadine Thomas Williams] took me there for orientation, she was scared out of her mind because she was looking at all these kids with orange hair, red hair, body piercing.  And she kept looking at me, say, "Are you sure this is where you want to go?"  I said, "I'm positive," because I--at that time I was still wearing shirts and ties and being very conservative with my dress.  And, and she was very uncomfortable with that, but she was ready--she knew that it was a change because after she saw the show at Northern she knew that I was gifted with that, and she knew that this was best for me.
Story_ID: 14187
Speaker 1: What was it like?  Was it a big adjustment at--at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because it was almost at the level of--you remember the original movie 'Fame'.  It was more or less like that concept.  It was without walls.  They didn't grade, we didn't have a grading system like A, B, C's.  You just had a pass/fail.  It was a very liberal place.  It was a true melting pot because you got from very poor kids to extremely rich kids.  It was just a mixture of various people in movies, film, I mean, theatre, film.  They would flock there.  And then we had a lot of people that didn't belong to the school but would come there and sit in on the classes because it was just a open-door policy.  You know, you can just come in and sit in our class if you behave yourself and kept quiet--they didn't care.  Nowadays you can't even walk inside of a building without security and stuff like that.  But, yeah, it was just a free-spirit environment.  And I think I got in the fashion department because you had to apply to get in the fashion department.  I applied in my sophomore year, and I was accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now you, you had your second show at the Art Institute and tell us about how that developed.
Speaker 2: That was the year that we--Cindy Crawford was only fifteen, sixteen years old and she fell off the stage.  That was--.
Speaker 1: She fell off the stage at the--?
Speaker 2: At the Art Institute.  That was when she first started modeling--the supermodel.  That was a great part of my life because they taught me things--my one instructor there was Kay-Karol Mapp, I think, and she taught shape and theory, which is something that stems from the slavery period--how the slaves would take, cut garments from eyesight--no patterns.  A lot of times they didn't use the traditional things like buttons or zippers.  Everything was kind of geometric in designs.  And she taught me shape and theory, which the head instructors particularly didn't care about because they were more in the traditional garment phase.  And the great thing about the Art Institute--they taught you creativity.  Like at Parsons [School of Design, New York, New York] and Pratt [Institute, New York, New York], they really teach you commercialization and how to fit in to the commercial market.  But at the Art Institute, they, they, they, they instruct you--"The skies the limit; be creative."  And, and that part of that of the school teaching was a great impact.  It was--it just let me be me.
Story_ID: 14188
Speaker 1: When you put on a fashion show, do you do it at your own expense, or how does that work?
Speaker 2: No, during that time at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] everything was a group show, so the students--we would do a collective fashion show.  We would put in, I think at that time, we could show, sophomores could show one piece and then as the years--junior can show two pieces.  And then at the end of the year you can show a miniature grouping.  At my first show--I never forget the first show because it took place in a gay bar, and the [Art Institute] Women's Board was in outrage.  They were very, very upset because they didn't want to hold something like that for the patrons of the art because these shows attracted all the people.  That's when I first laid eyes on Eunice Johnson because she was a, well, she's a board member still.  And I would see her all the time.  You know, she would come up and visit the fashion students and stuff like that.  And at that time my family really was, they still were skeptical about me being a designer until one day Eunice Johnson ran into my brother-in-law in Washington, D.C.  I think it was [President Ronald] Reagan's inaugural or whatever it was.  And she said that "Your, your son is going to be a great designer."  And that's when my brother-in-law [Oscar Williams] eased up on me (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1980 then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, yeah, around that time, yeah.  So, yeah, the, the fashion shows, like I say, were, they were a collective thing and we just--if you're, if you were in good standings in the fashion department, they would let you put a piece in the show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then after that I was curious, and I started doing things on my own.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--was there a sale you made of a garment that was like a groundbreaking, I mean, this was like a breakthrough where you sold something for a amount that it really--that really encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was still in school I was curious to the fact that I wanted to sell in stores and that was taboo.  My instructors were totally, totally against that.  And what I decided to do was from my shape and theory classes, I decided to develop a garment so that a handicapped person could wear--you can slide into it--no zippers or no buttons, easy care.  And I develop a concept and I just started peddling it to various boutiques.  And when I was a junior I had maybe four, maybe a half a dozen accounts that were selling my clothes at that particular time.  And 'cause I'm the deadly D's--I know how to cut, sew, and design.  I can do it all.
Speaker 1: So then not everybody that's a designer can do all that, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They have to depend on somebody else to cut it or sew it--.
Speaker 2: They have to depend on somebody to sketch it, sew it, draft patterns, sizing--you name it--customer service, you know.  But, fortunately, I was curious and I asked a lot of questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got income from clothing designs when you're, while you're at Art Institute.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was selling on the market.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was one of the one--well, I probably was the only student at the time in my class selling on the market.  So that was pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we get, we leave Art Institute, what, I mean, what do you think was the greatest lesson you learned there or--?
Speaker 2: The greatest lesson I learned at the Art Institute was to schmooze--you had to learn how to relate to various people.  My instructors taught me how to put a collection together.  They showed the, the theory of color and creativity--because that's the one focus.  Unfortunately, they didn't show you the business side because at that particular time their theory was you don't need to know the business--you hire somebody for it, which is why a lot of my constituents aren't in business today.  A lot of them folded.  A lot of them just got out of the business because they couldn't handle it on the business tip.
Speaker 1: Now, you were fortunate to have a brother-in-law who was involved in business deep, right?
Speaker 2: He wasn't involved in my business at that time, but I knew the--by sitting up late at night and listening to him talking and conducting business, it kind of, how can you say, it rubbed off.  Even though I was still quote unquote an artist and a lot of that I didn't want to deal with.  But, I did.  I was curious.  And if I wanted to sell my clothes I had to learn how to conduct and do business.  So, it was almost a natural thing for me.
Story_ID: 14189
Speaker 1: When you came out of the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] in 1983--and was there anything about, anything else about the Art Institute you want to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean it was a great, how can you say, springboard for me.  Once I graduated I never looked back.  As a matter of fact, I got my electives that I needed for, you know, like English and stuff like that from at the time Loop College [later Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois].  I never even took those hours back so that I can get my diploma because it just didn't mean anything to me because I got what I wanted at the time.  Even though if I wanted to now I can go transfer those hours and get a actual diploma.  But at that time I was so, how can you put, in need to have what I want--my own business--until that was my focus.  And that's exactly what I did.  I started out in my family's basement and I grew it out of the basement.  And then I moved over in Haymarket Street where, where I am now.  I'm still there.  And at that time my brother-in-law [Oscar Williams], like I say, that he was part of the Muslim thing and then he did some private things for some of the other large banks in Chicago.  And then one day he looked at me and I said, "You know, I really need your help," because at that time he was in semi-retirement.  I said, "I really, really need your help."  And that's when he came on board and started running my business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Something I had that just escaped me.  But, so, so you're running your business out of your basement, right?
Speaker 2: It was called the in-laws' apartment.  That's where they put me--the in-laws' apartment.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, '83 [1983]--I wanted to ask you about the [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington campaign.  And, when I mentioned it before you kind of lit up, but, I mean, what, what's your recollection of that time period.  '83, the Washington campaign, you're coming out of the Art Institute, going into business that year, I mean.
Speaker 2: It was for me, I mean, to--really, the visual part, it was almost like dancing in the street.  It was so many electrical, I mean, electric things were happening in Chicago.  Like I say, I was making headways in fashion and been written up a lot.  I got a lot of press.  I started dressing certain women in the city.  And Harold came in.  He set--set aside special programs for fashion because Chicago was a fashion capital.  I mean we created ultra-suede, believe it or not.  And the metal zipper came out of Chicago.  And, unfortunately, the, the, the, the needle industry started deteriorating in the '80s [1980s].  It was a full up-and-running thing from like the '50s [1950s], the '40s [1940s], '50s, and '60s [1960s].  And when Harold became, got in office, he did this special program and now it's called ABI.  And he did this so that the industry would have a support system for fashion designers.  And I was a part of that, that, that, that, the birth of that, which was pretty cool.  He opened up a lot of doors for us.  And that's when the local major  stores like Carson's [Pirie Scott]--Marshall Field's didn't play a big part, but they also bought some of the local designers.  But, Chas [Charles] A. Stevens, Evans, and Carson's were big promoters for local design talent.  And that was a great thing for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Harold Washington era was more than just a political kind of high and, but, I mean, he actually did something for fashion designers and--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  And he was serious about--I mean, he would come to the Apparel Center at least maybe two, three times a month just to check on us, see what things we've--how things were going.  And we had a chance to talk to him and, you know, question him or ask him things.  And he, if he didn't know the answer, next time we saw, he would give us an answer.  So he was a hands-on person when it came to the, the fashion industry.  It wasn't just something that, "Okay, I'm going to do this and you take care of it."  He was there.
Story_ID: 14190
Speaker 1: Tell us about how you got your, how you finally moved out of your, your sister's [Nadine Thomas Williams] place and, you know, started your own location.
Speaker 2: Well, at that--yeah, at that time we were, I was making enough money--unfortunately, I had hired friends and other artists and that didn't quite work out, but we were still taking care of business.  And the--I had outgrown the, the, the apartment that I had in my family's home so I decided to go out and look for a loft space.  And it took me almost six months to find it.  And then one day I found the perfect space, which is--Sue Chan (ph.) has developed a lot of the River North area.  And she saw me one day and she didn't pay any attention to me, but her--the guy who rents out the spaces, they took a chance and gave me a space.  And I had somebody to build it out for me.  It was beautiful.  And one day I was at home and we were all having dinner.  I say, "Oh, by the way, I'm moving out next week."  And they thought that was a joke.  I said, "No, I'm moving out.  I have my own space."  And that was when I moved out and started the business [Reginald Designs] outside of my family's home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you know, well, we all know it was successful now, but did it start off as successful as it ended up?
Speaker 2: We, yeah, we had major growing pains, tons of growing pains because, like I say, I had some knowledge of business, but--back in those days they didn't teach you that.  So I had to learn and, and, and grow.  And then by that time maybe a year or two later that's when my brother-in-law [Oscar Williams] came on.  And we went from a company that was doing like a hundred, hundred fifty thousand to a quarter of a million like overnight.  So that was another big problem because it was so many layers of, of, how can you say, bureaucracy.  It was just complicated then.  Because even though he came from a, a, a large, you know, situation as far as business, he couldn't shrink it down to like a small business idea because his brain was like larger than life.  So it took him some time to think about, okay, don't move too quickly--let's grow this.  But, unfortunately, it just really almost spunned out of hand.  And then two years later he died of a heart attack on my floor in the production room.  And that's when things really took a certain turn.  And that was the, the true part of my life where I realized that I had to make decision--whether I was going to sink or swim.  So that was the turning point of my life.
Speaker 1: So, of course, you chose to swim, but how did you swim, I mean how--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) How did I swim?  I didn't have time to grieve.  I didn't have time to do anything.  I went straight to my, my records, my books.  I had my office manager to pull everything.  And I found out that I was heavily into debt.  Yes!--because of the growing pain.  You know, when you grow so quickly, so fast, you create debt.  And that's--I became aware of that.  I became aware of other things that were done in the business.  So, unfortunately, it was just something that I had to get over.  And, I did.
Story_ID: 14191
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just had to reorganize things.
Speaker 2: I reorganized.  I downsized my company [Reginald Designs].  Some of my people that I worked with at that particular time--you know, it's just like sometimes people run away from you because after that incident because they actually thought he was the person that ran the business, which he did.  But some people--my vendors, my New York rep--she was very nervous.  She pulled out.  So, therefore, I basically had to start all over again, all over again.  And I was determined, and I did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to identify people for major roles in your business and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that particular time I had a few relatives--my sister [Nadine Thomas Williams] stepped in and helped.  I had tons of people that were trying to buy my business.  But for some strange reason, I just didn't want to sell.  I couldn't.  I mean, how can you give something that you worked all your life with and then give, give it away.  You know, you only have 49 percent share of taking it.  I, I just couldn't do that.  So I held on to my business.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what year are we now at?
Speaker 2: We're at '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I have--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So this major reconstruction and stuff and turnarounds--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had went from, what, twenty-eight employees down to like nine.  I had decided to--that was at the time I had just started my retail in '88 [1988].  So I decided to move out of the neighborhood a bit, so I moved over on the Gold Coast.  And I moved to a larger retail space.  And it was something I could easily handle.  So I did that for a while.  And then I started selling back on the market again--but not New York.  I was just--only sold in the Midwest, you know--Ohio, Detroit, you know, just Midwest territory, which gave me a chance to try out new silhouettes.  And that's when I started doing plus size because at that particular time plus size market was wide open.  No one didn't want to touch it.  But as you know our population is getting bigger and bigger and bigger.  So, therefore, I got on that bandwagon, and that's what gave me the means to float.  Even though I had the, the earning and the yearning to do high fashion and stuff like that, but I, I knew I had to do bread-and-butter clothing.  And I had been doing bread-and-butter clothing from '89 [1989] up until maybe just this year [2004].  I decided I couldn't do it anymore, couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, we mean bread-and-butter clothing in the, in plus sizes and--.
Speaker 2: Bread and butter--it means--it's simplicity, you know.  You give them a little dash, a little flash, a little texture, a little color, but you couldn't do anything, you know, extremely outrageous or too provocative or anything like that.  You know, you just had to, to kind of go mainstream or, as you say, Midwestern.  I mean, I can't sell a halter top on my line (laughs) and hot pants.  That's forbidden.
Speaker 1: Not even a halter top, huh?
Speaker 2: No, not in ready to wear.  But when I decided to change into retail, I could.  And that when I begin to explore more design territory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so, as--from 1989 until now, has the business grown?  I mean, has it really grown significantly, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, you--taking in effect the economy and what things are, how things are going on now, I watched some of my peers close their doors.  I watched some people take other, do other career moves.  It fluctuates.  I mean, I've ridden the tides through these twenty years, twenty some-odd years of fashion.  And, we have our peaks and valleys.  And, I just go with the flow.  I mean, that's how I've been able to stay in business this length of time.  You know, you--when the time comes for extravagance, you pull that out.  When the time comes for clamping down and being conservative, you do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Chameleon.
Story_ID: 14192
Speaker 1: We were talking about the development of your business [Reginald Designs] over the last, I guess, fourteen years or so, you know.  And, now you, from what I understand from what we were saying off camera, most of the clothes that you designed, you designed them to be sold through a mass outlet rather than--.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  Oh, and you do a lot of the, the real work yourself.  You sew the clothes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well, it depends.  If it's a large amount, I had contractors.  But, if it was just, you know, a hundred pieces, hundred fifty pieces, I would actually roll up my sleeves--even though I'm a master cutter also.  Regardless if I have my pieces produced by anybody, I always have hands-on approach to my cutting because a lot of my shapes and silhouettes don't have patterns.  Even though I have trained two people of my, my knowledge of cutting because the way that I, I, I produce my clothing, it's like a old customary from back in the tribal days where people didn't--it was no such thing as patterns.  So everything is cut by sight.  And those how, that's how a lot of my garments are produced, which is very unusual 'cause I don't know anybody on the market that cuts clothes like I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't really have a--you don't have a pattern as such, but you know just how you want them cut and you--.
Speaker 2: I mean for purposes of, you know, wanting be able to--if somebody wants to cut my garment, I have patterns.  But I don't use patterns.  I used to train--my, my eyes are trained so that I know when to cut in and cut out and subtract here and subtract there.  So, it, it's, it's a gift.  It's truly a gift.
Story_ID: 14193
Speaker 1: Do you have a certain philosophy about fashion, or what do you really like?  You know, some things--you were talking about doing clothes, bread-and-butter clothes, you know they're gonna sell that are good clothes but they're not your cutting edge ideas.  But what--how are those clothes distinctive from other fashions and then what kind of clothes do you really want to enjoy making?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I have various levels of clothes.  The great Charles Douglas, when he came aboard in my company, he had a phrase, a catchphrase called cheap and cheerful, and that's for the average working class girl that doesn't have a lot to spend, but wants to look really good.  So, I have a division in my company where garments cost a certain price point that every woman, every woman can afford.  As far as bread-and-butter clothes, those are just points of interest where certain pieces you know can sell and then sometimes designers get locked into a, a block like being a mother of the bride or being, you know, just special occasion or ready to wear.  And what I tried to do was cover a small gamut when I do my small collections for market is that I try to do something a little dressy, something for day and office because the structure of office clothing attire has changed greatly in the last twenty years.  Yeah, you practically can get away with wearing a pair of jeans.  Now they're trying to focus back on dressing again, which is something that they do every ten years, but who knows how that works.  But, myself, I love fashion to be comfortable.  It has to be comfortable.  The fabric has to be great.  And I love longevity of clothes because I've had people tell me that they bought a piece from me eighteen years ago and they still wear it to this day.  And, you know, sometimes you want something to fall apart so they can go buy a new piece.  But, yes, I've had people to tell me that they still wear my clothes to this day.
Speaker 1: That, that speaks to the workmanship as well as the design, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that does.  And it's a lot of dead people in my clothes (laughs).  Like I've had people to say, "Oh, I buried my mom in her favorite outfit and it was yours."  And I'm thinking to myself, wow, maybe a hundred fifty years from now people are exhumed and then they look at the article of clothing and see this Reginald Thomas tag in it.  And it's quite strange, but I--that's interesting.
Story_ID: 14194
Speaker 1: You said early on in the interview your favorite color was navy blue.  Do you use a lot of navy blue in your work?
Speaker 2: Yes and that's not a favorite color to most people 'cause it's very conservative.  But blue is just a beautiful--you know, they have various shades of blue.  But being a designer we have a tendency of sticking to black, taupe, and red.  I mean, speaking of [Roy] Halston back in his days, those were his key colors.  And that's kind of stuck with me as far as my palette is concerned.  I trend not to go into jewel tones even though now I'm in a more ethnic neighborhood and they tend to love color, which is great thing.  I love color, but I'm still kind of conservative.  I still like black, red, and taupe.  And so sometimes I have to venture outside the box.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you design men's clothes as well as women's clothes, right?
Speaker 2: No, only women's.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  I thought--.
Speaker 2: Every blue moon, every now and then, I'll make a sweater or something like that.  At one time I was making things for Sammy Sosa, you know, when he first started really getting big.  I used to do like shirts and stuff for him, but really we're, we're women's ready to wear.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, oh, I've read a statement where you were commenting on men's fashions, I think, and women's fashions for an upcoming season, I think, and you were saying that earth tones are in for men and then bright, more bright colors were in that particular year for women.  I, I'm not even sure what the particular year is, but it sounds like it's something that probably be true most years (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what?  Every year, you know, there's a different color, there's a different silhouette even though nothing's new under the sun.  I mean, a shirt is a shirt.  A pair of pants is pants.  But the technology that we have today is in fabric and color.  I mean, right now with the technology out here, you can make a hundred different purples.  And with fabric technology, you're having things made out of, of plants and tons of new synthetics even though the Italians have been doing it for years and still putting 100 percent of whatever wool or cotton in their label, which they're government cracked down and told them that they have to actually put what the, the fabric content is because [Giorgio] Armani was guilty of that at one particular time 'cause he uses a lot of blends.  But a lot of his blends are synthetic with natural fibers--which is good because the garment will have longevity.  It'll, it'll last longer.
Story_ID: 14195
Speaker 1: Does your work look like any era of the past at all?  I mean, when you, you know, you look at the history of fashion, I mean, is there a era that inspires you?
Speaker 2: I have a tendency like this year's [2004] fall collection--it's more like '40s [1940s] with a slash of ethnicity.  Basically, it just runs the board.  It, it really when most, which is a strange thing--most people thought it was Jewish until they saw my face (laughs) because they didn't say I fit into a certain group of designers.  But my stuff is really very American.  It's just very clean American fashion--that's some of my European customers say--it's very American.  I'm an American designer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, one thing I read that you said was that you've got to make your clothes a little bit bigger and roomier for American bodies because they're, they're bigger than European bodies and the other Asian bodies.
Speaker 2: That's very true, but since I open up this retail shop recently, I had a chance to really see the various women that walk through the door and a lot of them, a lot of them are small by surprise--like size 6, 7.  And we're talking about girls eighteen years old to seventy.  Now I do have some because, unfortunately, I haven't seen too many plus-size come through my space.  The largest I've seen is, well, it's a 1X, which is like a 18.  And that's--the average size woman is like a 14-16.  That's the average size woman.  But I've been seeing a lot of small women lately.
Speaker 1: Now, sizing is a issue in fashion and from what I've read because, you know, you can never be sure by going by the actual size.  I think the sizes were originally to denote the age, age of a person that should wear the garment rather than actual size.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, the government dictates sizing.  And if you want to know actual sizes, you're supposed to call in and they'll send you size charts and things of that nature.  But each individual designer as a certain look or certain way or concept that they design--like some designers may think all women have narrow hips, which most of them don't.  And some designers may design with a concept of small chests.  So it varies what designer you're talking about.  You know, some designers design for very tall women or short.  But the average woman, like for instance, who could I say--like, like, like you said the European designers now, they, they're, they have to make their clothes larger because most Europeans by chance like French people, they're very--kind of short and stubby and small.  So, therefore, they had to change their concept for Americans because (laughs) we're a little larger--we're a lot larger than most European people.
Speaker 1: Are we, are we actually fatter or taller or both?
Speaker 2: A mixture.  I mean, you--it's a, it's a, it's a melting pot.  But, yeah, we're, we're--some cases we're taller and then some cases we're more, we have more girth--really, it's the girth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a different world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, things have changed--have they changed since you've been designing in terms of people getting bigger or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, you know, you, you have to realize with the economy and then the, the, the, the, the convenience.  I mean, there's a convenience store almost on every corner even in the not so great areas.  And it, and I guess we as Americans are spending so much time wondering what's going in their life and, and, how can we say, the food comfort--we're just eating constantly and not being aware of health issues and exercise.  I think we have become a larger, how can you say--a nation of large people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think that's changing now with the, with the awareness that's how and the importance of exercise.  So now, like I say, now I'm beginning to see more smaller people or people that are really conscious about their weight.  You know, it's shifting--slowly, slowly, but it's, it's shifting.
Story_ID: 14196
Speaker 1: Is there a different, a difference in what black women want to wear as opposed to other women?  I mean, is there any--any differences you can--?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, because you got several groups.  You got the church ladies.  You got the entertainers.  You got the professional women.  And all of them, they have one thing in common.  They want quality, but they want things that they could actually manipulate like--I have a clientele that runs the gamut.  And most of my young, working-class girls want things that they can go and party in or go do some other social activity.  Years ago, you only bought clothing like, okay, this is for partying, this is for church, this if for work.  But nowadays, those activities are almost blending in and you need to be versatile.  So most people want things that are versatile.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  Yeah, I've noticed in the workplace people wear, tend to wear what we would consider at one time party clothes to work.  And, you know, for instance, there was a social service agency--I used to work in social service in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] where everybody working there had leather pants on the day I was there.  And the boss had gold leather pants (laughs).  You know, but, I mean, in the past, you know, you just way, well, that's really not the place for work.
Speaker 2: That's not the place.
Speaker 1: It seem like everybody was in a leather pants contest in that building.
Speaker 2: But I--what year was that?
Speaker 1: This was only about five, six years ago.
Speaker 2: Was that in the Eddie Murphy period where he was wearing the red leather pants, I wonder?  Because at one point leather became like the next cloth, and everybody had to have leather.  And it was just, it was out of control at one point.  I think we had to kill a large amount of cows because everybody had a article of leather.  And I think that's a part of, spin-off of the disco era.
Speaker 1: Do you work in leather a lot or are you--?
Speaker 2: I play with it, but I'm not really a leather guy.  I'm really--I'm a--I'm the knit king.  I know how to manipulate a knit and that's my forte.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why do you like knit?
Speaker 2: Because, like I said earlier, it was the most difficult fabric to manipulate because it has it's own mind.  It--you, you want it to go this way, it'll go the opposite way.  So, it was something for me to conquer, and I mastered it.  Because a lot of people don't like dealing with knits--a lot of designers.
Speaker 1: I can see it might, yeah, 'cause it wrinkles and it moves.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, it moves and it stretches.  But now with technology, you know, knit now has memory.  Like if you stretch it, it'll go back to its original shape and it's so many things you can do.  And like you said earlier since we're getting larger as a people, it gets--it expands.  So it's a comfort thing for me as far as designing clothes for women.  They can actually be comfortable in it.  Some of my customers have gotten pregnant and, you know, they, they wore my clothes up to a certain month or some of them with disability, they could easily get in and out of my pieces because of the shapes and silhouettes.
Story_ID: 14197
Speaker 1: What kind of clothes are you working on now and what do you see as the future of what you're doing in terms of artistic vision and--?
Speaker 2: My clothes go from anywhere from very, very, very conservative to ho nasty glamour (laughs).  I mean, I run the gamut.  Most designers have fantasies and the only part of, of fashion is fantasy is, is really evening wear.  I mean, you--some of the things that we put on women, I mean, God help us.  It shows creativity.  That's the only part of, of fashion that you can really explore.  Then you have to find the woman that would wear it.  But, outside of that, that's the strongest part of fashion because the other parts you control.  That's another reason I don't do men's wear because it's really nothing you can do for a man.  I mean, it's, it's a shirt, tie, blazer.  I mean, you could choose color and texture, but that's about it.  But women--sky's the limit.
Speaker 1: The creativity's in women's clothes (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, it is even though it's--back in the Victorian era and all those other past era, men were actually the peacocks.  We wore the powder wigs and the makeup and the--all that kind of stuff.  And the women, they were elaborate, but the men were extremely elaborate.  It depends on what time of the, I mean, what century we're talking about.  But, now, I think, men have really taken a back seat to fashion.  We're not the peacocks anymore.  And I guess we don't want to be 'cause it's so, so much easier to just put on the same shirt, same tie, and go on about your way.
Story_ID: 14198
Speaker 1: We were discussing earlier before we had even started the interview the colors of some of the suits in cities like Detroit and even on the West Side of Chicago, where brothers wear, you know, very loud suits now with, of unusual cut.  But they're usual in the black community.  They're not usual on, in the rest of the community, so--.
Speaker 2: And, actually, if you look back at those, those, those three-quarter length jackets and all those bright, bright colors, it's just a throwback from the, the zoot suit era--I mean, with Cab Calloway.  You know, as blacks as a people, we've always been fashion orientated.  Even though we didn't have the wealth, but we always made sure we had something.  We're very proud of the few things that we own.  And every now and then I take trips to the West Side, the deep West Side just to see how those people can pull things together, how my brothers and sisters pull outfits together with a little or no money and look fabulous.  And that's inspiration.  And I'm not the only one.  You have European designers that flock to America and go to areas of minority population and watch what the people have on, go to their clubs, visit their churches just for inspiration.  So I'm not the only one that do that.  I'm the only one.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about why black people are so creative in terms of--I mean on a personal, everyday level in, with how they look and fashion.  I mean, it's a, it's a--I don't--you, you have any thoughts about that thought?
Speaker 2: I think that stems back to the beginning.  I mean, look at the pyramids.  Look at--people think hair weaves are something new.  If you go and look at some of the Egyptians, they have hair weaves (laughs), I mean, those women have weaves and tons of jewelry.  You look at rappers and you see all this jewelry.  Look at the Egyptians.  They--it's like a throwback.  It's, it's, it's nothing new, actually.  It's just reincarnated, something new.  But, really, if you look at your history, we have always been peacocks.  We have always been into fashion and stuff like that--heavy jewelry, heavy makeup.  I mean, look at your history.
Story_ID: 14199
Speaker 1: What do you see as the future for blacks in the fashion industry?  You go involved and it didn't seem like it was that hard for you to get really established.  But, I mean, do you have any, any thoughts about, about it being easier now or harder now or, or what does somebody have to do to really get in.
Speaker 2: You have to have drive.  You have to have tons of patience.  Money does help.  Money does.  Fortunately, I've always self-financed myself.  I never had anything--I mean, I've had great people in my life like you mentioned Juanita Passmore.  In my youth I really needed some financial help.  She stepped to the plate.  Joan Johnson, George Johnson, people like Linda Johnson Rice--those have been supporters of my art for years.  And there have been many other great people in my life like them that have actually said, okay, this young black guy--he wants to be a designer.  I'm gonna support him.  And they, they supported me by buying my clothing.
Speaker 1: Now, that's important 'cause you--you often hear people talk, you know, in public that black folks don't support each other and don't come to each other's assistance now.  And, this is, this is really not true for you.
Speaker 2: I think it's a people thing.  I was very fortunate, like I say--growing up in a banking environment, I knew I had to save money, and I knew that I had to have a budget, and I knew this, that, and the other.  And, fortunately, that's what I did.  I made my money, I budgeted, I knew what to buy, what not to buy, and that's how I was able to survive because the other thing about fashion--it's an extravagant thing.  And, you know, it's a lot of money spent.  I mean, it, it's just--it's a lifestyle for some people.  Me, if you take all of that away, it's just--it's no different from any other business.  You know, if you strip all the glamour and all that stuff away, it's just a simple business.  And that's how I look at it.  That's one way I look at it.  And that's how I've been able to survive.
Story_ID: 14200
Speaker 1: Now what about the social aspects of fashion and style?  You said earlier you're kind of tired of going to the social events and so forth.  But you've met a lot of celebrities--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and clothed them.  And you had support from some celebrities.  I mean, what, what's that life been like for you?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, going back as a child as I mentioned earlier that my family was highly sociable.  I mean, out of a, a week, we may go to one or three parties in a week.  And when I became of age where I'm eighteen I said, "Stop it, I don't want anymore."  So I could say, "I'm--I don't want to go."  So during that period I, I, I, I was recluse.  I didn't do any socializing.  And then maybe about when I came back from Northern [Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois] and then I went to the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], I started socializing again.  And then there was a period in '89 [1989] that I pulled away from, from socializing.  But it was just a point--that networking, making contacts.  Because a lot of times, you know, you're at a party and you meet somebody, and it's just conversation.  And then sometimes every now and then you'll find somebody that's really sincere that calls you the next day and say I would like to see your collection.  I'd like to see what you do.  So every--it does help in the fashion industry, especially if you're just starting out.  You, you do need to socialize.  But that in itself is very expensive 'cause we're talking about parties that can cost anywhere from a hundred fifty to a thousand dollars a person.  And that costs.
Speaker 1: And who are some of the celebrities that you've clothed?
Speaker 2: Vidal Sassoon's wife, Beverly Johnson--wow, the Johnsons, both Johnsons, some opera singer that I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: Both Johnsons--you mean the 'Ebony' 'Jet' Johnsons and the Johnson Products Johnsons.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, hair care people--which I still dress both them.  I still dress Linda [Johnson Rice], periodically, and Mrs. Johnson, George Johnson's wife [Joan Johnson].  She's been a great supporter, a very great supporter.  So every now when she flies in from her summer home, she comes in and reviews my collection.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you've made clothes for Oprah [Winfrey], too, haven't you?
Speaker 2: Actually, that--the, the thing that I did for Oprah was what the '[Chicago] Tribune' suggests that she would wear.  I don't know if she's--to my knowledge I think she has some of my pieces in her wardrobe, but not recently.  She's more into [Gianfranco] Ferre right now and other European designers.  Since she's lost the weight, she's really into that kind of stuff now.
Story_ID: 14201
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite designer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of my favorite designers is Jean-Paul Gaultier.  And he's French, and he's extremely avant-garde and his men's wear is very avant-garde.  He dresses men in skirts and unusual stuff.  And lately he just got promoted to the House of Hermes.  Hermes is a very old saddle--they made saddles and stuff like that.  And he's doing some great things in that house now.
Speaker 1: Now you were talking I think before we started the interview about some of your more outrageous designs.  And I don't know if we--you've been just been, you know--.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Well, like I say, I run the gamut and, you know, most designers' fantasies is where you do the over the top, cutting edge and stuff like that.  And one year, the second year for ABI, we, we produce a fashion show, a big fundraiser every year.  And I really didn't want to do the show, so I decided to do something vulgar.  So on the back of a beautiful wool jersey top that was see-through, I wrote on the back in rhinestones, "Pussy ain't free," which caused a stir in the fashion industry.  It was really something (laughs).  And that was the last thing that I really did.  But some of my stuff--how I dress a woman--it's a old philosophy that I have.  I dress a woman like a ho and a ho like a woman.  And in that sense that I, I give a woman, I let a woman come as far as be herself in my clothes.  I don't try to change them, but I just try to give them a different outlook or a different feel.  Because most women that wear my clothes, when they first put them on they go, "Oh my God, they're so comfortable. Oh, I thought--.  They're so comfortable."  So it's just a point that those concepts that I do like that, I really try to, to, to, to give the woman another level of feeling or another level of expressing themselves.
Speaker 1: Now do you, do you do a lot of designing for an individual that, you know, that comes and says I want you to design something for me for this occasion?  And do you--what do you take in consideration when you do that?
Speaker 2: I rarely do that.  Like I say, the, the only made-to-order customers that I have are like the Lindas [Linda Johnson Rice] and the Joans [Joan Johnson].  Most of my stuff is ready-to-wear.  You buy it right off the rack.  And, in that case, I try to, to run the gamut as far as looks and silhouettes.  Even though I do have signature pieces like my drape jacket.  I've been making that jacket I would say for the last eighteen years.  And I've modified it as far as fabric, texture, lengths, sleeve lengths, drape lengths.  So I've done that.
Story_ID: 14202
Speaker 1: I was just saying it must wonderful to be able to conceptualize, you know, a product, produce it yourself, market it yourself, and then reap the benefits.  I mean--.
Speaker 2: It's a great experience, I mean, to be able to leisurely, while you're walking down the street because creativity comes any time of the day, any moment.  So, it's great to be able to, to, to think of something that's, you know, non-existing in your head--shapes and silhouettes and then be able to take that and then place it on paper, which is a two-dimensional figure, and then transfer it into a three-dimensional figure.  I mean, it's just like being God almost.  And then to be able to actually have a consumer that has a interest in buying it, I mean, that's heavenly.  I mean, to be supported by your art is--it's a great thing because a lot of us don't get that chance.  So, it's a blessing.  It's truly a blessing.
Story_ID: 14203
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I hope that we can heal from the pain that we've had.  I hope that we can move forward because I can see that.  And, I hope that we can begin to heal within ourselves and spread out.  That's what I really hope.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you look back on all that you have done, would you do anything differently?
Speaker 2: No, no (laughs).  Even though it hasn't been all roses and buttercups and all that kind of stuff, but no.  I mean, I've had a beautiful life so far.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were able to get your family involved in, in your life, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My niece has been with me now for about almost ten years in the business.  And now she's starting her own small business.  She, she loves jewelry.  So, now we're selling her jewelry in our boutique.  And it's great!  She's got a, a good little following now, and she's producing.  So, yes, it is kind of a family thing.
Story_ID: 14204
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point--and you're still real young even in this, you know, at this--I mean, what would you consider as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Wow, I haven't gotten there yet.  I guess that being a designer, a black designer, that was able to survive during all the ups and downs and peaks and valleys of the last twenty years and been able to survive and still standing.  I mean, that's, that's one I would say.  I don't know what else to say?
Speaker 1: Now, is--I know you didn't get a chance to, I mean, know your father [Alee Thomas] well and your mother [Alma Williams Thomas] died when you were nine, but do people tell you that you that you take after, well, one or the other or both?
Speaker 2: More, I look more like my mom.  Outside of that, my second family, which is my sister [Nadine Thomas Williams] and my brother-in-law [Oscar Williams], me and my brother-in-law have a striking resemblance.  Most people thought he was my father.  I mean we looked almost exactly alike.  But, people have a tendency of when they're mating they mate--they sometimes they look like relatives sometimes.  Like sometimes I see people in their marriage announcements they do look like they're related.  And, fortunately, this time my brother-in-law does look like he's my father, actually my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about in terms of other traits and stuff.  Do they talk about traits that your parents had that you might have picked up on?
Speaker 2: Probably, again, my mom.  She was very conscious of fashion, and she loved fashion.  And, and I guess that stemmed from her father 'cause her father was a fashion fanatic.  He loved to be dressed.  He loved clothes and stuff like that.  So I guess it just springboard off me.  You know, it was my turn to take that legacy or whatever you want to call that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, finally, unless it--is there anything else you want to tell us before I ask the final question?
Speaker 2: No (laughs).
Speaker 1: Well, and this is similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As one of Chicago's very own--a great designer.  A person that cared and loved.
Story_ID: 14205
Speaker 1: What do you think about this [The HistoryMakers] project, since we got you talking about it?
Speaker 2: I think it's a great thing because it, you know, it's--if anybody wants to go and do research, it's, it's right at their disposal.  And, you know, and it's just to document so that a young child, a young black youth can actually go and see or ask.  Because I see the program whenever you do the gala, the program airs on Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  Well it's, it's really cool.  I mean it's a great thing to document various walks of life.  I think it's a good thing.
