Story_ID: 14261
Speaker 1: I was sitting in a, in a olive grove overlooking a dry lake bed which they had given us to use as an airbase after we got into North Africa and there was a girl in Germany--no, she wasn't in Germany, she was broadcasting--she was like Toyko Rose--only we called her 'Gertie from Bizerte' because she was always broadcasting from Bizerte in Africa--and she asked us over the radio, "Why are you--" of course they never used the term 'black' or anything--"Why are you colored folks over here fighting the war for a country that didn't want you to begin with?" you know. And she says, "And we know you're there.  And we're going to send the Luftwaffe over to visit with you.  And I was sitting with General [Benjamin O.] Davis [Jr.]--well, he was a colonel then--Colonel Davis--and I was sitting together and overlooking the field and I said, "Well, we can always put out the word that "you can send your Luftwaffe but the Spookwaffe is all ready for 'em." You know. '
Story_ID: 14262
Speaker 1: Then [Tuskegee] Institute then is the [Tuskegee] University now and as did so many guys who went into the service including enlisted personnel.  Many of the instructors were taught to fly before at Hampton [University].  Howard University, West Virginia State and all the black historical schools had pilot training program they call civilian pilot training before the war and that was more or less to help build up a reservoir of pilots in this country and when I got my license, my license number only had five digits in it--17590-something--today they've got over a million, so that's how early I came along.  I told Travis--Dempsey Travis one time that I came along with Lindberg--I was--and Bessie Coleman and all that troop, you know.
Story_ID: 14263
Speaker 1: My name is William R. Thompson. And my name is spelled with a P--T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N--William R.
Speaker 2: What does the R stand for?
Speaker 1: Nobody ever asked me that, but I'll tell you.  My father's name was Rufus William Thompson so evidently there was sort of a stigma at that time about the name Rufus because there was a song that was out called, "Rufus Rastus Johnson Brown, what ya goin' do when your rent comes around?" and I can recall, I sort of avoided using the term Rufus even though I've met some wonderful people named Rufus and at the same time I just didn't like it because I grew up in a community where there weren't many Rufuses and I went to schools where there weren't any Rufuses like myself--what, if you get what I'm saying.  Actually, in elementary school I was one of three or four blacks in the whole school so that make--they had one Rufus.  And I never used the term, but I remember we used to have what they're starting here in Chicago was encouraging young people in our elementary schools the meaning of money, teaching them how to do banking and things like that and they have this bank set up in the classroom where you bring money every Wednesday and so forth and you have--.  Well, we had that in Pittsburgh schools.  That's where I am from originally, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and we had that.  I remember when I set up my bank account with the school, I called myself, "William Rogers Thompson," and one day my dad asked me, he said, "Well, I think you need--don't you need a new suit?"  I said, "Yes."  He says, "Let's go down and draw some of your money out."  And they had these little steps leading up to the cashier--just a tiny thing, I guess--and I got up to the cashier and she says, "What is your name?"  I said, "William R. Thompson."  "Well, what's your middle name?"  I said, "Roger."  "Damn!" (imitates his father hitting him on the head). "Where did you get that 'Roger' from?"  "Well, I got it from Will Rogers," because he was one of my role models in those days.  He used to fly around with [Wiley] Post and [Harold] Gatty [early aviators] and people like that and see a lot of these old-timers, these were the kind of people that I grew up to admire--[General Henry Harley] "Hap" Arnold., [General Ira Clarence] Eaker --you name all the top heroes like Jimmy [James Harold] Doolittle and all of these were guys when the powers to be when the young people decided that they wanted to go into the Army Air Corps 'cause the--it was before the Air Force and it was called, it was part of the army and when I was coming along I looked at these guys as being people I wanted to be like.  And I called not too long ago, Dempsey Travis, as you know, has written several books and I told him in an interview that "Yeah, I used to dream I was Lindbergh."  He said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Yeah, I used to dream I was Lindbergh.  I dreamed--I dreamt that I was Admiral [Richard Evelyn] Byrd, in fact, I have flown across the Atlantic Ocean many times by myself," em-, you know, emulating Charles Lindbergh. But I didn't realize these same guys were the same ones who didn't want blacks in the Army Air Corps and here we are a nation of young blacks--and that's why you had so many rush into it--that all wanted to become something in the Army Air Corps, but they were turned down by the same people that we were looking up to.  And that's the irony of this thing in this country at that time.  And it's a funny thing, I used to read the Time Magazine at the time of the inception of the 99th Fighter Squadron and how they said--oh, there were so many articles and I got articles and papers here that indicate that they--we were not capable of learning to flying, we were too ignorant to become pilots.  We were too ignorant.  In fact they never even used them in World War I except for one man.  We had one black who went into World War I as a pilot.  His name was--Blancher [sic, Eugene Bullard]--I'm not positive, but his picture is on the wall in there, I'll show it to you.  But you see--when I first saw this guy and I've met so many of these so-called heroes, you know, later in life. the--And he was flying, he was flying, he was in the French [Lafayette] Escadrille and Matt [videographer Matthew Hickey] might know--that was one of the famous squadrons of World War One and this black guy was in there and it just so happened in World War One there were so many volunteers coming out of universities and colleges like Princeton and Harvard and all these high-flaluting--universities like Yale and so forth--during World War One they volunteered, they wanted to get into the more exciting to be in the Air Corps in those days and they went in there and they saw--you should get this black guy.  We don't have that in our country.  So they got rid of him.  Now the first time I ever saw him was on Dave Garroway Show.  He had been working in Radio City as a janitor, but when Dave Garroway brought him on camera he had all these accolades and medals and things and so forth that the nation of France had given him and that was the way it was.  I mean if you had--Josephine Baker who I had an opportunity to meet--she had to go to France.  Bessie Coleman had to go to France to learn to fly.  Seems, though, if you didn't go to jail, you had to go to France--but it, it's rather interesting that we patronize these people whom we thought were great.  I used to the Cleveland air races every year--every Memorial Day from my hometown, even when I was a little kid.  I would garner up enough change to get on the bus and ride over there.  I had friends I used to hang out with and I'd get over there and I would look for Roscoe Turner, who was one of the outstanding pilots, racing pilots of the day.  I'd look for Howard Hughes and there was another Hughes that was very famous in, in the aviation field.  That's all I lived for was the aviation! and unfortunately, as I started to say at one time, there weren't many Rufuses and as a result because where I lived, at the, I went to a school where there weren't many Rufuses, I ca-, that's the way I'll continue to refer to it and you understand what I'm saying.
Story_ID: 14264
Speaker 1: I usually ask just five short questions.
Speaker 2: Shoot.
Speaker 1: And they're just really one line responses.  I'd like to know what your favorite color is.
Speaker 2: What my favorite color?  That's an interesting question.  You say they're one word responses, huh?
Speaker 1: Whatever, a short response.
Speaker 2: Okay, my favorite color--it's a combination of black and red--red and black are my high school colors.  When I see somebody--a young lady, that's my favorite color, you know. You know.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I eat a lot of fish--fish is my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: By way of seasons? I like the fall and for an example, living right here.  I can't see the museum right across the street here during the summer and spring day the--everything's in bloom, you know--but with fall there's no leaves.  I'm looking right through the front door of the Science and Industry museum.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite de-, vacation destination or place or other place in the world.
Speaker 2: Love Las Vegas.  You gonna send me there?
Speaker 1: (Laughing) No.
Speaker 2: I think Las Vegas is a very exciting place to be.
Speaker 1: It is--Actually it started out very--and what about your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's not my favorite, but I certainly would like to adopt it--Give me the money.  Like I tell my friends, we go out sometimes and I always tell folks the first time I came to Chicago my dad gave me some advice.  He said, "You're going to need money in Chicago and I'ma give you three magic words.  You can get money any time you want some, just be careful."  I said, "Well, Daddy, what are those three wo-, magic words?"  He said, "Stick 'em up."  Those are my favorite phrase.  Those are my ones that I'm always touting around whenever I'm seeing people and talking about money.
Story_ID: 14265
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to start--because you were born in Pittsburgh, right?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm from a small town called Duquesne .(Unclear)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Duquesne, I'm familiar with it--very much.  That was part of the campus that I lived on Duquesne University and University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Tech.  That's my territory.
Speaker 1: Sure, now tell me--I want to know about your parents, who your father was.  I know he was Rufus William [Thompson], but I want to know what he was and what you know about his background.
Speaker 2: Well, my dad came from Durham, North Carolina and he came from a very large family.  I'm not certain as to how many.  He had two or three brothers and I'm sure he had a couple of sisters because I had the pleasure of meeting one.  Now one of my uncles--that is my father's brother--was named Julius.  He used to come to Pittsburgh to visit and I don't know too much about him.  I know he got married and I knew he was sort of a--he was a railroad man, as was my father to begin life with--a lot of those people migrated into larger cities were railroad people and Julius was on the railroad even after my father was out of the railroad.  My father was--evidently a very good entrepreneur, a good businessman.  You didn't ask me--but my mother died when I was 14 days old.  My father never married again and my father used to farm me off to relatives, you know, and he'd pay for my support and so forth and I can remember one day I was standing in a little section of Pittsburgh called East Liberty and I was standing on the corner and I can remember exactly what that corner was like.  There was a Thom McAn Store--shoe store was right behind me.  Joyce McClemmons was across the street and I saw this wagon go by--horse-drawn wagon--and it had a sign, I mean it was painted with a sign, "New Life Baking Company," and I said to parent--the surrogate parent that I was living with at the time and I would call her my Aunt Nellie. And I said to her, "Gee, isn't that a pretty horse.  Look at that wagon he's pulling there."  And she said, "Well, that's your father's wagon."  I said, "What do you mean?"  She said, "He owns that baking company."  Then I saw what the situation was.  I had--there's a picture I have offered relatives and friends and there's nobody alive that can tell me.  Money--I'd pay a couple of hundred dollars just for one photograph because on the corner of Geneli and Wiley was this bakery shop and there were these Model T Fords lined up about 12 or 13 of them along one side of the street, horse-drawn wagons with people sitting in them all posed for this photograph and they were all my father's.  He catered the baking company all over the city of Pittsburgh and all into the suburbs, called the New Life Baking Company and from that point on he went into several other businesses after that.  Basically, he was a caterer.  He catered throughout western Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia and he'd have as many as three and four jobs going a day and they were big jobs, you know, with universities and colleges, with automobile row were having sales meetings and stuff like that and he was--he always had the wherewithal to do with what he had to do and that was he did pay for the education of his children and he couldn't drive a car,  I got pictures of here every time he goes out he always took his cronies with him, and they drove and--  They were sort of hanger-oners--I don't want to say hanger-oners--I don't mean it--they were friends of his.  So this is what my father was like, I mean,  I thought my father was quite capable.  He supported me in everything that I go-, had an interest in and I had a lot of interests going for me while I was growing up.
Story_ID: 14266
Speaker 1: Mr. Thompson let me ask you--do you know about his [Thompson's father, Rufus William Thompson], --he came from Durham, North Carolina, do you know how--at what point did he migrate to Pittsburgh and why he chose to come there or what was the reason?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really know, but I would like to say that before he migrated there he had one brother named Charlie--now it's coming back to me.  Charlie was a barber in Durham, North Carolina and Charlie had this barbershop and I've always heard this story that the North Carolina Mutual Insurance Company [formerly North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association, created in 1898] was formulated in Charlie's barbershop and I remember when I first graduated from college and business administration, they were the first ones to offer me a job.  I had an opportunity to go to North Carolina with Hampton's [Hampton University] basketball team and I was in school with two of the people from Durham, North Carolina that were the sons of the president of North Carolina Mutual.  There was B. B. Spaulding--B. B. Spaulding was in my--I can show you my class book--B. B. Spaulding and there was C. C. [Charles Clinton] Spaulding--C. C. Spaulding was the president of North Carolina Mutual--one of the biggest black organizations in the country and it was all formulated, I understand, in Charlie Thompson's barbershop.  I haven't--that's why I say--give me the money.  I never benefited from that.
Story_ID: 14267
Speaker 1: He [Thompson's father, Rufus William Thompson] was a dining car worker.  In fact, he might have been a chef.  He might have been--no, actually I think that's where he learned the catering business, you know, or where he got interested in the catering business.  A lot of his friends were ex-railroad workers.  This is how I think he came to--and he came to Pittsburgh and probably ran into my wife's family--met my wife--I mean my mother's family and he met my mother's family and they were both impressed and you'll see the pictures of them--you'll see they could be impressed because he was a outstanding man, you know, he looked like he had some substance. And he married into a family called the Fowler family, which was well documented as one of the first families of Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Now did he talk, and I'll leave the subject after this question, but I know he had brothers and sisters.  Did he talk at all about growing up in Durham, North Carolina and anything about his parents?
Speaker 1: I haven't met but two people--I met Julius Thompson and I met a lady by the name of they called her as they in the South--that was a sister of her--they always call them--they always had men's names like Johnnie Thompson--and my aunt, that would be my father sister's, she became the executive secretary to the North Carolina Mutual [Insurance Company].  I did have the pleasure of going up on the porch of her home one day and being introduced by one of the Spaulding boys telling, you know, who she was and I have tried and I've tried to get information about my father's people and I haven't gone beyond there  I haven't had an opportunity to go behind that.
Story_ID: 14268
Speaker 1: So you were born in what--Nineteen-six-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 1916--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) -teen. 1916
Speaker 2: January the 26th.
Speaker 1: And now what would you--what section of Pittsburgh did you grow up in? Did you grow up in--?
Speaker 2: Well, my first experience in knowing exactly where I was in the black community like around Wiley Avenue--you're familiar with Wiley Avenue.  Then later my father [Rufus William Thompson] opened up a couple of other businesses.  The catering business got to be pretty big.  As I said, he catered in three states.  He had two companies there.  He took over a couple of white companies that owed him money for have my father service them to take care of jobs that they would pick up, like liquor people who would sell liquor into wealthy families and for parties and so forth and they'd always get the idea that there was going to be a wedding or there was going to be a party or something like that and they'd always throw the business to my father.  It's a funny thing about the town of Pittsburgh, most of the people preferred giving the business to black caterers rather than to the one or two white caterers that were there because the town was predominantly I think was Jewish and that's the way, that's the way the set-up ran in those days. And so we got a lot of business through Smith & Hahn (ph.) catering company and that they wouldn't pay their bills so my dad took them to court.  So he owned Smith & Hahn when the court thing was over, plus he owned the (unclear) catering company--so there you've got two big companies tied into together and both of them belonged to my dad and as I pointed out, he already knew how to handle business because he had all this equipment for the--took--in those days people delivered bread, cakes and pie just like they did milk--used to do around here, but people used to leave their notes in there for bread and milk and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, so your--your papa was a pretty amazing man, really.
Speaker 2: Was, a pretty what?
Speaker 1: Amazing person.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was amazing, but he was--he offered me a lot of tough love--he worked the hell out of me and didn't pay me nothing.
Speaker 1: Now where were you in the family tree?
Speaker 2: I was number four, I was the baby in the family and my mother died when I was fourteen days old, my f-, as I say, my father never married again and he started farming me off and made it possible for a lot of people to--relatives to make it, even though the relatives that I was living with were educated people who had already had careers.  They were doctors, they were druggists.  The women, a lot of them were nurses.  Many of them had already graduated from the University of Pittsburgh before it was the University of Pittsburgh--University of Western Pennsylvania, as they called it in those days back when I was a kid, you know.
Story_ID: 14269
Speaker 1: And what about, what, what about your siblings--who were they and did you grow up with them or they grew up separately than you?
Speaker 2: We all grew up separately [after his mother's death when he was two weeks old].  My youngest sister, the one before me, she is 90-some years old and she was he one that was married to Bill Barry.  She's in Pittsburgh now and she's living alone.  And then I had a brother named Max Thompson--Frank Maxwell Thompson--and he's dead.  And he had one child, which I haven't seen since his death because it was a mixed marriage.  He married my father's secretary. Hmmph! Yeah.  And she disappeared after his wedding--I mean after his death and--. They lived very well.  They had a beautiful home out in a town called Butler, Pennsylvania and they had built that, built it themselves on ten acres of land.  Then my oldest sister, she was sort of the one who looked out for me, especially when I lived at my grandmother's.  She made certain that my clothes were clean and I went to school and so forth and so forth--that's when I was on Wiley Avenue.  And--one day I'm sitting on the front steps and I saw her going out of the house with a bag and she was carrying a suitcase out because she was getting ready to marry a young dentist from Homewood area and that's what she did and they had six kids and they all ended up in, in some form of dental service.  One became an oral surgeon in Philadelphia and the other right now is in charge of the dental operations at Western Pennsylvania prison in Bloomberg, Pennsylvania and one became a mechanical dentistry who supplied dental services to all the dentists in and around Pittsburgh--I'm talking about black community--and they've got one down in Florida now, a niece down in Florida, who worked for her sister, who owned American Micrographics Corporation when microfiche first came out.  They take a, take a whole floor of file cabinets and people had all the files and files and aisles and aisles of files.  They could tell you down a penny how much it cost to put--to file these things--and she put it on microfiche and all those files would be in a little box on your desk about that big--and they were great at it.  They had a big corporation at one time.  They had Piper Aircraft Corporation down there at Vera Beach, Florida.  After they lost their business up in--that is, the--Piper lost their business in, in Pennsylvania, they used to make aircraft up there, but they got flooded out somehow.  Then there was so many other companies that they did this kind of work for and they, they fared very nicely and they got two children--one boy and one girl.  And one of them just graduated from--about two years ago she graduated from Princeton and she went to the University of Pennsylvania and she is now a lawyer for S&P--Standard and Poor people on Wall Street and I listen to her.  So--so I've got pretty much connected to the pulse--my fingers on the pulse of the situation around the country, you know.
Story_ID: 14270
Speaker 1: My childhood, I thought it was pretty good, that is--when I--I told you I lived on Wiley Avenue my first recollection, you know,  I lived in a black community, but eventually and I will show you a house that my dad--and a white friend sort of teamed up and put together which became a part of the housing situation for Duquesne Tech and University of Pittsburgh and they took all--took young men from all over the country and all over the world that come to the University of Pittsburgh.  We had them from--living in this house--I lived in that house, too.  I had a lot of wonderful experiences with those guys, running errands for them and working in the community, going to a school where, as I say, I had a principal who had a tremendous amount of respect for me as a--he treated me with a tremendous amount of respect and the school that I was going to at the time was a lab school--I didn't realize that because the first two floors was a public school.  Top floor was the School of Education for the University of Pittsburgh and, of course, we always had a cadre of teachers in almost every classroom because that's what it was--was a lab school.  Today it's an international language school and I want to show you that.  I had an opportunity to go back there recently and I visited that school and I brought them some pictures that were taken of me back in 1931 with my class and you'll see--and I said to the principal, who is now black--"Find me and I'll give you three seconds to find me and I'll give you $5.00."  And she found me in two seconds (laughter), I stood out so, you know.  But this is the life I had when I was growing up and most of the kids I went to school with were Greek and I still recite their names when I look at their pictures and so forth--names like Mary Theomolios (ph.), Peter Bamboros (ph.)--there's a couple of them I can't think of their name right at this minute, but these were the kind, these were--and, and, it was in--I would leave school with them and they would always be going, they would always--on the way home they always had to stop at the [Greek] orthodox schools.  They went to school after having gone to school.  Just like in Pittsburgh, all these kids went to Hebrew school after public school.  Because I used to go to the playground, be playing in the playground while they're in classes again, so I got to know a lot of these kids and some of these kids came from very prominent families.  You talk about Brach['s] candy company here, but we had what we called the Dimling['s] Candy company and we had Isaly['s] ice cream corporation, you know, and all, all--these are the kind of kids that I went to school with and I al-, I always tell everybody jokingly--I say it jokingly, but I said, "I, I didn't even know I was black.  My folks wouldn't tell me I was black until I was 18.  They didn't want me to have a heart attack." (chuckles). I always thought that was funny, but I guess it is.
Story_ID: 14271
Speaker 1: So what would you describe Pittsburgh like at that time growing up?  What type of community was it?
Speaker 2: Well, the community that I lived in and I lived on Dithridge Street--it's right, practically right in the heart of the Oakland district where all--the University of Pittsburgh and their hospitals and all the educational areas are and I used to walk a half a mile to school. And I would pass some of these buildings where--like the Pennsylvania Historical Society, Soldier's, Soldier's Field, Soldiers' [and Sailors'] Memorial [Hall], Syria Mosque, all these educationally and culturally dedicated and focused organizations--big--and I was in the shadow of the Cathedral of Learning.  In fact, I always claim that I own a piece of it because when they built that Cathedral of Learning, I was just a little kid and it's a towering piece--edifice--educational edifice--and we all contributed.  I got a certificate that showed I presented--I brought a dime to class for my share of the Cathedral of Learning.  But that's the kind of community I lived in.  In fact, as I said I lived in a house made up of young college students that were Chinese, there were guys from all the way up in Poughkeepsie, New York--I can remember some of them fairly well--and a lot of them were--and they were in the engineering school.  We even had a couple of professors there that were in the field of aviation that used to take me out to the airport.  This sort of continued my interest in aviation.  When they used to have the balloon races at Pitt Stadium, these guys would take me up to the room.  I had to do little things for them like run errands and stuff like that.  During the period when the stadium was loaded with all these balloons and races.  They made a balloon for me.  How they did it--they used to take coat hangers and bend them up and put them in bottles and extract from the metal the hydrogen that was necessary to get it into the balloon.  How did they did--I never saw how they did it, but they did it.  Built a net over it and a little basket to hang from it and I just thought that was the greatest thing--take my balloon--especially everybody going to the stadium to see the balloon races.  As soon as I hit the door, out of my hand.  I ain't seen it since.  I haven't seen it since--I lost it that fast, you know.
Story_ID: 14272
Speaker 1: What type of child would you describe yourself.  Were you a meditative child, were you a fun-loving child, were you--what type of child?
Speaker 2: I know I was rather sensitive, some might say I was paranoid, I don't know--but I just know I spent so much time by myself in a sense that I started building model airplanes which kept me--that's how I learned to read because I learned to read blue prints and then I started reading books and my favorite book at the time was the editorial by ['Editorials from the Hearst Newspapers', 1906] --the author was [Arthur] Brisbane and I remember when the book came out with Dale Carnegie, 'How To Win Friends and Influence People,' [1936]  well, that affected me and I used that book as a guideline to getting along and my philosophy came out of that book.  I learned to read and I had trouble learning to read at the very beginning.  I thought about it the other day how my Aunt Nellie and her son, Frankie, which was my cousin, she set us a table and he used to read through 'Piggy Wiggy' like it was nothing.  Me, I tried to memorize what he was saying because I couldn't read worth a damn, but I got so I started reading Arthur Brisbane, I read all the Tom Swift books, you know.  Sound familiar, Tom Swift to anybody?  Well, I don't know.  But I--I had a lot of interests and a lot of my friends, as I said, they were of the other, of, of the other race and so forth--and I spent a lot of time with them.
Story_ID: 14273
Speaker 1: The circus came to town and Duquesne Garden was a place where the Pittsburgh hockey team played--I think they called it Penguins--where the hockey team played and they brought this circus in there.  And all the school kids in the district and all the schools were invited to come to the circus and I'll never forget this.  For some reason or other because we were one of the first ones there, my school wasn't too far away from it, I lived close to Duquesne Garden, in fact, we lived half a block from Duquesne Garden.  I was sitting in one of the three rings of the circus and kids were in bleachers all around me and there was one act where a man and a woman would bring out a big grizzly bear, had a collar on it and had a chain and would bring the bear in, you know, and, of course, we thought that was exciting.  I was sitting right there on the edge of the ring.  I don't know how I got down that close to it, but I was down there watching this grizzly bear and then his son came running in, that is the man who manages the bear.  His son was just a kid, not much older than myself, and he got to playing with the bear and so forth and next thing you know, the bear grabbed him in such a way, pulled his pants down and he was so embarrassed, he had to run off. Oh, that was all part of the act, I'm sure.  So next thing you know the man says, "Well, why doesn't somebody come and wrestle with the bear."  And all I heard in the background was, "Hey, Bill," (that's me)--"Hey Bill! You go ahead!" (laughing) I went up there like a fool.  That bear towered over me standing on his two feet even though the man had this collar on him and this chain and the bear had big paws--big paws--but they were covered with thick leather and I would go in there like a boxer thinking like Joe Louis, I'm jabbing at the bear you know, wingin' at him.  The man pulled me back.  "Now, do-, do- do- don't hit that bear."  But the bear--you know what the bear was doing?  He was walking toward me going like this--(smacks hands together hard) If he had got my head between those paws of his, my head would have been about that thick.  I'll never forget that.  I always tell people that when they get to talking about their hunting experience.  "Oh, yeah, I fought a grizzly bear." Which I did.  But that bear was coming at my head like this. (claps hands)  All I could hear was--Bang! There goes my head!
Story_ID: 14274
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your love of flying and when that started.  I know you said you put together model planes as a child and you had your heroes, but what inspired that sort of?  What was the first thing that sort of made you pay attention?
Speaker 2: Well, it was in 19--to be exact I think it was 1921 [sic, 1927] when Charles A. Lindbergh flew across the Atlantic Ocean as a solo pilot and he got world acclaim.  I think every young boy and maybe every young girl, I don't know, wanted to become aviators like Charles Lindbergh.  He became an international hero.  I think I must have built ten or fifteen models, pardon me, of his airplane 'The Spirit of St. Louis'.  I must have built--I knew his airplane forwards and backwards, all the parts and I used to dream I was flying just like all the other--my  whole world, like I say, a lot of times was spent dreaming and I think this is what motivates young people today.  I won't say today--you don't find too many kids dreaming.  They don't have to because if you look at the situation, you don't have to dream.  You just turn on your TV.  You've got the world in the palm of your hand, but we had to use our imagination because we had to read and then we had--we didn't have television and the movies weren't that great, you know. (Unclear) but when you went to the movies you only saw cowboy pictures like Tom Mix, Jack Hoxie, Desmo--Desmond--some of these famous--Tom Mix--these were our, our heroes too--but this was all I knew.  But this was what I all young kids--it was Charles A. Lindbergh that inspired the world and I wanted to be--and I told my dad--I wanted to become a pilot like Charles A. Lindbergh.
Speaker 1: Now, when you said that to your father, what was his feeling about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess he felt that if that's what he want to do let him go ahead, that's his problem. You know what I mean?  I think that's probably what his attitude was and I remember I received a medal for something--I forgot what it was--and I had sense enough to know that when the war was over--World War One was over--then all these agreements were signed with a blue ribbon with a medal hanging from it, you know, and I wrote my dad a letter and I put my medal on there and making it official that this is what I wanted to do--there was this document. And since then I have been pursuing that field.  I've had a lot of experience in flying.  I've owned my own--I've owned airplanes. I've owned--I've been a part owner in a fixed base operation over at Gary [Indiana] Airport.
Story_ID: 14275
Speaker 1: I want to go back though.  Now in high school was there anything that would distinguish you or anything that you would talk about in terms of your high school years.
Speaker 2: Yes, you bring it up at the right time too because it was associated with my interest in flying as it was all the little white kids that I grew up with in grade school, and we went to the high school and I grew up with that and I remember I was one of the--sort of the keystone in the aviation clubs in Pittsburgh among the group that I hung around with and I can recall very vividly when we were about ready to graduate one of the couple of guys would say, "Hey, Bill, what are you going to do?"  I said--one of them said--"I'm going down to Kelly Field and join the army--Army Air Corps."  I said, "Wait a minute.  I'll get my hat. I'll go with you."  I didn't know then that all these role models of mine [aviators in the military] were down there and said--"No, no, you ain't coming down here; not in our backyard."  You know, that was their attitude.  And I said, "Well, okay, if that's the way you feel about it, I guess I'll go down to Pensacola and join the naval aviation thing."  I didn't know the Navy was--excuse the expression--was worst than the Cubs--took them a long time to get a (unclear).  They wouldn't take anybody.  In fact, I was telling you about my friend--the Golden 13--they were the first ones, you know, and that was in the middle of the war.  But, that I'll never forget.  I was denied the opportunity of going into the service and getting all the beautiful training in the military and yet I pursued it from that focus point.  I focused out on that.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated high school in what year?
Speaker 2: Hmm--about 1936 because it took me four years to go through college and I graduated in '40 [1940] from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]--so '36.
Story_ID: 14276
Speaker 1: Now what about the decision to go to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]--I mean whose decision was that and why Hampton and--
Speaker 2: Well, the decision was--"Why Hampton?" --to answer that because I didn't want Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  My dad and I got into a Lincoln touring car with a buddy of mine who is related to Charlie Jackson funeral home up there at one time--we grew up together.  Tom Coleman, myself, my dad and one of his cronies and we headed for Washington, D.C. and my dad didn't care which school I went to, just so I went to school.  So we're going to Washington and I get out of the car and step out of the car onto the sidewalk and then onto the campus of Howard University, but there was something about Howard University.  It was too posh or too aloof.  The people around--there weren't any people.  I didn't need the, the presence of the people.  The buildings and so forth, even though they were nice there was something telling me, I don't want to go to school here.  And I told my dad that.  So we got back into our Lincoln car and we drove on down to Hampton, Virginia.  The minute we went through that gate I said, "This is it.  This is where I want to go to school."  And that's exactly what happened.  When we went through that gate, I don't think I ever came out of that gate until--for a long time, but there was a time, there was a spell that I left Hampton, but nevertheless, I got to Hampton, it's one of the most beautiful campuses in the country.  I mean it's one school that doesn't depend on--who's the guy who raises funds for all the black colleges, he has these shows?--so far.  They have the greatest endowment of any school in the country.  I didn't know anything about endowment, I couldn't even spell endowment.  Like I didn't even know how to spell, as the man says--Dow Jones.  But the point is--it was a great school and great atmosphere.  It was typical of the characterization of the friendliness of the South. And, and--I loved the magnolia trees, I loved the people, I loved the campus.  That's why I went there.  But I spent one year there and went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to work and my uncle, who was also a doctor in Atlantic City, was on the board at the Lincoln University in Pennsylvania I'm talking about, and certainly--you know go to Lincoln--I can get you a scholarship--because it was my dad that helped him through medical school; gave him jobs in the catering business, you know and so he felt he had to do me a favor and so he took me out of Hampton and put me on scholarship at Lincoln University.  And I went to Lincoln University.  I knew it was going to be an all-boys' school, but I didn't have any idea what the impact of being among all boys and no girls and so I had on my plaid shirt and had my .22 [caliber] rifle across my lap and I got on a bus and rode all the way from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia and got on another little dingy bus and went into Lincoln University and the man hollered, "Lincoln University," and I got off with my rifle and my plaid shirt. 'Cause it was an all boys' school.  I had planned on going camping.  This was good-- for me this was camping, you know. Pardon me.  And when I get on this side of the road, on the right side of the road, and when the bus pulled away and I looked for Lincoln University--there was one little sign up there, "Lincoln University."  Now this is a school where all the black doctors and lawyers and ministers got their pre-education there at Lincoln University.  Well, it was supposed to be the black Princeton of the North and here I was going to join them.  I got into the black Princeton of the North--I took the first room assignment, allotment of the rooms that they had, you know, and I walked in the room and I thought I was in prison because all these cots were down there and all these guys and I said, "Well, what's that building over there?"  "Well, that's our new dormitory."  I said, "That's what, where I want to go, over here."  So they made arrangements for me to transfer out of the area immediately into that and I went over to the Lincoln University and--Randall Hall--and that's the name of our doorman downstairs--his name was Randall Hall.  Anyway--I stayed there one year and I'll never forget that on weekends would come, I would want to, you know, do something.  Where are the guys?  I was looking around--nobody's on the campus and these are all boys.  I go by--ready to play draw football and standing out there, throw the football up in the air and trying to get somebody looking out the window would see me--"I think I'll go out and play football with Bill."  No, nobody there to look out.  Then I found out and I looked down the road as far as the eye can see, there are all these guys from Lincoln University are going--standing on the side of the highway going (gestures with thumb as in hitchhiking) to Philadelphia.  If they weren't going to Philadelphia, they were going to New York in the other direction.  Or to Washington, you know.  So I learned very quickly--I didn't need a football to get along here and put the football back and next thing you know, I started exercising my thumbs and I was going into Philadelphia and down to Atlantic City and Washington.  It was nice.  I enjoyed it there and the guys were all nice fellows, but I wanted to get back at the co-ed school where there was some life and interest.  And that's why I went back to Hampton and I stayed there until I finished up, promised myself I was never going to come off that campus.  And I left there in '40 [1940] and I went back there in 1990 which represented my 50th anniversary year and took my wife back and that's how I got to where I went.
Story_ID: 14277
Speaker 1: We had a white president at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]
Speaker 2: Okay, you did?
Speaker 1: Yeah--Dr. Howell--he's related to the Howells that were very famous through the Civil War--antecedents, you know. But--all--there was--but they got a black president down there by the name of William R. Harvey and he's brought up a lot of changes to that university.  He had been outstanding.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any trepidation when you went to Hampton?  I know you fell in love with it, but when you were making the trip, did you have any trepidation or fear because it was in the South?
Speaker 1: I didn't have any idea what the South was all about anyhow.  I'd been living in the North I didn't know there was going to be a change in venue or my attitude when I went down to Hampton. I didn't know anything about segregation, even though I lived in a segregated community, I still didn't know what segregation was in the South.
Speaker 2: And did you--did you--how did you find experience though--not just the excitement when you first got there, but did you find the South a little different than your experience in the North since you really had been raised in a more integrated environment and people's attitudes--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can tell you about that.  It was really a shocking thing for me because when I went down to Hampton, down South among all those people from the South, I came from the North and I didn't know anything about segregation and I came from good schools in the North so I felt very superior to the students down there when I first went down there.  But you know, those students wiped me out.  They were about ready to throw me out of their school--because the Southern kids were, were trained, you know.  They--for some reason or other I thought being educated in the Northern schools would make me superior to anything that--any competition that I would run up against in the South, but my God, man, I I didn't start learning until I went South.  It was quite a shock to see these kids and the thing is, a lot of these kids worked their way through school when they were down there.  They came from Washington; they came from Roanoke, Virginia; they came from Winston-Salem; they came from all those major cities, you know--and--I came from the North.  I felt very superior, but they brought me down on that.
Story_ID: 14278
Speaker 1: Tell me just a little bit about the heritage of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  I mean you must know--what is the heritage of that, you know, the university and wasn't it established by a grant, because--?
Speaker 2: It was really established for actually Indians.  It was established, I understand, that they had--to train Indians and also to train blacks--freed blacks, you know.  This was a school that Booker T. Washington came to from Tuskegee and if I remember the story, he came from Tuskegee to Hampton and helped establish Hampton [Note: vice versa; Washington attended Hampton then established Tuskegee.], but he got a scholarship like many of the black students that came there even back in my day and they gave him a broom and he swept up the room so well that they decided that was going to be his, his scholarship fee. You know, I mean they're giving him that scholarship because he did such a fine job of cleaning up the room.  As time went on, I decided I think I'd get a broom and start cleaning up there, too, because they had a NYA [National Youth Administration] program down and everybody worked except me and so I got a job on NYA and there was a high school right off the campus called Phenix--I think it was called Phenix High School--and I'd go over there and sweep the classrooms after school was out with a bunch of other guys--we were making money, you know, and get a check.  So that helped out a lot, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated as a business major.
Speaker 2: How''s that?
Speaker 1: Business--
Speaker 2: Yeah, business administration.
Speaker 1: Right, right. So what--did you co-, did you go in as a business major and was it your father who influenced you?
Speaker 2: I thought I was going to be like my dad [Rufus William Thompson] in a way that I get into the business world, but I did work--of course, I majored in accounting and so forth and I had an opportunity--I worked here [Chicago, Illinois] in doing a trial balance--an account receivable trial balance--for one of our major hospitals here, Provident Hospital.  I'd produce a trial balance every three months for them--account receivable trial balance.  Other than that my--then I worked as a cost clerk for Macon Corporation on the North Side, but as far as my business experience was concerned, it was rather limited to that type of thing.  I thought about going into business.  It's really interesting that the man I was telling you about who's a Golden 13 owned a restaurant when I got out of the service, down on 47th Street, and I thought I knew enough about the restaurant business and catering and so forth that hey--I can go in.  I didn't want to go home because my old man used to work the hell out of me and didn't pay me.  Everybody else had a paycheck coming or an envelope.  You'd go in there--but me.  "Bill, you did a nice job."  He would talk and pull out of some change.  You ain't getting me back here.  But, I had an opportunity to work and I thought about going into this restaurant business, but the man I was telling you about upstairs, he owned a restaurant that I think was on 47th Street and that's Sylvester White.  Somebody told me that he was going to sell it.  I said, "Oh, gee, I think I'll buy it."  And I went by it and that was when I first met him.  He probably won't remember that, but I first went by there to ask him about getting into his restaurant business and, of course, that didn't work out.
Story_ID: 14279
Speaker 1: Oh, I would estimate that they must have had pretty close to 2,000 or more--3,000.  I mean it was a nice population [at Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I don't know exactly how many, but I do know this, as of today for every seat that they have for the freshman class, they have ten or more people applying for it.  I mean it's a highly thought of school.  It's got everything in it.  I called down there just a couple of days ago.  I was going through my stuff trying to pull out all this stuff and I did know they have a tremendous aviation program.  You can get a degree down there--in fact, the government after the war decided to give many of these so-called historical black universities and colleges grants or money to bring about a good aviation program, so you can go down there and become a traffic controller.  You can go down there and you can get your pilot's license.  You can go all the way from a private all the way up to the commercial.  You can go into aviation administration, you can go--and get degrees in all of these things just like any good aviation--or any university--so the government and Tuskegee has--each of these schools has done something to earn this grant, I think, in that the engineering schools throughout the black institutions today are most outstanding.  I get a magazine every now and then from a lady upstairs whose hus-, whose son is in the engineering in one of these schools and I see now nuclear engineers, now Hampton even has an aquatic engineers.  I went down--last time I was down there they have undersea studies--all this stuff--because they're right there on Hampton Roads, you know.  The most beautiful location right there on the--I forgot what the river is, but it's just outstanding.
Story_ID: 14280
Speaker 1: But then I went into the military.  I became a cadet--aviation cadet.  The government says that we are going to let black people into the air corps and they didn't call them black.  They called--we were colored people.  Or we were 'them'--we will allow "them" into the air force, and flying, and I got into it as a cadet.  It was my desire to become a pilot with the United States Army Air Corps, but unfortunately I was too fast from this standpoint.  One of the Assistant Secretaries of War came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and, of course, a lot of my people were politically well connected and when I heard that this guy was in town talking to an aunt of mine I--"Hey listen, I just put an application in; see if you can do something about getting them to pass on it right away because I want to get into this flying business real quick, you know."  And he did.  He got me in, and--but the point is--they were so busy that they decided to activate a squadron, but they realized they needed airplane mechanics; they needed, they needed communications people and they need weapon systems people; they need all kinds of tactical services to put on a military outfit--to launch a military outfit.  Hey, Net got me into Chanute Field [Rantoul, Illinois] right downstate here. They sent me down there as a, as a cadet. Now,  I was a cadet--I was a flying--what's called a flying cadet. And they got me down there, but they were training me--to become weapon systems officer for the first all-black organization and that's what I did.  I became the--got commissioned, but later the War Department decided that they were going to give me a break because I put a lot of pressure on these guys, I mean--I had some--knew how to, you know, work my way around the system by using people who I knew that who had contact and I was assigned to the 99 Fighter Squadron as a weapon systems officer.  We were all ready to ship to go overseas and I got a call from headquarters, "Lt. Thompson, report to headquarters immediately, if not sooner."  I go up to headquarters and the executive officer of the base--a Major Hazard (ph.) --I'll never forget him--said, "Lieutenant, you are going to be taken out of the 99th Fighter Squadron,"--knowing I was all packed and ready to go overseas. I smiled, "Yeah, okay."  He took me, he said, "We're going to put you in a base squadron to hold you because we got orders from headquarters from Washington that you are now going to be put into flying status as an officer in grade."  They trained officers to fly, too.  Usually it was cadets.  The way you became an officer was you became a cadet--but you can get officers to become student pilots also and they were transferring me then--General B. O. [Benjamin O.] Davis [Jr.] was a major or lieutenant--a lieutenant colonel at that time.  He called him up and said, "We're going to have to transfer Thompson our of your outfit.  We got orders here; he's going to be held for training in class so-and-so and so-and-so."  I'm standing right there beside the man and I saw what was coming up and I heard what was coming up.  I didn't have to be standing next to Davis--I was standing next to Colonel Hazard and this guy was pushing. I said,  "Go, go, go.  Give it to him, man."  Davis said, "No way--no way, Jose if you're going to get this guy out of my outfit."  And I didn't get out of it either.  If you want to know the story that goes with it, as they say, the rest of the story of that--well, he called me down to operations and told me, he says, "If you ever try to get out of this outfit, I'll see that they are taken care of."  He meant--I knew what he meant, see.  He said, "In the meantime, you'd go up to headquarters of the 99th headquarters order room and ask for Lieutenant [Benote H.] Wimp."  He's a Chicago man.  I don't know if you knew him or not.  I think his brother became a general here--General Wimp--and there was a Wimp that worked at the post office on 47th Street.  "You tell Wimp to put a cot in there and that's where you're going to stay until we get out of here safely."  And I stayed there for seven days.  I knew if I broke--because I knew for seven days that's what you call a summary arrest in military and I didn't break it, so I stayed there for seven days.  I had it nice, you know, so I stayed.  I never got onto the flight line except as a--I used to run the flight line from operations though.
Speaker 2: Was that disappointing to you?
Speaker 1: Sure, it was.  I was going to get all that--I would be flying those big military planes, those bombers and so many guys got washed out, my dear friend.  Let me say this.  You take a class of about 30 or 40 black young men coming in there, like it was in the movie.  They chopped them off just like that.  And some of these guys, it's just like in the movie.  One of them hopped in a plane and took off and went and committed suicide with the plane.  Now we got some guys who didn't committee suicide with a plane; they committed suicide in a whole lot of ways.  They're nuts.  They're walking around here like they're normal.  Because it upset them to the point that they never could adjust to that because they had been telling the world:  "I'm going to be a pilot.  I'm going to be a pilot," you know.  And it hurt.  Sure it hurts.  But I made up for it.  And I'll tell you one thing, I look back at the, at the rate these guys are dying and were being killed over there and they were losing a lot of them.  We lost 66 guys.
Story_ID: 14281
Speaker 1: Now how many people were part of the 99th?  How many, How many numbers were there?
Speaker 2: Well, you was talking about the 99th when it was first put together and put on a boat and shipped overseas.  We had 210 enlisted men with us that included all the contingent for, for mechanics and radio people and armament people, cooks, administrative people and all that:  210 enlisted men and there were only twenty-eight officers and I was one of those twenty-eight officers.
Speaker 1: And--and how would you describe sort of the feeling as people were going over on the boat--what as the feeling?  Because a lot of people had not been out of the country at that point.
Speaker 2: Well, it was exciting for a lot of reasons.  First of all, they--our guys were more than qualified to belong to any outfit that was overseas, because the average guy after he finished his training, got about--maybe twenty-five or fifty hours or more in a front line combat plane before they ship him--but they could take a white guy and put him into any--all these different outfits all overseas, but they wouldn't--wouldn't put us overseas.  We had to go get Mrs. [Eleanor] Roosevelt to come down there.  You probably heard the story.  We've got pictures that will show you that.  Mrs. Roosevelt came down and she swaggered around the airport and said, "I heard you guys can't fly, but look at you, would you?"  In fact, she took--I got a front page picture at the time.  She got in the plane with 'Chief' [Charles] Alfred Anderson and he flew her around in a Cub.  Not the plane that you saw in the movie.  The plane you saw in the movie you remember was--what was the movie star's name?  [Lawrence] Fishburne.  She said, "I want to fly with him."  And next thing you know, she was in the plane 'cause I was sitting there--you know, biting my nails.  I said, "Now look at her."  She had a great big hat and long skirt and I want to see her climb to the back cockpit of that airplane, I want to see this--you know.  And, of course, the picture is--actually, she climbed into the back seat of a Piper Cub at Moten Field--that's where it was--because when she started getting in one of those airplanes--man, the Secret Service that accompanied her entourage, man--got their phones and their flags and start signaling Washington and and everything that they could.  And "(unclear) no, Mrs. Roosevelt you can't do that."  And she went up with 'Chief' Anderson.  He just died.  I got the front page of the story here.  And she came down she said, "They could fly."  So as my one of my buddies said it was the engineering officer said--"Yeah and she went back to Washington and she said--'Delano'--I think that's what she called Franklin Delano Washington [sic, Franklin Delano Roosevelt]--she said, "Delano, those boys can fly.  Now if you don't send those boys overseas soon, I ain't going to let you climb in this bed with me any more."  (laughs) That's why my buddy had said.  You know--we make up our own stories as we go alone, you know.  So next thing you know--yeah, we were off and running.  Orders came down and we was shipped up there to New York, to Camp Shanks and were put on a boat called the [USS] Mariposa and they said, "Well, I guess we'd better get rid of them real quick," and they put us in a single boat and back in those days not a boat ever crossed the Atlantic Ocean during the war if it wasn't in the company of 200 other boats and battleships and submarines under them and a lot of things, you know, of this nature.  We didn't have a single thing.  I can remember very vividly, I kept saying, "You know, they're still trying to get rid of us," you know.  Then all of a sudden I looked up and the sky and it was a bright morning you know and I saw this naval PBY flying boat flying over us and I said to my buddy, I said, "Oh well it's not bad, we got some protection.  Look here, we got this flying boat."  As soon as that SOB got to the Statue of Liberty he did a 180 [degree turn] and went back where he came from.  We ain't seen him since. I haven't seen him.  I don't think anybody has ever seen him.
Speaker 1: So how long was the trip over?
Speaker 2: About seven days.  It took seven days because we had to zig-zag avoiding [submarines]--we went right into Casablanca [Morocco].  And, of course, when I got to Casablanca as I hinted before--right away I wanted a little drink or something, I started looking for 'Rick's Place' and I didn't know there wasn't any Rick's Place--it was a movie.  So any how--it was a great experience.  We went into North Africa and I got to meet a lot of--oh, I forgot what they call those soldiers.  They were black soldiers that were already there.  But we go into the harbor, there was nothing but boats that had been turned upside down by German bombing and we, we got in there and the next thing you know they put us on a train and sent us up to a place called Cape Bon--that's where we were headed for--Cape Bon--but we didn't go directly to Cape Bon, but we were put on a train which was called a forty and eight.  Back in World War I days they used those same trains.  They put forty men on the train and eight horses.  Here we had these same trains, but the Arabs in, in in French Morocco, they were all over the train.  They were riding on top of the train.  You could afford to because it took thirteen hours to go 100 miles on those trains.  They just "Chug-chug-chug-chug" along, you know.
Story_ID: 14282
Speaker 1: I was in, in North Africa for approximately six months maybe--about six months--and then we was--then they came along--what happened was--tell my story; I've got my own version of it.  They were--after they pushed [German General Erwin] Rommel off of the--and the Italians too--they pushed the Italians and Rommel off of Cape Bon and they tried to make it back, a lot of them lost their lives you know going back to, to Italy and I would say that we were there a good--about six months.  I lost track of what I was getting ready to say--excuse me--but--we--oh, I know what it was.  This is at a time where [General Dwight David] Eisenhower was Commander in Chief of all the troops and I can imagine the Chief Air Marshall of England--[Arthur William] Tedder was--I got to, I got to meet all these people personally; had lunch with them and so forth.  But, one of them probably said to Eisenhower, "Hey, Ike, I understand you've got some black guys over there flying planes."  Ike said, "Yeah.  Well, let's go over and have lunch with them."  They got into that old DC3, flew over from the command base, wherever they were and landed on our dry lake bed and got out of the plane--got photographs of them when they arrived and so forth--and they briefed with us.  We, we received direct briefing from Eisenhower himself in a tent about the invasion of Sicily before the invasion took place.  By this time you've got to take into consideration that many people--I've heard guys who had never been over there saying, "Oh, yeah, you guys got the worst airplanes and you got the--you didn't get treated right."  It's a funny thing about this whole racial thing and I've got to mention this.  They could not afford to mistreat us for some reason.  The world--the eyes of the world were on us, you know--and they were on this government, too--and they couldn't afford to--we got brand new airplanes when we got over there.  We had good food when we got there.  Yes, we were segregated; we were on our own base.  In fact, the very first mission our guys flew on it was a funny arrangement.  I don't think anybody's ever had this arrangement before.  It was in the movie and it was true.  Our first guys who flew on a mission were on the island--to bomb the island of Pantelleria--had to get in a jeep, drive four or five miles down the road to a white outfit--the 3--the 32nd Fighter Group--and sit there and listen to the briefing.  Remember when the guys arrived at the base and they said, "10:00 o'clock scholar and so forth--"  The 10:00 o'clock scholar and a dollar late or something, I forgot how the poem goes.  But anyhow what it was--we were told to be there we'll say at 5:00 o'clock, if you remember the movie.  It was true--but--and they changed--be there at 6:00 and they had already started at 5:00 and our guys were down there and they had to extend the briefing just for our guys you know--because they did it purposely because they weren't too happy about having us become a part of the--here were some black guys becoming a part of--we were flying now with white guys and I was thinking--I said - how wonderful it was that those white guys--I said these guys were better pilots than they were and they were for a reason.  Our guys went overseas with an average--and I'm not exaggerating this.  Our guys had an average when they went overseas and not having any combat at all--was approximately 250 hours of flying time just in the P40 airplane alone--which was our front-line combat plane.  White guys get forty hours in a combat plane.  They say, "Okay, you guys, you can go over there and you're going here and you're going there," and they had organizations all over Europe--all over Africa that they could send them to.  "I don't know where we're going to send y'all."  Sure, that's the way it was.  So we got--go down to briefing and those guys had to ride down in the jeep--get in on the briefing.  Come back and get on the plane and all of a sudden maybe by a couple of miles away, you'll see a red flag go up and it's a signal--you guys take off and airplanes would come, make a big circle around it.  Our guys would turn in and join them as they go and then they head for the target area.  That's the way we went into combat.  That's how we got our first training--I mean our first orientation in combat.  It appears that there was a comic strip called, "Terry and the Pirates," and there was a guy in there called Flip Corcoran and they sent Flip Corcoran over to our base to give us orientation.  He came over there and said, "Where's your airplane?"  We didn't have any.  We were over there putting an area around our pup tents, planting flowers and stuff--waiting for something to happen.  But he ordered a B17, took about six guys back to Casablanca and came back with six brand new P40s.  So we had brand new airplanes.  I remember not too long ago I was at a meeting in downstate at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois].  One of these guys who likes to know--he knows everything--but he wasn't there.  And I can tell you--we got good airplanes.  We had good mechanics.  Our guys--our guys were one of the best and we fueled more airplanes than anybody else when we go to escorting.
Story_ID: 14283
Speaker 1: Who made decision of who flied and who didn't fly--was it based on testing or was it based on area of the country or--
Speaker 2: Well, if you're talking about--who was going to make it through flying school or who was going to fly on a mission, I mean--
Speaker 1: Who was going to fly on a mission.
Speaker 2: Well, all the guys--everybody over there was qualified to fly on a mission.  If you were there you were going to fly on a mission, there's no doubt about it.  I mean even if you were a mediocre pilot and you were trained and you're there, you're going to, you're going to be assigned to a mission.  And this is what happened.  These guys would be assigned.  And we had some guys that I used to make money off of sometimes.  You're always running into them--white ones, black ones, green ones, yellow ones, it don't make any difference.  The minute they take off you can look across the horizon there and you see a little speck coming out of the horizon and see some guys coming back and we had one guy who had to go maybe fifty efforts toward a mission before he could get twenty-five good missions because he was coming back all the time talking about--"Oh, my plane engine was a little rough on the left mag" or rough on the right mag or something was happening, you know.  You talked with Jack Rogers--let me tell you about Jack Rogers.  Jack was to me one of the best dive bombing pilots we ever had in the theater.  I thought he was one of the greatest.  And he was one of these kind of guys if you've ever noticed them--they've been recently--maybe you didn't get a chance to see the characteristics, but if he'd go to the beach for something--he's like this.  And we used to have a lot of fun watching him take off.  That was a little tight cockpit and only one person sitting in there and the plane was going down the runway--it was like he was running upstairs and get his coat and coming back downstairs and get his shoes.  All this--while the plane was running and he was one of those kind of guys, but he was a guy who knew how to interrogate the interrogators.  He--we supported the 8th--British 8th Army and he--they used to come in and lay the map down on the hood of the jeep and Jack would say, "Now, do you want us to go in here and there's a big cannon behind that school building there that's holding you guys up from--so you couldn't get--make any forward motions.  Okay--now how high are those trees over here?  How far from the road is this?  And Jack--, "How far--?"  I'd sit there and look at Jack--"Damn, Jack--how come you ask so many questions, man?"  These were British boys; they didn't know us that well--and Jack would ask them all kinds--like they was on the witness stand.  Maybe he was preparing for his law career, I don't know.  But boy I don't care what the situation--weather might have been bad--but he always took them in there and we always got to the target because of Jack.  So I was very proud of him.  Even though I said, "Damn, shut up."
Speaker 1: At the time.
Speaker 2: At the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Hindsight is always--you can give him his accolades now.
Speaker 2: After all, he's the one that's going.  I'm not going, he's going.  So he's going.  He went and he took the responsibility of others who were with him.  I've only seen Jack make one situation that I gave Jack hell about because I worked out of operations and briefings and so forth.  I had to talk to these guys before they went.  And one thing--Jack never had any problems about coming back early.  Jack always went to his target; always completed his missions.  He wasn't interested in the army or anything else.  He wanted to get over and get his damn work done and get out of there--get back home.  But one thing he did, he took a flight of four planes, I'll never forget this--and, of course, if you're going along and you see something untoward like an enemy plane sitting up there in the sun and getting ready to dive down on you, you make a turn--make a fast turn in that direction and take your four guys with you.  Jack didn't see anything.  He just had a problem with his engine, but instead of turning gently and going back and leaving the other guys so the other guy could come up and take his place as the leader, Jack went--shwee--  And everybody went shwee--and you looked up and all--the whole damn flight was coming back.  Jack brought them all back because that's the way it was.  You follow your leader.  But the way you do it, you've got to be very careful, but Jack--I still kid him about that.  I remember the enlisted personnel on the line handled stickers--went in and started typing them.  "What do you want to do--live forever?"  Take these stickers and put them right on the gun sight.  The gun sight was right here in front of your face.  You figured you'd look through that gun sight, you know.  And so it wasn't a nice thing to do, because the guys did that, but they were proud.  They shared all the hurt and the anger of the discrimination but they never made a point of showcasing it.
Story_ID: 14284
Speaker 1: Most of these guys--I have never heard anything about discrimination or breaking--like one of the organizations--the 477th--you'll run into some of these guys.  They almost got put in jail because they wanted to get put into the white officers' club.  The 477th was put in jail and there's a whole book on it right here called, "The Mutiny," I forgot the name of that mutiny, but anyhow they call it a mutiny and they were put in jail because Commanding Officer Selfish Field didn't want them to share in the Officers' Club.  These guys wanted to get in and be a part of the white Officers' Club and they were being shown to the side.  So I always tease these guys because I look at--I remember when the guy who did "Jaws," what's the name of that movie director that did "Jaws."  Who was the movie actor that did the thing for the Jewish people you were talking about?
Speaker 2: [Steven] Spielberg didn't do "Jaws."
Speaker 1: Yes, he did.  I think he said this is the same guy.
Speaker 2: He did?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, anyhow, he [movie director Steven Spielberg] was having a press conference in Culver City [California] and I was there at the press conference and he was getting ready to do a movie on the Tuskegee airmen and I was sitting there--of course, you've heard of Percy Sutton.  Percy was an intelligence officer in our outfit and I was sitting with him that night that we were having this press conference and, of course, these guys in the 477th never had the opportunity to go overseas, but they're taking great credit for bringing about the integration of the military because they fought the battle of the mutiny going into a white Officers' Club.  So I said--one of them guys got up on the other side and said, "Well, what you going to do about us--477?"  I guess they were rather sensitive about the fact they never got overseas.  And I said loud enough, I guess too loud; I shouldn't have said it because Percy Sutton hit me like that when I said, "Well, what did they do?"  He said, "Bill, that wasn't nice."  And I've been on their case ever sense.  Now I always said--they got the wrong impression that the 'Mutiny of the Bounty' [sic, 'The Caine Mutiny', motion picture, 1954] was over strawberries, if I remember correctly.  These are over blackberries. (laughs)
Story_ID: 14285
Speaker 1: There was the 99th and the 100th and the 332nd and the 330--.
Speaker 2: Now don't get them--I don't like to see them mixed up that way.  First of all, there was an organization all by itself--the 99th.  They're the ones that went overseas.  They're the ones that shot down all the planes at the invasion of Sicily and also moving up to Italy.  If you remember the movie, these guys came in and they dropped their bags and they met with the night guys at the 99th at Ramitellli in Italy.  Okay--but you see, these guys, the 332nd--the 100th, 301st and 302nd--I mean 100th, 301st and 302nd--they were on the high seas coming to the battle zone, when the 99th was over here and had been over here working for a year or two.  And this is the thing that upsets me.  I say it upsets me.  I guess I shouldn't say that, but we want to consider this all together, so when the 90-, 332nd came over and became a part of the--in the war zone with us--then they decided to say--oh, well, there's the 99th; the 301st, the 302nd and that makes up the 477th--we call that a wing.  The two organizations were blended together and merged together.  But I've always been a little concerned about the guy who wrote that book--yeah, I've been on his case several times.  I mean, I have a bad habit of speaking--I like, I like to come up with these weird ideas, you know, like the berries--and blueberries and strawberries, and all that sort of stuff.  But I think that way.  I can't help it.
Story_ID: 14286
Speaker 1: Well, I think the Tuskegee Airmen holds a very important part in the history of this country in the sense that they were able to accomplish the goal that was really set in the minds and hearts of the young men who first went into this business.  All we wanted to do was fly for our country, but I think deep down inside, there was an opportunity--there was an opportunity to learn to fly because flying was an expensive hobby to get involved with, you know.  But we had hoped to go over there and do our job and then when we come back the nation would open up its arms and say, "Welcome home, boys," but it didn't come out that way.  Like a lot of these guys go, like talk about the Korean War and so forth--they never even had an opportunity for a parade, you know.  But--but they soon learned to-- I tell you where their learning becomes very astute in the minds of the, of white y'know, people who are viewing history today.  When we run into young men--white men--not young men, my age--and they--just not too long ago, I think a week ago, out here I think it was Lincoln Cemetery they were celebrating--they were going to have a fly over Bessie Coleman's grave every year and Janet Waterford and they go out and celebrate these two young ladies who used to fly and so (unclear) flying--they were standing in a group, in a tent--this elderly white man stood up and he asked, he pointed out--"You know, I, I was a gunner aboard one of the bombers that you guys used to escort and if it wasn't for you, my wife here, and my two daughters here would not be here today if it hadn't been for you guys, because you gave us such great support."  I've had that said many times.  I used to be in troop transport--up here at O'Hare Field in the reserves and I've got a guy I can get on the phone and call any time, you know, and he told me the same thing.  He introduced me to his two daughters and his wife and so forth saying that, "If it hadn't been for you guys I wouldn't be here to introduce you to my daughters or to see them grow up."  So that was important.  It makes you feel good.
Story_ID: 14287
Speaker 1: He [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] was very tall, very handsome, very astute in all (unclear) of any decisions that he had to make, he would see that--.  You know, he went through West Point, and he had a hell of a time too in West Point.  When he went into West Point the cadets are--shared rooms together; they shared the dinner table together; they shared their participation on the athletic field together.  They wouldn't let him do it.  They wouldn't even speak to him.  They wouldn't share a room with him.  When he wanted to bring his tray to the table and have him sit down at dinner they'd say--no, you can't--he would have to ask permission of the ranking cadet, "May I have dinner here with you at this table?"  Embarrassing.  No, he took all that stuff.  He had to take it.  Well, he had to take it because he was dedicated to his, his--objectives, his life. "This is what I want and this is what I'm going to get.  If I have to take all this crap, I'll take it."  He came from that kind of home stock.  I understand that.  And that's the way a lot of the guys who went into the service--into the 99th [Fighter Squadron], I would say--are like that.  They didn't get out here and try to--we didn't try to bust into Officers' Clubs or become socially aggressive with people.  What we wanted to do was--we wanted to prove to the American people that we were just as good as they are.  We can do anything they want.  And we proved that we were even better in many cases.  And when Davis came back and told us that--told our outfit that this was the expanded outfit with the 332nd now part of it--we got a new mission and I'll show you a picture of Davis and I took it myself.  It's on the front of his book.  It's called--his plane was called, "By Request."  The Americans and the British were losing 600 men on every mission they would send out bombing Germany--notwithstanding that they might have had--I'm not certain--but they might have had good escort or mediocre escort, I don't know what they had.  But this guy who stood up in a tent the other day wanted to know why--why our escort service was so good.  It was because Davis said, "We've got a job to do and we were requested to do it."  And he was a military man and he was strong.  He said, "I don't want to see any of you guys going out to these bombers and all of a sudden you look out along the horizon and there's a couple Messerschmidts or 'Focke-Wulfs' [Fokker-Wulf German aircraft] sitting up there in the sun.  Be careful, don't go chasing after them.  Your job is to take care of these boys here," you know, "--these white boys,"  you know. That's why the guy asked him, "Well, why do we have to do it?  Why don't they take care of their own boys?"  And he said, "We were requested to do it."  That's what it all meant.  And our guys went in, and this guy [a white veteran, whose bomber had been escorted by Tuskegee Airmen]  the other day--out at Lincoln Cemetery got up and he said, "How is it that you did that?"  He says, "I know you were the greatest because we would look out and see,"-- because we weren't the only ones doing the escorting, but the white guys wanted to become aces.  They wanted to go back to their home town, "So-and-so here shot down 55 airplanes."  Okay, how did you do it?  At the sacrifice of these bombers that you were supposed to be taking care of?  Davis wouldn't allow that.  Not at all.  So we stayed with them.  This white guy said, he said, "You know, when we looked out from the bombers and looked at the escort, these guys [white fighter pilots] would be way over there, we couldn't tell whether they were friend or foe.  But you guys, we just looked at your airplane and we knew your airplanes because all our airplanes had that red tail."  See that one model up there.  They all had red tails.  That's how you distinguished them.  That's how you knew the black-and-white checkered tails belonged to the 33rd or the 56th Fighter Squadron or something.  They're the ones that were sitting out there in the sun waiting for--and the minute you started out to move away from your bombers, that's all they wanted.  So these guys would come in and take care of the bombers.  That's why we got to be famous--we did our job.
Speaker 2: So was he--he was a tough leader though?
Speaker 1: He was tough; he was fair.  Notwithstanding what he did as far as I was concerned [As Thompson related earlier in this interview, he had been trained as weapons officer of the 99th squadron instead of as a flyer; then, just before the 99th was to ship overseas,Thompson had an opportunity to transfer out for officer flight training; Davis refused permission and Thompson was deeply disappointed.], I loved him.  I learned to love that man.
Speaker 2: But, did he differ--did he remind you of your father at all?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't remind me of my father.  He was taller than my father. (laughs)
Speaker 2: I mean you said your father ran a hard bargain.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father did, but he didn't remind me of my father, but I mean--the thing is--the difference was, this was a young man given the leadership.  I, I, I had told him when I left the confines of his command and I was on his staff for the 99th, for the 332nd and then [summer 1945] when he came over and took over the 477[th] Bomb[ardment] Group, he told me, he said, "We came back to take over," he said, he told me, he said, "Now, we're going back overseas; I want you to go with me.  Will you go?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well, I don't want to hear no damn hard luck stories from you, no hardship story that your grandmother got sick or something like that," he said.  "You're goin' back, goin' to Japan with me when I go."  I said, "Okay, it's all right, I'll go."  I mean, I would have followed him anywhere, you know.  At a safe distance, that is.
Speaker 2: You said "notwithstanding what he [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] did" and that sounds like my ignorance, what did he do?
Speaker 1: I just told you.
Speaker 2: Oh--about--?
Speaker 1: About my going on flight status.
Speaker 2: Right. Okay. Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And like every--that's all I wanted to do--like everybody else.  But in a way, look--I'm sitting here talking to you and a lot of these guys are not here.
Speaker 2: Did you--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Maybe I was lucky.
Speaker 2: And in those cases you really couldn't challenge someone sort of on that whole thing--it was the military's decisions that are made and they're made and you have to--
Speaker 1: Oh, I guess there could have been challenged if I had pulled some strong strings that maybe--called back and get Judge [William Henry] Hastie or somebody to get on the case for me or--. I got some letters in there where some Urban League director was trying to get into the Navy and I found these letters after a relative of his died and--and I know he was hurt, you know. But he, he was sort of a frail person.  I don't think the Navy really recognized he could ever have become one of the 'Golden 13.'  But it, it hurts you when you go through life as a kid and telling people what you're going to be and then have somebody--cut you off, you know.  But I, I, I overcame that.  It didn't bother me.  I, I got--when I went overseas with Davis, I'll tell you this, and as I told Davis the day I left him--I said, "I've learned more about becoming a man in seven years under your command than I could under seventy-seven years out here in the street."  And that was--I meant that.  I think about it, it kind of gets me here.  I, I, I talk to Davis every now and then, I get him--he's not well now. And I went to Washington very recently when he became--received his fourth star.  I got a letter from the White House inviting me to attend his affair and I went and had a good relationship with--I remember when we left the stage, we had--I can show you the list of the people that we had, you know.  They had about 148 people in the auditorium and I was proud to be one of the people that he had on the special list of invitees, so it--I feel a little--you know--emotional right now.
Story_ID: 14288
Speaker 1: When I saw the movie ['The Tuskegee Airmen', 1995] over here at this little theater over on the North Side [of Chicago, Illinois].  That wasn't the first place that I saw it.  It was in Atlanta [Georgia] at the premiere. I tell you--my eyes just ran all the time.
Speaker 2: Was it the acknowledgement of it?  Was it the way you thought they did a good job following the story?  Was it that Tuskegee Airmen were getting acknowledged?  What was it?
Speaker 1: Were they what?
Speaker 2: What, what was it that touched you so much--was it the memories of it?  Was it that you were getting--.
Speaker 1: It was just like any good story.  If you listen to it and if you were part of it, sure, it will touch you.  And the thing about it, no one person was eulogized in that story.  In fact, you take [Laurence] Fishburne--he carried the name of Hannibal Lee [in the motion picture, 'The Tuskegee Airmen', 1995].  Hannibal was the son of--you might have known Mrs. Cox.  It was Hannibal Cox from Chicago.  Have you ever heard that name?  The Cox has a tavern up there, his dad had a tavern up there.  'Hannibal Lee'  Lee--Lee Archer--Lee Archer was a young man, he was a tremendous pilot.  He got credit for shooting down 4-1/2 enemy airplanes.  He wasn't an ace.  You can't become an ace until you get five.  But he shot down 4-1/2.  The question is--how do you get a half?  Well, he shared a kill with somebody else--got the other half.  Maybe some guy got 2-1/2.  Maybe it would have been the half that belonged to Lee Archer, you know.  But I remember I left--I was at the--that high-class hotel out there in Hollywood--Hollywood Hilton, whatever it is.  I had gone up to Seattle, Washington to see a friend of mine, who nobody really knows and didn't know about him until I started talking about him.  He's the only black American ace [unofficial] in the country, but he didn't take part in this war [World War Two].  He took part in the French--I mean in the Spanish Revolution [sic, Spanish Civil War].  He was from my hometown.  His name is Jimmy Peck [James Lincoln Holt Peck].  When I came back--I walked into the VIP Room down there.  I was getting ready to go up on stage with some people and this one guy who likes to personalize and aggrandize himself by pointing out what he knows and who he knows, you know and he says, "Hey, Bill, I think we're going to be able to get an ace established in the next week or so."  I said, "How's that?"  "I think they're going to make Lee Archer an ace."  I thought, "What are you talking about?  You don't make aces by affirmative action, man.  This cat gotta go back to war to do that, you know."  And--and I spoke to Lee about it.  I said, "What do you feel about somebody calling you an ace when you're not an ace?"  He says, "I know that."  He says, "It's very embarrassing.  It's embarrassing to my wife and that's why she's not here."  Now Lee is a millionaire.  How did he become a millionaire?  As far as I know, I see him every now and then,  I see him about every year at all our conventions.  He came back and--remember how your mother used to make dresses for the family?  She'd take that tissue paper and lay it on the table and cut the material around--what is that called Benedick or Butterick patterns or something like?  He got--he bought that pattern from the General Mills Corporation.  Then he leveraged a whole lot of other things--he and a couple of other lawyers got together and they leveraged a lot of--today he's sitting up there as a millionaire.
Story_ID: 14289
Speaker 1: You were over in--on--on--abroad, you were there for about two years?
Speaker 2: A little better than two years, yes.
Speaker 1: How do you think that whole experience changed you?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said--it, it made me a better person in a sense that I took responsibility far more seriously than I did before I went in there, otherwise I wouldn't have been trying to get out of a situation that was--needed me [before shipping overseas he had tried to get out of his position as weapons officer in order to transfer to officer flight training], but now I take it a little differently.  I learned more as I said--I learned to respect the authority of (unclear)--one of the commanding officers we had was George Spencer Roberts.  He was the one that was commanding officer when we were shooting down these planes.  [Benjamin O.] Davis [Jr.] was out in the middle of the ocean--bringing over a new outfit.  So we called him  [George S.] 'Spanky' [Roberts] from West Virginia State University and we--Spanky was only about twenty-four or twenty-five years old--when he took over command at the outfit.  Spanky was--he was a guy that you just had to respect.  He's dead now too.  Most of our guys have died, you know--it's at that age now, but--but Spanky, I can recall was on the board at Chanute Air Force Base down there in Rantoul, Illinois and they asked me during Black History Month one time, "We're going to have a new building put up down here.  We want to know who would you like to have the building--" They're asking me who to name the building--who, to name it for somebody.  Spanky came back from overseas and he became a commanding--some service down there.  I don't know what it was, but they made him commanding officer--some one of the elements they had down there.  His children were born there.  He had about four or five kids--they were born there.  He was known in the community, so I recommended that they name the building, George Spencer Roberts--which they did.  They called here one day--not here, but I was living in Chatham [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois] at the time.  They called here and asked if my wife and I were to come down to take a look at this new building that they-- and it was a $15 million building named for Spanky and I had the pleasure of naming it.  That made me feel real good.
Speaker 1: Now, you, when you came back--you were saying that "we didn't even get, you know, a parade for us"--so what were, you know, people--but in the black community you were known. Right?  It was a big thing--
Speaker 2: Oh, the black community was proud of us.  They're still proud of us.  As soon as somebody says--like this doctor I was telling you about.  Here it is fifty-five, sixty years later and she says, "You were a Tuskegee Airman!  Wow!"
Story_ID: 14290
Speaker 1: Where did you go after, after, you know, coming back [after WWII]?  Did you go to--where did you go?
Speaker 2: I came back here to Chicago.  I married before I went overseas.  I married on the Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] campus, that was another black school.  I got married down there and I had been going with my wife she was--as I told you she worked at the Urban League.  When you see this story--that tape, you'll see what it was all about.  I tell on that tape that she had her fingers on the pulse of all the employment opportunities.  We had to eat. So I, let me marry a girl who's giving herself food and a place to work--all that--and we've been married for fifty-seven years.  She's great.  She's got--she taught school here and she's got a couple of master's.  Well, she had one master's but she did all the work on the second master at the University of Chicago, but didn't get it because I came home just as she was writing her paper, but when she got her promotion in the school system, they gave her credit for thirty-six hours beyond a master's because she got her master's at Teacher's College.  She graduated from Evansville College [later University of Evansville, Evansville, Indiana], which was, she was one of two black girls that went to that college when it was still segregated, you know.
Story_ID: 14291
Speaker 1: When did you get here to Chicago [Illinois]?  That just went over my head.  I know your father [Rufus William Thompson] had a bakery over in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], but how did you get here?  You said you came back here, but I don't know how--
Speaker 2: I had to smile when you asked that question because right away--this is the way my old crazy mind goes--I got a crazy answer for you.  I came on one of those 40 mules that the government gave us.  You know, when we were supposed to be got our reparations.  They were going to give us a mule and 40 acres of land.  I came on my mule.  Excuse me for being--doing--asking--wasting your time like that, but go ahead.
Speaker 1: But no, how did you--that's what I'm wondering, how--
Speaker 2: Well, my wife was here in Chicago working at the Urban League.  I certainly wasn't going back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  In the meantime while I was in the service, my father died and my sister, he lived with her when he died so that put her in position, get her pad together and write the will for my dad and--hey, girl, what about me?  And I said--hell, I ain't got no reason to go back to Pittsburgh.  My brother is dead; my father is dead; my mother died when I was a baby.  I haven't got any relatives, but this one sister who--with her educated self wrote my father's will.  And she never even worked in his business--so I, I wasn't particular about going back, but I had--I didn't have many relatives left over there.  It was--it was--so I came back to Chicago and still hung out with my wife to--I worked in a whole lot of industries.  I worked at the---first job I got was working for Johnny Johnson. [John H. Johnson of Johnson Publishing Company]  I did the first promotional work for 'Ebony' magazine--the very first magazine he wrote as 'Ebony' [in 1945] because he already had the 'Negro Digest' and we were all familiar with, but he used to be down here on State Street [Chicago, Illinois].  Howard Gould here, I believe is the one, sent me down to work and I traveled all over the country promoting that magazine.  And it's a funny thing years later,  Aerospace Museum [ National Air and Space Museum] where I was, served as a consultant for them in giving them all the photographs and all the documents that go to make up that exhibit that they had there.  If you go there today you'll still find it--some of it because it's been expanded to a lot--but--. The curators--I got their books--autographed their books, those are the guys that wrote the things--they came here and they wanted to get some photographs or something from John Johnson's files from his morgue or whatever they call it.  And they knew that I had been--they had heard me say that I had been Johnny Johnson's--public--not public relations, but I was in charge of something with reference to Johnny Johnson and came back and I'll never forget this because--you tell people--a lot of people don't believe half the things you say to them because you're always joking and saying it in such--because I know it sounds ridiculous some of the things that I can say that I can tell you about, so I like to put them in the form of a joke and go at that.  Now you can bother and forget it, you know, but the way the fat lady sings in Peoria--but it just so happens that these guys came back and we went down to 'Ebony'--I took them down to 'Ebony'.  I, I knew John, I felt strong enough to know that Johnny Johnson would remember me, I thought, I've got a lot of stuff that he's given me, you know. So he--these guys get down there and we go into the office of the public relations man and his name was Lincoln--Lincoln--excuse me--trying to think of what Lincoln's name was. [Lincoln T. Hudson] You might have known him--but he's dead now.  But he was--he had his private office down there and we went to his office and one of the guys--two white guys that were with me said, "Colonel Thompson here says that he did the first promotional work for Johnny Johnson."  I said, "Well, this is going to be good."  And this guy was sitting there with his feet up on the desk in this high-faluting office and everything.  I guess he said--his eyes rolled towards me as if to say (unclear) So, pretty soon he had an opportunity to "white me out" he said.  "Oh, listen, I'll tell you what.  Let's go down here and see Johnny--he's in this cafeteria down here," and just about before we could get to the cafeteria, Johnny Johnson come running out, he'd been in eating and mouth all greasy and everything.  "Oh, Mr. Johnson," says this guy Lincoln.  "This man here--these guys are from Washington [D.C.].  These fellows are from Washington.  This fellow here, Thompson, said he did the first promotional worker on your--"  "Oh, Bill, how you doing?  Yeah, he did!"  I said, "Okay, thank you, buddy."  People are ready to pull the cover off of you, you know.  And he asked where he was working--he had an office there on State Street in a little storefront and the people who did the work for him were Ben Burns, if I remember it correctly. Do you remember the name? Ben Burns. They did a--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He died.
Speaker 2: He died recently--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He just died recently.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --so I know all these people because I was part of it.
Speaker 1: Do you know a woman named Doris Saunders?
Speaker 2: Huh, yes.
Speaker 1: Someone just introduced me to her.  I'm going to meet her on Friday night.
Speaker 2: Now did she tell you she had a son who is a Lieutenant--I mean a husband who is a Lieutenant Colonel or something?
Speaker 1: No, she didn't.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm not certain if that's the same Saunders, but--
Speaker 1: She was the librarian--
Speaker 2: Oh, the librarian for 'Ebony' magazine--yes.
Speaker 1: Right, the book department or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, I remember the name.  I don't know if she would remember me because I went to--when I was in Washington [D.C.] you see what was happening--this was immediately after the war that I went to work on State Street [Chicago, Illinois] for Johnny [John H.] Johnson and I went to Baltimore [Maryland]--and Baltimore and Washington are considered the twin cities, you know--but the guy who had the distribution for Baltimore and Washington, D.C. was still in the service and his wife was trying to run the business and she got a car that wasn't working half the time, so I had a lot of friends, the guys away from Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], they were the Murphy family that operated the 'Afro-American' in Baltimore, so I go by the 'Afro-American' and a couple of my friends are there and he says, "Hey, Bill, why don't you do me a favor?  Why don't you do it this way--get Johnny Johnson to give us the strict distribution for the 'Ebony' magazine and you can share in it if you want to."  I said, "Sure, it sounds good to me. I mean, then I wouldn't, then Johnny Johnson wouldn't have to send anybody to Washington.  He'd have me right here on State Street and I can account for him, for the lack of service.  We were having troubles here in Chicago with the Ellis Brothers.  Have you ever heard of them?  They had the distribution rights for every black publication that came into Chicago.  They had 'The [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] Courier', they had the 'Norfolk [Virginia] Journal Guide', they had the 'Afro-American', they had the 'Amsterdam News'.  They had the first magazine that came out which I knew the guy--as I said I hung around--I lived practically, grew up with the office of the Chicago--'The Pittsburgh Courier' and 'Sepia'--Charlie Forsythe was the guy that put that out and I knew about all these publications, see so I had an opportunity to expound on it, but it so happened that--I'm forgetting what I'm going to say, see, I talk so much.
Speaker 1: You were talking about the publications and how you were working with 'Afro-American'--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And I came back and I told Johnny Johnson, I said, "Hey, listen, I got an idea.  Give me the distribution right and I'll get it in Kansas City [Missouri], I can get it in Pittsburgh, I can get it in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], then you've got me--we'll have the distribution all locked up right here in Pittsburgh--in, in Chicago," because this guy Ellis--that's what I was getting ready  to tell you.  The Ellis Brothers who had all the publications that came in here, they were making money off of--but they weren't servicing 'Ebony' magazine at all.  You go into a store or black business was selling magazines and publications and so forth--what they had was a string across the front window and the magazines just hanging there, or you go into the el [elevated] stations and--"I'm sorry we don't have any more.  Nobody's got it.  The guy was supposed to come here yesterday but he didn't show up."  That was the Ellises because the Ellises had State--had, had the office here on the corner of State and 57th Street and everybody--they had it in a big storefront and people were sitting there typing and looking out the window and every time something go by--they stopped you and they weren't going out.  They were so busy just watching traffic go by and not servicing and so I told Johnny.  So he ended up giving all the business to the Levy Brothers. You remember them? They're well-known, aren't they? So I, I, I remember I had to try to get the ABC for Johnny Johnson, you know, the crediting bureau for figures on the circulation. And he got 'em, and next thing you know, Levy Brothers were distributing all of the, all the publications that Johnny Johnson had.
Story_ID: 14292
Speaker 1: Harolton (ph.) [Thompson], my son went to a private school.  It wasn't, it wasn't a public school.  It was a school put together by a few educators--women--Mrs. Anderson and Mrs. Johnson and a few other ladies.  Then when my--it came time to send my son to high school, the high schools weren't particularly hot in our community--I was living in Chatham [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois]--but I was sending my--my son was going to Evanston Township [High School].  My older boy graduated from Evanston Township because a lot of my wife's family lived in Evanston [Illinois] and we very easily changed the address and sent him up there.  My youngest son went to Mendel [Catholic High School,  Chicago, Illinois].  I don't care what you say--we were lucky to--the luckiest parents in the world because there was a gentleman here in Chicago who used to run a tavern here on 70--79th Street--Wilson is his name--and he was a--I guess he was a millionaire in a way, I always thought he was a millionaire, but he had a summer home up in Brainerd, Minnesota--up there on Eagle Lake--and he had a summer home and he had all kinds of boats and he had a son who was close to my son that went to Mendel.  Every summer all those kids that were in Mendel--he'd sweep them all and send them all up there to Brainerd, Minnesota.  My son learned how to ski up there.  They water skied--they had everything going for them--and so Mr. Wilson took our kids off the streets.  I mean--Plus the fact they developed a relationship that today, my son is the godparent of practically all--that my youngest son is the godparent of practically all their children--there are five or six kids involved--and Jimmy Wilson's father died and left him a tremendous fortune, but he's lost it all.  But he works for a ticket company.  Then there's the guy who worked for Lucent Corporation.  That's the guy you oughta talk to.  Friends of my son, they're all--this guy is a six-figure individual.  I don't think he's ever gotten any publication.  He doesn't need it.  He has 180 engineers working under him.  When they have a meeting, they just take their meeting and take all the engineers with them, you know,  from all over the country.  Lucent Corporation, I've used it.  They handle all the communication equipment the big corporations use and telephone companies use.
Story_ID: 14293
Speaker 1: You must have known for a while during your life that you were on the upper end of the black community, right?
Speaker 2: I never said that I was on the upper end of the black community, but I knew in my hometown [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] I was-- I belonged to a select group of people.  I had two uncles that were pharmacists.  I had an uncle who--a doctor.  I had an aunt who was a nurse--what do you call--the one who wore the little black bag and a white collar--was a visiting nurse and became head of the--I had another uncle who was referred to as the "black mayor of Pittsburgh."  His name was Harry Washington.  He lived through the administration of several mayors of Pittsburgh.  I had an uncle who worked for Hallef (ph?) --is it Halibut Company? Yeah, Hala, Halabut company who--that's a big corporation and then I spent some time--I met them, I met one of the decedents of the Hallep (ph.) people-- they were offering my son a job--. Down at Hilton Head  [South Carolina], my wife and I spend time down there, because this last time we went down to Hilton Head my sister invited all my nieces and nephews that I didn't know still existed.  They were the children of my cousins and my nieces and nephews and these are the children.  And they're all doing so well.  They--one of them is an archivist for a couple of corporations.  I forget some--as I told you, my niece is now a lawyer for S&P [Standard & Poor's] for Wall Street [financial district in New York].  She's a graduate attorney and from University of Pennsylvania and Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey].  I have a son--a nephew who's married to--I want to show you a picture of him--married to a girl from Sri Lanka, India.  Her dad is a big-time surgeon out East.  His two sisters teach medical--yes, sure, that answers your question.
Speaker 1: I have a question for you.  Was there ever a perception because you knew that you were in a select group?  Was the feeling--was there ever a perception that we have to be representative of our race or we have to bring our race along or we take care of it.  Was there any mind-set that went along with knowing that you were part of a select group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was a kid, all I knew is I had to protect my butt because of these other kids and everything.  You know, smart ass, who do they think they are?  When they'd corner you at a baseball game and we're supposed to meet their team.  Sure, I knew that there was a difference.  Unfortunately, the kids I hung out with their dads were all doctors or--the Franklin boys--but it's a funny thing--my cousin Jimmy went to Gordon School in Gordontown, Pennsylvania.  Whenever they had a birthday party for their children, they had a three-piece band come to the house and they had everything going.  Always had maids in the house--to take care of the house.  We had all that sort of stuff, sure, but we never thought we were better than anybody else, but we had to walk like walking through a mine field if you didn't want to get your head blown off.
Story_ID: 14294
Speaker 1: That [the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum exhibit on the Tuskegee Airmen]  made quite a difference because that exhibit was being displayed to over a million people a day sometimes.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When did that exhibit happen?
Speaker 1: Where was it?
Speaker 2: No, when, when.
Speaker 1: Oh, I would say maybe in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay so that was the start of the resurgence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: Now how did they know to contact you?
Speaker 1: Well, actually I think it was done by the fact that there was an interest in--on the part of--oh, I know, I got it now, I remember.  I was trying to think. Senator [Barry] Goldwater and the Detroit representative,  forgot his name, I could think of it quite often--when they were at the Museum of Science--at the Aerospace Museum--suggested that they should do something about having blacks represented--the Tuskegee Airmen represented.  Then this announcement reached into Chicago by way of a friend of mine, who is Harold Hurd, who is among the, those we consider early pioneers with [Cornelius] Coffey and Willa Brown and all that group.  They knew I had this inventory of, of publications and newspapers, photographs. In fact, my hobby was taking pictures even when I wasn't working overseas.  My wife--I've got a camera, I've got a lot of memorabilia up there.  My wife sent me a movie camera because part of my job included--see, on all my airplanes.  I say my airplanes because that was my job--to see that those airplanes were kept combat ready. I mean without the, without my equipment on it--all you have is an oversized Piper Cub--too expensive to operate even.  So I had to take care of the bombing equipment, the gun equipment and the sight equipment and movie equipment that's on this aircraft. 'Cause my--I have, I had a crew of about 50 guys working for me.  And--my wife sent me this camera--it's right up there; it's magazine load--and I could take film from the cam-, from the airplanes that we use, a little extra film, load my camera with it and I'd take movies all up there.  I had movies and everything overseas.  I gave them all to the museum and I got stuff at the museum--we've got a museum in Detroit  [Tuskegee Airmen National Museum] and I'm on the board of governors of the one in Detroit.  Are you familiar with it?  Oh, you are.  Did Jack tell you about it?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I mean the Tuskegee museum.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's the Tuskegee museum in Detroit.
Speaker 2: I read about it.
Speaker 1: I can recall the very first displays or memorabilia they got to go to that museum to launch it--they got it from me.  Excuse me for saying it that way.
Speaker 2: But it sounds like you did a lot of the documenting and you know, all these--
Speaker 1: But it was done without portfolio, let's put it that way.  I wasn't assigned to do that.  It's just that I did it.
Story_ID: 14295
Speaker 1: So in many ways you're very much a historian yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say so, yeah.  There are people coming behind me that every time they see me, "Bill, I'm going to pick your mind, your brains because and this person is going around the city talking about--he's an aviation historian," but I can--yes, sure.  I guess I might be considered an historian.
Speaker 1: So how--so you got contacted and how did you feel about the whole thing with the acknowledgement that--you know, here it was.  This is a major institution, the [National] Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm proud of that.  Sure, because something like--oh, a quarter of a million people view this museum every day and I've had oh, any number of beautiful situations where parents of children that were related to me by way of marriage and so forth would send me a letter and say, "So-and-so went with her class to Washington and was so proud, we saw your picture in Washington."  Yes, I was very happy and proud of that contact and these people are constantly getting--a woman about two weeks ago just came back with a group of people from the museum over here.  They were doing some work at the museum and just went to Washington and came back. And, "Saw your picture."  Okay, all right.  And "We're so proud."  This woman is upstairs and her son is an engineer and she sees to it that I get a lot of the engineering magazines from the engineering schools.  I had a call about--less than a month ago--a young lady called me and I don't know how, well I do know--I found out how she got--she got my name through a photojournalist from The Chicago Tribune.  You might know him.  He's been here, did a lot of photographing.
Speaker 1: Is it Tom (unclear)
Speaker 2: Brown.  And I didn't know where the guy--because I've got to be very careful when people call me and say, "I would like for you to mentor my son."  Being an old military person, you get to thinking, "Now wait a minute, wait a minute. Why I want to mentor her son for?  I ain't got nothing to do with her son." But me--you know, one of those kind of things.  I'm just making jokes, but you think about all these things, you know. And they invited my wife and out to dinner and they took us over, invited us--came by and picked me up and my wife and took us over here at Harper Court that used to be--what do you call that little restaurant over here with all the paraphernalia from the--anyhow it's called--
Speaker 1: I know what it is.  I've been there but I.
Speaker 2: I can't think of the name of it but to me it's changed.  Instead of being an ethnic restaurant for blacks of the South, all I saw over there was nothing but--
Speaker 1: You're talking about--I know--
Speaker 2: Kitchen--
Speaker 1: Dixie Kitchen.
Speaker 2: Dixie Kitchen. Well, it ain't Dixie Kitchen to me any more--it's 'Saigon Kitchen,' because every waiter coming up--most of them don't speak English--Dixie Kitchen, yes, we went there for dinner.  But his son is going to give a speech on B. [Benjamin] O. Davis [Jr.] so I supplied him with a lot of photographs and pictures and documents and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 14296
Speaker 1: What do you want the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen--I mean, you know, everyone is getting older right now--what do you want that legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I would really like to see the Tuskegee Airmen remain in history, but I don't think we need to expand this history at all because the more we expand it, the more polluted it gets.  And--when I make a differentiation between the groups of guys--'cause we're getting a lot of people in [joining The Tuskegee Airmen, Inc., a group that promotes the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen and works with youth; membership includes both veterans and civilian volunteers] , I don't know who they are, they come from diverse experiences and I can't,  I can't buy them all because they haven't got the slightest idea what we--here we are sending young people--sending people out to churches and schools and corporations to talk about the experiences of the Tuskegee Airmen and half the people coming in can't even spell 'Dow Jones'--you know what I mean.  And they should be embarrassed by it because I'm embarrassed by it.  To stand up in front of a group of people, 1,500 people at a church one day and this young fellow says to me, "Colonel, I'm I'm a little embarrassed, but I just don't know.  I went out with somebody who was made a new member and when he got up to speak to this corporate group, he, the first thing he said was, 'The only reason I'm here is because of these guys here.'"  Less than a month ago we were at this new police station over here on 111th Street.  This guy Jackson, who is in the housing project, we're getting a lot of people like that in the organization, and--oh--I understand he's not in that same spot any more, but here's a young fellow from the police department going up pretty fast in rank and so forth and one of the guys got up to speak to an audience of about 200 or 300 people sitting out there in that police station and I was shocked because he got up and he says, "Well, you know how we've got to stick together."  He says, "I want you to come along with me.  Sing it together--Going to lay down my sword and shield, down by--"  That's the kind of crap I used to do when I was in the Southern school.  I never had that experience before.  I come out from dinner and had to go into the chapel and had to sing all these black Negro spirituals.  We're not into black Negro spirituals--it's my opinion.  Blame my environment, as I said, where I lived at one time, you know.  I was the only Rufus.  I didn't know about all this crap.
Story_ID: 14297
Speaker 1: What would be the new thing for youth today if it were the military or aviation, what do you think would be best?
Speaker 2: I would like to see--we've got 150 guys in this chapter [of The Tuskegee Airmen, Inc., a group that promotes the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen and works with youth; membership includes both veterans and civilian volunteers] right here in Chicago [Illinois], but, of course, they're not genuine Tuskegee Airmen in my opinion.  They are members of the organization--I can't deny that--because they came in the right way.  As long as the Constitution says, "Raise your right hand and you swear to support the Con-, the Constitution--" and so on.  Okay, there I am, all right.  But what I would like to see--what I really would like to see--I would like to see each of these guys take on the responsibility of being a real member and contributing something to those kids that are coming along behind us.  In other words, find one kid and mentor him all the way.  That's a wonderful expression--an experience.  I've had that experience and I'm reaching for another one as I said--this lady called the other day.  When I go down to Meigs Field on those Saturdays that we're flying those kids for the Young Eagles organization, I spend my time talking to the parents and telling them how to keep their kids out of trouble; how to get into the military academies; how to take that catalogue and find out what are the prerequisites for this--to qualify for your job that go in this direction or in that direction.  And then check and see if your schools are providing the necessary vehicle for them to get there.  That's what I'm interested in.  I'd like to see every member--I have a young man, his name is Captain Wilson.  Now when I first met him he was a student at Chicago State [University] over here.  I was on the board at Chanute Field downstate [Rantoul, Illinois].  I took him down there and he got all interested in all the memorabilia and everything they got out there and I shared it all with him and in doing so he got interested.  Next thing you know, he was on his way to Kentucky, Fort--I forget the name of the training base--to become a helicopter pilot.  Now he is married, he's got two kids.  He's been promoted all the way up to a captain now--and he, he's in charge of the biggest helicopters this nation has in its inventory--that's the Chinook.  That's the two big blades on it--but we call them--used to call them bananas.  And I'm proud of him.  I look upon him like he's one--there's nothing in the world I wouldn't do for him.  I even during his training, got on the phone and called an old-- flight instructor from, living down there because he used to be the instructor on that base.  "Go over there, put your arms around this kid.  Help this kid get through."  He got through and I've got pictures of him in his helicopter.  He's come up here on occasion.  He even brought his co-chief with him--a little white fellow.  I forget what he called that--. What's that guy's name?  But I gave him another name.  I have a tendency to give people nicknames and I gave this kid a name. I forgot what his (unclear) He was a nice guy.  We had a lot of fun with him.
Story_ID: 14298
Speaker 1: You had talked about black youth and mentoring but--what are your hopes--this is a more general question for the black community in general.  You know, we've just entered a new century and--
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll tell you what my hope is.  I participated in about four or five Bud Billiken parades and I'm on a float for the Tuskegee Airmen.  I had never seen so many potential voters all lined up on both sides of the street and the only thing I could do was holler--"Go vote."  I mean it's-- everybody was hollering all kinds of things--and I'm up there and--"Why don't you all go down there and vote."  Man, we had enough people on both sides of the street to take a hold of the whole state of Illinois.  Yes, that's what I like to see.  I had a lot of respect for [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington--he was great, you know--even though he never called us by name.  We called ourselves "The Doe-Doe Club.  But he called us--"The Doo-Doo Boys"--we were doo-doos. (laughing)
Speaker 1: Doo-Doos (laughing)
Story_ID: 14299
Speaker 1: What do you think the benefit of military, the military or being involved in the military and especially the military and its relationship to the American American community?
Speaker 2: I've always said that every young person should be assigned to some duty either in the military or what we used to have when I came along, the old CCC group.  Are you familiar with that?  Civilian Conservation Corps.  That's when the young men were taken off the streets and they were put into all these park areas and they planted trees and they fixed new roofs, under the NYA Program--National Youth Administration and things of this-- I, I think that everybody ought to have--every young person ought to make a (unclear) like they have in Switzerland.  You're--you become a part of the government.  Every man and every child shares in, in some duty with reference to his country.  I, I think they should--then in this way you will be able to--we won't--look what happened after World War II even when Eisenhower was command.  A lot of our guys didn't come home.  They joined with the enemy and became part of that country, you know.  When we were kids we used to have to say the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag every day in the classroom or sing, "The Star Spang-[led Banner]."  I think all kids ought to be exposed to that.  This is a great country but hell, you will never share in it if you don't, you know--history does repeat itself, but you never learn anything from history except what you learn from history.
Story_ID: 14300
Speaker 1: I had asked you about the Tuskegee Airmen--the legacy for that organization.  I want to know what you want your legacy to be.
Speaker 2: Mine personally?  I never gave that any thought.  In terms of what am I leaving behind?  I don't know, maybe some of the stuff that I've left in these museums and some of these books around here.  You'll find that there's a contribution in practically every book that's ever been written on Tuskegee airmen.  I've got some mention in there, even though--there's a picture of 'Chief' [Alfred] Anderson, the guy that took of Eleanor Roosevelt for her airplane ride--from a black airport.  But they called him--Bill Thompson.  There's my legacy.  As a matter of fact--people don't get their history right.  History is--I always say this--that's like the definition of a committee.  The Lord said to the group, "I want you to design a horse."  And the committee got together--they got to arguing and fussing--they ended up with a camel.  The horse started looking like a camel.  But--I don't know, I've enjoyed life and I know I'm at the--not too far from saying good-bye to the world and I have had a good life.  I've got two healthy boys and a beautiful wife.  I'm somewhat comfortable.  I'm not rich; I'm not poor.  I've had the best things in life.  I've owned airplanes.  I've driven my own Cadillac cars and I've had all of it.  I have it all and I, and I always say more or less to impress people that--there's nothing in this world that I haven't done at least twice.  You name it, I've done it twice.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to convince old Doc Wow-Wow that.
