Story_ID: 670337
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matth- is, I'm sorry, Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Sure, Penfield Wallace Tate III [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III].  Penfield is P-E-N-F-I-E-L-D, Wallace is W-A-L-L-A-C-E, and Tate is T-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: All right and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 19th, 1956, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right and politician--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd, I'd say politician.  I had, I'm not in elected office right now, but I've held several offices before, so, but I'm active in politics, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to establish that, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September 25th, 2016 [sic. September 26, 2016].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Denver, Colorado, in my home.
Story_ID: 670338
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask, 'cause they only require a short answer, and the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, barbecue ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, purple.
Speaker 1: All right a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean, but usually Grand Cayman [Cayman Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: I do, it's a phrase I've used before.  It's: the world is run by those who show up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right I like that.
Story_ID: 670339
Speaker 1: All right so I'm gonna ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Penfield W. Tate II] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Ellen Mildred Tate [Ellen Cooper Tate].  E-L-L-E-N, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, T-A-T-E.  Her maiden name was Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 11th, 1932, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  What were their occupations, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My mother was the youngest of four.  She had three older brothers [Harold Cooper, Elliot Cooper and Charles Cooper].  Her father [Harold Cooper] was an immigrant from Nassau [Bahamas] who actually in my lifetime my grandfather was not a U.S. citizen.  Back in, back in those days I think he was called a permanent resident alien, but he immigrated from the U.S.--from the Bahamas to go to college.  My grandmother [Pauline Cooper] is from a small town, Brunswick, Georgia, and so they met when my grandfather was in seminary school, moved to Philadelphia.  My grandfather then was a barber.  He was, his--an independent sole proprietor.  He had his own barbershop for many, many years in the Germantown section of Philadelphia.  And the family moved around Philadelphia.  We lived in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then the Germantown section where we ended up, up by Broad [Street] and Olney [Avenue].  My grandmother worked as sort of a dietician.  She worked in, in different homes and facilities in that capacity.
Speaker 1: Did she ever work in the schools, in the--?
Speaker 2: No, she never, I don't think she ever worked in the school systems.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so did your mother grow up there in Germantown?
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother grew up in, in North Philadelphia in the Germantown area.  She graduated from Gratz High School in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Simon Gratz right?
Speaker 2: Simon Gratz High School, okay you know it then, and so did her brothers.  She and all three of her brothers and she graduated from Simon Gratz High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now what did she, what were her aspirations when she graduated?
Speaker 2: You know I, I, I think at one point she aspired to go to college and maybe work in an office environment.  That didn't quite happen for her.  She took some classes at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but didn't go on and continue her studies because short, not too long after graduating from high school and working, she did some job.  She worked in Philadelphia and in the summer she and my aunts and her friends would, would go to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and work in Atlantic City on the boardwalk.  They used to talk about how they had summer jobs pushing strollers and taking care of the babies of the affluent white families who could vacation on the boardwalk.  And, and my grandmother had a couple of sisters who lived in Atlantic City, so they could stay with their aunts and work and vacation on the boardwalk and then go back to Philadelphia for the wintertime.
Story_ID: 670340
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side and then we'll try to get them together.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is identical to mine.  He's Penfield Wallace Tate II [Penfield W. Tate II].  I'm named after my father and my grandfather [Penfield W. Tate].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was June 11th, 1931, in New Philadelphia, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's interesting New Philadelphia, Ohio and so what can you tell us about your dad's side of the family.  The first thing we already know is your grandfather's name is the same.
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 1: And was he born in New Philadelphia too?
Speaker 2: No my grandfather was not.  My grandfather was born in Lookout Mountain, Tennessee, and my, my dad's mother was named Vera, V-E-R-A Jane, J-A-N-E, Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N [Vera Houston Tate], and she was from Georgia also.  My, my grandfather worked his entire life in a steel mill in Ohio, and he, he and my grandmother immigrated from the South and like a number of blacks did back in those days and went to the, to the North and the Midwest for jobs.  And my grandfather worked at a steel mill.  In fact, he used to tell the story that when he first started working at the steel mill he was too young, so he lied about his age so he could start earlier and work and help support the, the family and then when he reached mandatory retirement age at the steel mill he had to go and confess that he lied about his age to get hired, so he gave them the correct birth date, so they let him work a few more years.  So, he spent all of his life working in a steel mill.  My grandmother worked in a variety of hospitals and nursing homes.  She wasn't a registered nurse or a trained nurse, but she provided sort of in home care and some other care for people.
Speaker 1: Okay now New Philadelphia is near Cleveland [Ohio].  I looked it up on a map, right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right below Cleveland, south yeah.
Speaker 2: It's about sixty, sixty-five miles south and east of Cleveland.  It's very close to the West Virginia border.
Speaker 1: Okay it's in that, that area that northeast--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Ohio area where Youngstown [Ohio], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's due south--you got Youngstown and then Canton [Ohio] and then New Philadelphia they're all, sort of all in a row down, and they're all just to the east of Cleveland.
Speaker 1: These places represent some kind of football capital of America, or one of the football capitals because a lot of Canton McKinley Bulldogs [McKinley High School, Canton, Ohio] and Massillon Tigers [Massillon Washington High School, Massillon, Ohio], Youngstown teams, they're all--now this is where, you know, pro football actually begins up in Canton and--
Speaker 2: Right, and, and you know people talk about how football is a religion in the South.  It started as a religion in the Northeast.  Football drove the local community, and in fact my father was a high school football star.  He was a star player in his high school, which was integrated but not heavily so.  He was one of few blacks on the team.  He then went to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] on an academic scholarship and ended up becoming an All-American football player, the first All-American out of Kent State University.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Most people think of Jack Lambert who played for the Pittsburgh Steelers, but he was actually the second All-American.  My dad was the first.  He was a, a lineman.  I can't tell you offensive or defensive because back when my dad played he was a tackle and he played both ways.  So, he was a tackle, he was an All-American, was drafted to play pro football, but while he was in college, as he said he was there on an academic scholarship, he enlisted in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and so when he graduated from college he had his military commitment to fulfill.  When he was in school, they didn't let you defer that commitment to play professional football, and so he went directly into the [U.S.] military from there.
Story_ID: 670341
Speaker 1: The name Penfield Tate resonates as something that's probably important, you know.  And I don't know if you know the story of your [paternal] grandfather's name how he got it and he got it in Tennessee apparently and--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --brought it with him.  Is there a story behind the name?
Speaker 2: There, there is.  My grandfather [Penfield W. Tate] was the youngest of I think nine or ten and but more importantly he was the only one of his siblings to be delivered by a doctor.  All of his other older siblings were delivered by, had a midwife or, or someone else.  But the doctor who delivered my grandfather his last name was Penfield and so my great-grandmother and grandfather named my grandfather after the doctor who delivered him, and it's kind of interesting because later in my life when I went to law school [Antioch School of Law; University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.] I met a woman from Tennessee and her middle name was Penfield and when we sat down and started sharing names and dates and times, her great-grandfather delivered my grandfather.
Speaker 1: That's something, that's something.
Story_ID: 670342
Speaker 1: Okay so the name is passed along; and so now your, your father [Penfield W. Tate II] met your mother [Ellen Cooper Tate] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: There is.  My, my father when he graduated from college [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and went to do his ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] commitment he was stationed in Philadelphia and his roommate at the time was someone I always refer to as Uncle Jimmy, James Marshall [ph.], who was also from Philadelphia.  And so they went through basic training and they were bunkmates and they lived together, and one weekend my uncle Jimmy took my dad out on the town with him in Philadelphia and when he was doing that he introduced my dad to a bunch of the folks he grew up with and knew from growing up in Philadelphia, and one of the people he introduced my dad to was my mom and I think my, my mom's old- one of her older brothers, my uncle Charles [Charles Cooper], was also there also, so my uncle Jimmy introduced my parents to one another.
Story_ID: 670343
Speaker 1: Now your, your father went to law school--did he go to school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my dad took an interesting journey to get to law school.  You know when he, when he went into the [U.S.] military he went in as a lieutenant, second lieutenant, and got promoted a couple of times to first lieutenant and captain, but his major and his degree in undergrad [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] was political science and pre-law, so he had always aspired to be an attorney he just didn't, you know, he had the military commitment.  So, what he ended up doing was he, he started his law school career as a night school student and he attended a number of different law schools around the country because we were in the [U.S.] Army; we relocated essentially every year.  So, I remember him taking night classes, I'd wanna say at John Marshall university [The John Marshall Law School] in Chicago [Illinois].  I can't remember the school in Cleveland [Ohio], but he also took some night classes.
Speaker 1: Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University].
Speaker 2: Might have been Case Western in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: There was a Cleveland school of law [Cleveland Marshall Law School; Cleveland Marshall College of Law, Cleveland, Ohio] too there, right?
Speaker 2: Right, but he attended law school at night, and so he completed his first two years of law school in the night division of different schools based on where we were stationed.  And then at our last duty station was Fort Lewis [Joint Base Lewis-McChord] in the Tacoma, Washington area and that's when he decided to leave the military and we ended up in Boulder [Colorado] and that's where he completed his law school education.  He did his third year of law school in Boulder, and, and even that was sort of like a lot of things in my life it was just a fluke occurrence.  When we were living in Washington State, my father took a road trip down to visit some of his friends who were retired military here in the Colorado Springs [Colorado] or Denver [Colorado] area, and he came to look at DU law school [University of Denver College of Law; University of Denver Sturm College of Law, Denver Colorado] because one of them had been affiliated with DU law school.  And when he was doing that, one of his buddies said, "You know Penfield [Penfield W. Tate II], you ought to go up to Boulder. That's where the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] is and they have a law school there.  You know if you're thinking about DU, you at least ought to check out CU."  So, my father went up to the CU law school [University of Colorado Law School, Boulder, Colorado] and when he got to the building it turns out that the registrar of the law school was a woman he'd graduated from high school with and he (unclear) as I said he's from a very, very small town in Ohio and they, she was stunned to see him and, and he saw her and she told him, "Penfield you have to come to law school here." And she convened the admissions committee of the CU law school over the old fashioned speakerphone, the little squawk box that you used to have and so they all called and they admitted my dad on the spot.  And so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: --that's how we ended up in Colorado.
Speaker 1: There was a, a friend of mine in Chicago [Illinois] that we interviewed, Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] who got his Ph.D. from the University of Colorado, and he always said that the way you get a Ph.D., I mean some of the smartest people don't get them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He said but those who know the secretary will probably get it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: He used to say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And here your father comes in and sees somebody from New Philadelphia, Ohio, and how fortuitous is that, that she orchestrates this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and this was a white woman he graduated from high school with.  Yeah, now he didn't have very many people of color in his high school at all.
Speaker 1: That's, that's amazing.  That's--that really reinforces what he said (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 670344
Speaker 1: This is a journey he never probably would have thought of had he, when he was living in New Philadelphia, Ohio, that he would end up in Boulder, Colorado, as a lawyer and then become the mayor.  Now tell, tell us how this happens and, as we you know.
Speaker 2: Sure, and you're right about my dad's [Penfield W. Tate II] aspirations.  I think growing up until he went away to college he'd never been west of the Mississippi [Mississippi River], and I'm not convinced he was west of the Mississippi in college because Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] played in a league that was mostly Ohio and Pennsylvania and West Virginia based.
Speaker 1: That American conference [Mid-American Conference].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio.
Speaker 2: And so I think he got west actually when he was in the [U.S.] military.  What happened is when we moved to Boulder we moved to Colorado in 1967, and my father enrolled in CU law school [University of Colorado Law School, Boulder, Colorado] and graduated in the summer of 1968, and so after that he'd, he'd had a number of jobs as a lawyer.  He worked for Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado] as a civil rights specialist.  He worked for the old Mountain Bell telephone and telegraph company [The Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company] also.  It's now, gosh I don't know what the phone company is called here now.  I think CenturyLink [CenturyLink, Inc.], but it's been named five or six times.  But he was interested in becoming active in politics, and so a number of the folks in the community--he had already been active speaking on civil rights issues, you know this was the, the late '60s [1960s], we moved in '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969].  He, because of the experience he had gone through in college, one of the things my, my dad started and continued for a number of years was a tradition where when the, particularly the African American football players at the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder], would come to Boulder and begin their careers.  My parents used to host a barbecue for a bunch of the black students at our home because there weren't that many back families in Boulder, and he'd spend time talking to the football players and explaining to them, you know, I, "I know what you're going through 'cause I've been a college athlete and this isn't Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan] or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or New York [New York]."  Boulder, Colorado was a very different place than probably any other place you've ever lived, and people are going to treat you different and act differently towards you, so you need to know that you're always on spotlight, you're always on stage because more people will know you than you know. So, you have to sort of govern yourself accordingly.  So, he spent many years sort of shepherding these, these students through, and he eventually became known for being active in the community and a time came when he thought about running for city council [Boulder City Council] and he convened a number of folks together and they told him they thought it would be a good idea.  I remember one of the, the campaign meetings in our living room.  One of the big questions was whether to put my dad's picture on the campaign literature because he was, would have been the first black ever to run for city council in Boulder.  And ultimately my dad and the campaign manager said, "We may as well. They're gonna figure out sooner or later who I am, so let's put my face on the, on the campaign literature." And they did and, and he won.  He was the top vote getter in the election in '71 [1971] and then Boulder is a mayor, city manager form of government, so the city council sort of sit as council of equals.  They select a mayor among them, but the city managers sort of run the day to day activity of the city.  And so in 1973 after two years on the city council, my dad was elected by his colleagues as the mayor of Boulder and he served until 1976.
Story_ID: 670345
Speaker 1: Okay and he was a progressive mayor from what I understand, and he even supported gay rights just you know and, and some say it cost him the election.
Speaker 2: Oh it did.  It cost him his political campaign.
Speaker 1: I mean the next election, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was interesting because you know when you talk to people now they'll talk about the United Republic of Boulder [sic. People's Republic of Boulder], because Boulder is perceived as an extremely liberal island within the State of Colorado, but liberal is relative is what I always tell people.  When he was mayor, he and a number of city council people were approached by some folks in the city who were complaining about housing discrimination because of their sexual orientation, and they asked my dad [Penfield W. Tate II] and some of the city council members to run an ordinance that prohibited discrimination in employment and housing based on your sexual orientation, and it, it's interesting because I remember the time neither my dad nor the other city council people thought it was particularly controversial and when the council took up the ordinance it was passed, the human rights ordinance; it was approved by the city council [Boulder City Council].  Well what happened was there was this outcry from a few citizens who got a number of other folks worked up who thought it was somehow sanctioning gay marriage or gay this or gay that and, and you know as I said liberal is relative.  And in 19, you know, '76 [1976] in Colorado people just weren't having it.  No actually it was '74 [1974] I think.  So what happened is a recall movement was put forward, and there was an effort to recall my father and three other council people.  Two of the council people were the first two women ever elected to city council.  But because of how the city charter was written, they were not eligible to be recalled, and so the recall effort focused on my dad and one other city councilman, Tim Fuller, who owned a bookstore, college bookstore, and, and Tim was gay.  And so they targeted them for the recall, they recalled Tim, my father survived the recall election, but when he ran for reelection about two or three years later he lost very badly and he subsequently lost a race to, to get elected to the state legislature [Colorado General Assembly] as a representative from Boulder.  He had lost the Boulder primary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were twenty years old I guess when he lost that election--
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: --so he, he, I guess he first took office in what '71 [1971]?  Was it '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: He was elected in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he started in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: All right so you were in high school [Boulder High School, Boulder, Colorado] I guess when he--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was in junior high when he first ran for office.  By the time he was mayor, I was in high school because I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and I started high school in '71 [1971].  So, he got elected when I was in junior high school [University Hill Intermediate School; University Hill Elementary School, Boulder, Colorado], then when he started to serve in city council I moved to high school, and then when he was mayor I was in high school.  I, and I went away to college [Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado] as he was completing his term as mayor.  So, I was only in Boulder for about a year while my dad was mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay and his, his stature was, I mean he was, he was highly regard and when people in this area talk about Penfield Tate they have to remember which, which, which number to put behind it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --because of your accomplishments and your father's as well so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my dad did a lot.  You know you, when you look in, in Denver [Colorado] for instance at the downtown 16th Street Mall, Boulder had the Pearl Street Mall first, and my dad was the driving force behind that, which is a pedestrian mall in the heart of downtown where there aren't any cars, you have bikes, maybe skateboards to everybody's chagrin now, but it's a pedestrian mall where people can sort of walk and gather; and he was a driving force behind that in Boulder.
Story_ID: 670346
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to your father [Penfield W. Tate II] and your mother [Ellen Cooper Tate], and I always ask this question.  When you consider their talents, their personalities, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know I think I take after both of them.  My mother was, is by far the more disciplined of the, and, and, and my mother has an ability to concentrate and focus that I, and, and I know I got that trait from her.  She was very organized, she's very structured, which is ironic when you think about my dad and his [U.S.] military background, but my mother was really the organized structured one in the family.  You know often growing up an [U.S.] Army brat, my dad was often away on assignment or on deployment and my mother was the one who ran the household in every respect.  And when we'd move from one location to the other she sort of ran the operation to get us, all us kids packed up and you know put together and moved from one place to the other; so I got that from my, my mom I think.  The, that sort of the commitment to serve I got clearly from my dad.  I watched him, and I watched him when he ran for office.  I watched him when he survived the recall.  I watched him when he dealt with difficult issues when he was in office.  You know my mom and dad did their level best to hide a lot of the hate mail that came to our house and the threats and everything, but I saw that and I saw how my dad handled it and dealt with it and--
Speaker 1: So did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we, we'd have conversations about that.
Story_ID: 670347
Speaker 1: Yeah, what is it--what you just mentioned is, this the kind of thing that happened to Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] when he was elected president.  I guess it was hate mail, racist mail, you know responding to him being the mayor, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, it, it, it happens and you know and, and, and I'm glad I got to see that, not, not that I'm glad it happened to me, obviously you don't want to see your parents or your father get hate mail or death threats or anything like that.  But, it, it was good to experience it to know that there are people out there who will do that and to know how to handle it and deal with it.  And it, and it helped me later in, in my, it's helped me later in my career, particularly when I was in elected office.
Speaker 1: Okay did, did any of the threats affect you when you were in school or anything?
Speaker 2: You know they, they didn't affect me directly.  It was interesting I-- my arc through school has been interesting.  I started school at Charles S. Deneen Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois which was an all black school, and when I graduated from Boulder High School [Boulder, Colorado] in 1974 I think I was, there were four African Americans in our class and I think it was five to six hundred kids in our graduating class.  So, I went from one extreme to the other in school, but you know my dad's political career it had a little bit of an effect on me in that when he was popular, I was popular.  When he was not popular, I was not popular.  And sometimes my teachers would say things about the fact you know, the mayor's son or something and it's, it's kind of interesting because I had to handle myself in a certain way because I, I knew you know sometimes when you're in high school you, you know you're a guy you, you have high jinks, you hang out with your buddies who are in the sports teams with you and you go and do stuff and I'd always have to think in the back of my mind if we get caught, nobody is gonna care about them, somebody is gonna write a story about me and call my mom [Ellen Cooper Tate] and dad [Penfield W. Tate II] and I'm gonna be in trouble, so--
Speaker 1: And being the mayor's son.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's exactly right, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Named the same name, you know right.
Speaker 2: Yep and, and that happened on occasion.  There were times when we did some things and you know the police would ask for everybody's name and we give, there'd be like twenty of us and we'd give our names and they're like, "The mayor's son?" I'm like, "Yeah." And they'd all huddle and they're like, "Okay you kids get." They'd give you a stern warning and we'd all go and sometimes guys would say, "Thanks for being here with us.  If you hadn't been here well you know they would have taken us in or something." So yeah.
Story_ID: 670348
Speaker 1: So you started school at John- I mean at Charles Deneen School [Charles S. Deneen Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think that's the father of John Deneen [ph.] (background noise) who became the county commissioner at some point I believe.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.
Speaker 1: But okay so in Chicago [Illinois].  So how long did you--so you were like five when you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started kindergarten.  I went to kindergarten and first grade in Chicago, and so yeah, so I think, I think I started in '61 [1961], so that would have made me five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was in Deneen from '61 [1961] to '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Thinking about--I vividly remember living in Chicago, and I also remember before Chicago living in Cleveland [Ohio] because we were stationed there.  I have memories before that, but you know how you watch enough home movies and you don't know if it's really your memory or if it's you remembering the home movie.  But, I do remember probably when I was two or three my sister and I our pets when we lived in, in Cleveland because we were stationed there for a while.  My sister was born in El Paso, Texas, about fourteen or fifteen months after I was.  So, we went from, family went from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to El Paso to Cleveland.  And I remember us living there because number one my middle sister was born there.  She's four years younger than me, but also my, my sister Paula [Paula Tate] and I we, we loved pets, so we had dogs.  And one dog got stuck outside in the snowstorm and we lost the dog in a, in a, in a blizzard in Ohio.  And another dog we don't know what happened to it.  My father [Penfield W. Tate II] had, was one of ten and whenever we used to go on vacation he'd have one of his younger brothers check on the house and check on the pets and my uncle Richard [Richard Tate], we called him Uncle Dickie, we used to always cry and tell my dad, "Don't let Uncle Dickie watch the pets," 'cause something always happens.  We'd go on a trip, we have fish, we come back all the fish would be dead.  Uncle Dickie would never know what happened to them.  We went on one vacation, and the dog was gone and Uncle Dickie just didn't know what happened to the dog so.  I re- those, I remember that.  So, Cleveland is probably the earliest memories I have, and I would have been about two or three during that time period.
Speaker 1: Okay, so after Chicago you moved to--
Speaker 2: After Chicago, we moved to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we lived in Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  We were on the base there.  It's around the Lawton, Oklahoma area.  I, I remember that for a couple of reasons.  It was the first time I can remember losing someone in my life to death.  Our teacher died in the middle of the school year, and I remember when the principal and a bunch of people came in and talked to us about how she had died and that you know we'd have a new teacher and if we needed to talk to anybody come see them, so that happened.  I remember fire ants because we used to kick over ant hills and get bitten up and be sore for months.  And I remember awful wind storms in Oklahoma, and, and used to always get earaches there.
Story_ID: 670349
Speaker 1: So we were talking about Oklahoma.  You said you just didn't like Oklahoma, right?
Speaker 2: You know it was not my favorite place and, and maybe it suffered by comparison to Chicago [Illinois].  You know we lived in the city, we had a great neighborhood, a vibrant neighborhood.  The town was vibrant.  There was a lot going on.  You could go downtown.  You know my sisters and I used to love to go to the, the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] and hang out there and just watch the little chickens hatch in the incubator all day long and you had Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois].  My dad [Penfield W. Tate II] was a sports fan, so we'd go to Bear [Chicago Bears] games and see the Cubs [Chicago Cubs] and stuff and the White Sox [Chicago White Sox], and in Oklahoma there was none of that.  It was just kind of in a desert.
Story_ID: 670350
Speaker 1: So then you moved to, out to the northwest what was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah from, no from Oklahoma--from Fort Sill, Oklahoma, we moved to Germany.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And we spent two years stationed in Germany and that was a wonderful experience also.  You know I, I was, when we went to Germany--you know military life is interesting because it was not unusual to not complete a school year where you started the school year, get transferred in midyear, finish the school year one place, start the next school year maybe move again.  So, your academic progress was always interrupted, but we, we moved to Germany and, and that was exciting because we, we went by ship and so we, we sailed out of New York [New York] and spent seven days on a ship and, and travelled to London [England] and then went by train to Germany. The voyage was interesting I got sick, so I was seasick for half the time as a little kid, and that wasn't fun.  But living in Germany was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: So you were about eight or nine on this--by this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think so.  Let's see if it was '63 [1963], about yeah, about eight or nine, eight or nine.  And when we first moved to Germany there wasn't officer housing available on the base, so we actually lived in a small town in a hotel, which was just wonderful.  We would live in the hotel, we'd have our meals in the hotel, and we'd catch the school bus from the small town onto the military base.  It was about twenty, half hour, twenty minute ride onto the military base and go to school there.
Speaker 1: So, so what town in Germany were you stationed?
Speaker 2: We were in Neckarsulm, Germany, and the base was in Heilbronn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was wonderful.  It was, you know we in Neckarsulm we lived across from a city park, so there was a park there and they had these massive beautiful fountains and these gardens and a lot of greenery and you know it was a safe time and so our parents [Ellen Cooper Tate and Penfield W. Tate II]--we sort of stood out, so it's not like you know you, we, we could get lost easily and, and so our parents used to let, just let us go across the street and play in the park with some of the other kids.  My youngest sister was probably about three or four, but she just had an ear for language and she actually became more fluent in German more quickly than my older sister and I did.  And plus in the hotel we stayed in, the people who ran, owned and ran the hotel it was more like hostel, it was a small hotel.  I bet there probably were twenty-five, thirty rooms, but they had a little girl about my sister's age and so she would always run around with us also.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were there in Germany two years?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: We spent about five, five or six months in the hotel, and then we moved on base.
Story_ID: 670351
Speaker 1: How was school, I mean was school all right there?  Did you, did you--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're, you're in an American school on the base right?
Speaker 2: Right, American school on the base in both instances.  Germany was probably where I first had my really bad experience in a public school, and, and it was, it was quite a shock for me because in Chicago [Illinois] you know it was an all black school [Charles S. Deneen Elementary School], but the teachers expected you to behave yourself, to mind, to perform, and to excel and so they really drilled that into you.  When I got to Germany, the first year when I was completing second grade was fine.  I, I did fine.  But, when I got to third grade I had a teacher who, there were two African Americans in the class and I'll never forget I didn't know or why it happened, but at one point early in the school year we were going into the math segment and she announced that, "Okay we're gonna do this, but Penfield [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III] doesn't have to pay attention because he'll never need to know his multiplication tables for the jobs he's gonna have."  And I remember going home and my mom [Ellen Cooper Tate] is like, "Where's your homework?"  "I've got it here." I laid it out and I was always a good student, conscientious, and she's like, "Well where's your math homework?"  I said, "Well--." you know, I won't repeat the teacher's name; I remember it vividly. I said, "She told me I didn't need to know the math multiplication tables 'cause I never need to know how to multiply when I grew up."  And my mother was livid, and so I remember her going to the school and I don't know what she did, but I remember it was one of the few times I remember she and my father [Penfield W. Tate II] they never argued in front of us, but I remember him asking her, "What did you do? What did you do" because I guess he had heard about it from the base commander.  But, she went and fired up the teacher is what she did.  And I know she did because a couple of days later when I went to school the teacher singled me out again and said, "We're gonna do this and Penfield will participate because his mother came down here and made a scene." Or something like that.  So, of course, I went home and told my mom you know, "She said you went and did something wrong mom and acted out.  What did you do?"  My mother really hit the roof then and went down and blew up the teacher and the school, but the good thing is I, I, she taught me.  She, she had to teach me, and my mother made sure that, that I picked up math because for some reason this teacher didn't want to teach me.  I bet the teacher would be st- if she's still alive, she'd been stunned to know I'm a finance attorney and deal with numbers all the time, but (laughter), but that was the first really bad experience I had in school and that, and that really bothered me.  But, you know my parents had raised me in a way that at least I had enough sense to tell them what was happening to me at school and that it was being done by a teacher.
Story_ID: 670352
Speaker 1: So when you leave Germany coming back to the U.S., do--is this where you end up in the northeast or west or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right we, from Germany we went to Fort Lewis [Joint Base Lewis-McChord], the base in the Tacoma, Washington, area.  I wanted to mention one other thing about Germany it, and I don't know if it was just a coming of age thing where I began to notice certain things, but Germany is where I began to realize that our life on base was very interesting because we lived in segregated bases.  The officers typically where we lived were either other African Americans, Hispanics, or interestingly enough Italians.  And, and Germany was where that became, I became acutely aware of that and I think because of my age and also my father [Penfield W. Tate II] was one of ten and one of his younger sisters moved, lived with us, and from the time we were in Chicago [Illinois] to Oklahoma my father, the [U.S.] Army at the time let one sibling so to declare younger siblings as dependents, and he offered his younger brothers and sisters an opportunity to live with us and travel around and see the world, 'cause they were all living in rural Ohio.  Only one of them took up the offer, my aunt Yvonne [Yvonne Tate], who now lives in Bellevue, Washington.  So she, and she's only seven years older than I am, so it was like growing up with a big sister.  And so much of what I went through if I didn't tell my parents I told my aunt Yvonne, but I remember Germany in particular because she was becoming a teen and that was the last duty station where she lived with us and so I would hear her and the other teenage girls and guys talk about some of their experiences.  Germany was the place where on all the military bases we lived in I played sports, and I played on the football team in Germany, that's part of my dad's influence as a former football player, but they wouldn't give any of the black players uniforms.  And so we used to practice--I'll never forget when we went and signed up we had to do a physical and they had to make mouth pieces and when we went to get assigned uniforms first they said they had us line up by height, but then when there were shorter white kids than me they'd move those boys ahead of me so that by the time they outfitted the team, no black players got uniforms and they still made us practice against players in full uniforms.
Speaker 1: With pads and yeah.
Speaker 2: With pads and cleats and helmets and everything else.  And I remember mentioning that to my dad and, and I don't know what he tried to do to change it, but I, you know a bunch of us got together and talked about it and we finally decided you know we're not doing this.  We're practicing every day, we're getting beat up by guys who have uniforms and pads and stuff, and we don't get to play in the games.  And so that was one of the few things in my life where I actually quit--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --something that I started.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I know my dad was disappointed, but he understood why and--
Speaker 1: You didn't get helmets either?
Speaker 2: No, no, nothing, nothing, nothing.  It was outrageous.  And you know I, I didn't realize what was happening to me until a few years later, then I looked back and I said, "Okay that's why this happened."  And I talked to some of the guys who, who grew up around me at the time and we didn't, I think we were all too young to understand it.  Interestingly enough, our mothers and fathers understood it when we would go home and talk about it and hang out in the neighborhood.  And again because of how the base was we all lived in the same general area, we'd talk about it.  But yeah that was something.
Speaker 1: This is, it's really curious 'cause this is 1966, people over here talking about black power, I mean a lot of marches--
Speaker 2: Yeah it's about sixty- yeah '63 [1963], '64 [1964] yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well okay you were eight or nine, what what--
Speaker 2: I was in the third grade--
Speaker 1: Third grade.
Speaker 2: --second or third grade in Germany yeah, that's when it happened.
Speaker 1: Second or third grade, yeah that would have to be.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that was, that was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah that was, let me see that would be about--
Speaker 1: Yeah '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: --sixty-three [1963], '63 [1963], '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --sixty-five [1965], right in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause I, 'cause we came back stateside in '66 [1966], lived in Washington in Fort Lewis '66 [1966], '67 [1967] and came to Boulder [Colorado] in '67 [1967], the summer of '67 [1967].  So yeah this would have been up until about '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, I mean so the U.S. base is no better than Mississippi or some place?
Speaker 2: Oh no, you know when we lived in Chicago I, I should have mentioned this one of my father's assignments was he was responsible for officer housing on base, but they wouldn't let any black officers live on base.  That's why we lived in the City of Chicago; we couldn't live on the base, but my dad managed the housing.
Story_ID: 670353
Speaker 1: Now this--these are many years after the integration of the [U.S.] Armed Forces, right (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  You know and, and it, it's interesting I have, in my life I have talked about some of these experiences.  When I was in the legislature [Colorado General Assembly], every year for Martin Luther King Day [Martin Luther King Jr. Day] we used to suspend the rules and let people talk about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and some of the lessons learned.  And I talk about some of these experiences I had growing up.  And when I talked about the military base thing I actually got a couple of angry letters from people saying that's not true, the [U.S.] military was desegregated then at this time, and I'm like well the military may have been desegregated, but I'm telling you what it was like to live on base as a kid, what I experienced, what I saw, and this is what happened.  So it's the difference between slavery ends, but you've got Jim Crow.  Yeah, it may not be the law, but it's the custom and practice and that's how things were on military bases.  There, there was a distinction.  In Germany was where my eyes were really open to this.  I don't recall it ever happening to me in my life until we got to Germany.  I still loved it there, we had a ball.  It was an open base, so that you moved from the base to the surrounding town and neighborhood freely.  Our parents and others let us kind of you know explore the town and the city and the base.  We weren't locked in or, so it was a wonderful opportunity to experience another culture, and we did, but there were these little things that happened on base that, that were a little disconcerting.
Story_ID: 670354
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you get back to the states that's when your father [Penfield W. Tate II] finishes law school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah we, we get back we do one, about a year basically in Fort Lewis [Joint Base Lewis-McChord] in the Tacoma, Washington, area.  And at that time my, you know my father decides he wants to leave the [U.S.] military and so he leaves the military, makes his trip around visiting schools and decides he is gonna go to the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Law School].  And so in the summer of 1967, we, we moved to Boulder, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Boulder is an interesting place when I first saw it, University of Colorado in the rocks.  It looks like that the university rises out of the mountains.  It's really dramatic.
Speaker 2: No, it's a, Boulder is a beautiful town.  I enjoyed you know that part of my life growing up there.  It was fun.  I think it was a safe community, and, and I learned a lot.  I learned a lot about myself and I think about the world around me too.
Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't have any of the segregation and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: You know no, but only because there wasn't a large enough black population in Boulder to be segregated.  You know when we, we moved to Boulder and I started the sixth grade, in the entire elementary school building there were only three African Americans, and my sister and I were two of them.  When I went to junior high school and started there [University Hill Intermediate School; University Hill Elementary School, Boulder, Colorado], there were only two African Americans my first year.  Later there were three or four, but that was as my sisters caught up with me in school.  And when I was in high school, as I said, in my graduating class there were only four African Americans in our class and I think in my three years at Boulder High School [Boulder, Colorado] one year we had seventeen black students and that was the most we ever had.  And that was because the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] had started a program where students and teachers who were teaching at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] would come to see CU for some additional training and in service work and you know I think get advanced degrees and so the families would relocate to Boulder for a short period of time, but they, they, it was just a one year program, so they typically left a year later.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so was it, what, what was the name of the neighborhood that you lived in, in Boulder?
Speaker 2: It's called the Hill, which was short for University Hill area.  My--there's a, there's a park in Boulder that's well known, Chautauqua Park, which lies just at the, the, the foot of the Flatiron mountains [Flatirons].  And so it sort of divides the northern from the southern part of Boulder because of where it runs, and so I grew up in the neighborhood just north and downhill from Chautauqua Park. It's University Hill, because as you go downhill further, you roll right into the University of Colorado.
Story_ID: 670355
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations?  Were--did you aspire to become a lawyer too, at that--I mean when you, were you thinking about that in grade school like your father [Penfield W. Tate II] or were you thinking (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know I re- I really wasn't.  I, I thought what my dad did as a lawyer was neat, but frankly I'd grown up on military bases most of my life up to that point and so I hadn't ruled out a career in the [U.S.] military yet.  It was, it was familiar for me.  It was something that I was used to, and so I thought about that.  I'd had three uncles who were on different police forces around the country too, on the force in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so that was something that crossed my mind at some point.  And so being a lawyer wasn't--I think as I, as we sort of settled down and lived in Boulder [Colorado], you know after two years we lived in Boulder longer than any place we had in my entire life and so that, that really had an impact.  What I gravitated toward really was science more than anything, and so early I think in my career when you start thinking about these things, when you're in high school you think about what do you want to do in college, where do you wanna go, what I was really thinking about was science and biochemistry--something like that.
Story_ID: 670356
Speaker 1: So did you have good teachers in terms of the sciences?
Speaker 2: We did.  You know what, one of the things that I found when we moved to Boulder [Colorado] is I, I really liked the teachers in, in, in, in Boulder public schools.  I, I will never forget the first teacher I ever had, Mrs. Pollard [ph.] who lived four blocks down the street from, from our family.  I liked her because she was very strict.  She was very regimented, but she was very honest.  And in one time I, I remember her telling me I got a B on the test and she told me you, "You know Penfield [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III] you could have had an A if you studied.  I've watched you and you're very smart.  You, there are just times you just don't apply yourself, so if you wanna settle for Bs you can settle for Bs, but if you really want to get A's all you have to do is work and you'll get the A's because you can do the work."  And, and I never forget that.  She told my parents [Ellen Cooper Tate and Penfield W. Tate II] that also, and she made it real clear to them that he can do a lot, he just needs to be pushed and motivated and driven and I think that kind of really got my motor started hearing that from a teacher who didn't tell me I didn't need to know the multiplication table, but told me if you worked hard you'll get where you wanna go, just push it and so I sort of went into overdrive from there.  When I went into junior high school [University Hill Intermediate School; University Hill Elementary School, Boulder, Colorado], I ran for city, for student council and got elected to student council.  I signed up for math, a special math class the--when I first went to junior high school the school was overcrowded, so I actually signed up to show up by 7:30 and take a special 7:30 math class.  I enjoyed math, it was good, I had a great teacher, and so junior high school those three years went by pretty rapidly.  I got to meet people.  Again, it was the first time we'd ever lived any place more than a couple of years, so I really got to know folks and got invited to sleep over at other people's houses and they slept over at our house and got invited to social events and you know sort of, really got engrained in the community and, and that happened in Boulder.
Story_ID: 670357
Speaker 1: Was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, it was.  It was interesting, my mother [Ellen Cooper Tate] was raised Episcopalian because that's the religion she was raised, and my grandfather [Harold Cooper] went to an Episcopal seminary school and, and met my grandmother [Pauline Cooper] and decided not to be a priest and so he left the seminary.  My father [Penfield W. Tate II] was raised in we called it Holiness at the time, but it's now referred to as Church of God in Christ.  And so my father is the one who converted, and so I was raised Episcopalian.  But yes we, we went to mass service every Sunday and that didn't change when we went to Boulder [Colorado].  And in fact, the church in Boulder [St. John's Episcopal Church] probably, not probably, it did play a significant role in my upbringing.  It was a progressive institution.  The pastor there, Father James McKeown, he's now deceased, but he was very progressive and forward thinking and forward looking and he sort of drug the congregation along with him, but it wasn't too much of a struggle.  A lot of the people in the church, I think, were really forward thinking and looking people.  We, we had a period of time in our church where during the winter, Father Jim insisted that the church remain unlocked so that the hippies, the street people, could have some place warm to sleep and so they'd come and sleep in the pews of the church and on the floor and they'd get up and leave the next morning.  The church adopted a program, I think, where they served some meals.  Father Jim created a youth ministry where Sunday evening we would all, the teenagers would all get together at church with just him and no parents around, we'd cook meals, we'd all get together and cook a meal, and just talk about different things.  And it wasn't always things out of the Bible or related to religion, it was just growing up things you know and it was sort of a safe space where we could talk about a bunch of the issues we were dealing with you know as teenagers growing up in Boulder.
Speaker 1: Were you in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or any of those kind of--?
Speaker 2: You know I was.  I was in, I was very active in Cub Scouts during the time we lived in military bases.  Once we left the military bases, I never continued in the Boy Scouts.  But, I, I was active in Cub Scouts my entire time we lived on bases in the [U.S.] military; and that pretty much ended when we left Fort Sill [Oklahoma] and--and moved to Boulder.
Story_ID: 670358
Speaker 1: Okay now what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Boulder High School.
Speaker 1: Okay Boulder High.  Is there only one in Boulder [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: There's, well yes (laughter), but, but if I had said that people who are from Boulder would know that I was being facetious because our rival was Fairview High School [Boulder, Colorado].  So, there were always two high schools in Boulder, but if you go to Boulder High you always say, "No there's only one high school.  There's another place, but there's only one high school."
Speaker 1: I see, I see, I see.  So, so you were, they were only like four in your class you were telling me earlier right?
Speaker 2: Four African Americans in my graduating class.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right so high school career did, did you run for office in high school too?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was sophomore class president when I was in high school, and I did that and then sort of fell out of the student government piece, but it was, it was due to a variety of things.  I got a job, and it was my first on the books job you know other than cutting lawns and doing summer work.  I, I got a job at a restaurant, and so I started as a busboy and over the, the three years I worked there through high school got elevated to a shift supervisor and, and the chief cook.  But, the job sort of distracted me because I had a goal I wanted to work and earn some money.  There were some things I wanted to have for myself, and I wasn't afraid to work, so I would go to school and go to work so that sort of pulled me away from student government.  I also had some other experiences in high school that weren't quite as vivid as what happened to me in the third grade in Germany, but caused me to sort of, ugh, not withdraw just I'd say redirect my focus.  I wasn't interested in being one of the popular kids at school anymore where I think maybe when I first started that was important to me.  After my sophomore year, I decided that wasn't important that I ought to focus on things I wanted to do.  I, I paid closer attention to the academics and what courses I took to prepare me for leaving, and I think just because of what is the old saying you can die a death of thousand cuts.  There was no major incident, but it's just after time in high school in Boulder watching what my father [Penfield W. Tate II] went through as mayor and city councilman and some of the things I experienced I knew before my senior year in high school that when I graduated I was leaving and I was never coming back to Boulder.  I might live someplace else in Colorado, but I knew I wasn't gonna live in Boulder any longer, that it was a place that I knew just, it didn't fit me anymore and so I, I, I really focused on taking care of my grades, not getting distracted, and graduated on time, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so did you graduate with any honors there?
Speaker 2: No, that, not, no not really, not really.  I mean I was a good student.  I think I graduated with something like a 3, 3.3, 3.2, 3.4 [grade point average] somewhere in there.  I was never a bad student.  I was a good student, and so I was on the honor roll most of the years; and so no, so I, I just graduated.  I knew I was, I was leaving.
Speaker 1: So this is 1971 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-one [1971].
Story_ID: 670359
Speaker 1: And you went on to the, to Colorado State.
Speaker 2: Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you choose Colorado State?
Speaker 2: It wasn't Boulder [Colorado] (laughter).  No, no what happened is and, and, and I, I don't wanna say it that harshly.  I still, my mother [Ellen Cooper Tate] and two of my sisters still live in Boulder and I spend a lot of time visiting.  Colorado State was sort of an accident for me.  I really had my heart set on Amherst university, and I'd never been there before.  It's something when I was in high school [Boulder High School, Boulder, Colorado] they had started a new program where they had these computer labs set up and you can go in there and put in the locations if you, you could talk about what you were looking for in a school, large, medium, small, region, that sort of thing and I came across, across a place called Amherst university and I began to read about it and knew it was in the Boston [Massachusetts] area and I'd never lived in that part of the country before or visited there before and just read about it and saw it was sort of a smaller liberal arts institution.  I'm like this might be a good thing for me.  It's far enough away, I mean it snows, but so what it snows in Colorado, I'm used to winter, that wasn't a problem, and so I sort of had my heart set on that and focused on it and applied to Amherst.  My guidance counselor told me that although my grades were good she didn't think they'd be good enough to get me into Amherst and told me to temper my expectations.  But when I didn't get accepted, I was pretty disappointed.  I did get accepted to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio], my dad's alma mater, and was going to go there.  I was pretty much set to go there, but at the last minute as I thought about it I said you know I can go to Kent State it will cost my parents an out of state tuition and I'll be away from home, and it's not a whole lot different from Colorado State University and I had an academic scholarship, so no matter where I went that scholarship travelled with me, and as I thought about it I just said you know it just makes more sense to go to CSU.  I'll be away from home, but close enough where if I need to I can get home on a weekend or for a vacation, the cost is cheaper, it's about the same sort of institution, and so I, I went to CSU.  And I'd had some experience with CSU because for a couple of years before he started his own law practice, my dad [Penfield W. Tate II] was a human rights executive up at Colorado State and so there were occasions when he'd take me up with him and on occasion I'd, you know he'd introduce me to a couple of students and I'd spend a weekend up there with him.  So, I got to hang out and experience Fort Collins [Colorado] and student life, but I also got a sense of the place.
Story_ID: 670360
Speaker 1: When my dad [Penfield W. Tate II] worked there, CSU [Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado] was part of the Western Athletic Conference, the WAC, with Brigham Young [Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah] with the, the, the Mormon school.  And there was an issue in the '60s [1960s] where African American athletes in other schools were protesting because at the time Brigham Young didn't have black athletes and what I had been told was one of the tenets of the faith supposedly at that time was that African Americans couldn't go to heaven--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that we were sort of the, the marked tribe or whatever and so there was a protest among the Wyoming football team [University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming] and it was very famous because Wyoming had a very good football program and the coach there got angry and when the black players wanted to wear arm bands he kicked them all off the squad and they immediately had losing seasons and he ended up losing his job.  Something similar began to happen at CSU, and there were student protests and one night the Old Main administration building was burnt down, and so the president of the university [A.R. Chamberlain] hired my dad as a human relations executive to help deal with some of these issues that were not only at the CSU campus, but sort of spreading through the conference.
Speaker 2: Like the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: Yeah, anti-pra- protests, protest against Brigham Young University, all of these things.  And so I, I'd seen all that happen on the campus and had on occasion made some trips with my dad to CSU, so I had a sense of the environment there; and, and so long story short once I didn't get into Amherst, I decided no need to have my scholarship money spent on an out of state school, I'll just go to CSU: my money will go further, and I'll get a similar education.
Story_ID: 670361
Speaker 1: All right so University of Colorado at, no I'm sorry Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sorry. Okay so, so you're then, you majored in, in sociology.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because I, I would never guess a math, a match oriented, science oriented person would major in sociology.
Speaker 2: You know it was really interesting.  When I got to CSU and my freshman year they give you your advisor and I went for all the orientation and my, my freshman year I, first semester I took an overload.  I took more classes than I needed just because I saw so many course offerings and I knew what I wanted.  But what happened is as I took a science class or two I, I sat in the classes and I just realized you know what this isn't what you really want to do and I just decided it didn't make any sense to waste my life or waste time taking a bunch of science classes and other stuff just because as a kid I thought I wanted to be a scientist, so I continued to take science courses but I decided to major in sociology and ended up getting my degree in sociology and, and, and didn't really plan on going to law school when I started at, at CSU either.  Figured I'd get a job in academia or as a researcher or doing something like that.  I liked the idea of traveling and maybe doing some field work as a sociologist looking at different cultures in different places.
Speaker 1: So was this statistical studies and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Statistical or, or qualitative studies just evaluating different cultures and things of that nature.  And, and so that was my plan originally, and it probably wasn't until my junior year when I really started thinking you know I don't think I wanna do that either.  I think I wanna be a lawyer, and that's when I really started changing my focus a little bit.  I was taking a few more sociology classes.  I was still, I'm, I'm sorry I started taking a few more political science classes.  I was still committed to sociology as my major, and that's what I wanted to finish in, but even then I had a sense that I was gonna go into law.
Story_ID: 670362
Speaker 1: Okay so talking about Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado] and when you, when you graduate you're, you, you're majoring in sociology, but you decide you wanna pursue law (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I did.  I decided I wanted to pursue law.  So probably my last year and a half to two years I pretty much knew what I wanted to do, and, and at this point Colorado State and Fort Collins [Colorado] had really become my home because what, what happened is when I graduated from high school [Boulder High School, Boulder, Colorado], I got a place in Denver [Colorado] and worked summer times in Denver for the Denver Water Department [Denver Water] as a laborer and I shared an apartment with, with a cousin of mine.  But after I went to CSU, I actually transitioned and worked in Fort Collins in the summertime, so I actually lived in Fort Collins year 'round for two years and frankly I loved it.  I thought Fort Collins was a wonderful community.  I've never had issue with folks around town.  I'd, I'd often tell people no one at Fort Collins ever used the N word around me.  It happened in Boulder [Colorado], but it never happened in Fort Collins.  And so I really loved.  CSU was a perfect fit for me as a school.  I got a great education.  Unlike students today, I got in and out in four years.  I got a job working in the residence hall, so my last two years, my, my, my room and board was covered and so I had free room and board.  I worked in the cafeteria, and I had another part-time job and I had an academic scholarship.  So, my last two years basically were almost debt and loan free coming out of college and so yeah then it was time to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's really lucky considering what people hold today.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was blessed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Coming out of a four year institution.
Speaker 2: I know I was blessed.
Story_ID: 670363
Speaker 1: So how did you decide on a law school?
Speaker 2: The, the law school that I picked I, I went through a selection process, but I ended up at Antioch [Antioch School of Law; University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law] really by accident and again my father [Penfield W. Tate II] was involved.  He had gone to an ABA [American Bar Association] convention and had heard the former chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, Judge Burger, Warren Burger [Warren E. Burger], talk about this new progressive law school in Antioch in, in Washington, D.C., and the chief justice said what was so special about it was that too many law schools were graduating kids with an academic degree who didn't know how to be lawyers, didn't know how to service clients, and basically didn't know how to do anything.  And my father told me his story about how when he got his law school degree [from the University of Colorado Law School, Boulder, Colorado] and because he was an older student, he was already in his thirties when he graduated from law school, he had a law school degree and didn't know how to do anything.  You know he knew a bunch of textbook law, but he didn't know how to be a practicing lawyer.  So he told me how to take a look at least at this school that had three years of required clinical instruction to see what I thought.  So, I went to Washington, D.C. and I had interviews at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] and Antioch, visited both of them, had applied to some other schools.  Got accepted to all of the schools I applied to including Georgetown, but I really liked Antioch.  I liked the atmosphere.  It was very counterculturist, very cutting age, and it was a lot of fun.  When you went into that building, you saw the academic setting, but it was a law clinic.  You saw people coming in and out, and the students were working on real cases, and I decided that's where I wanted to go.  So, I applied to Antioch and got accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay so this is 19--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978] I started.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978] okay, all right.  And, well so was it what you thought it was?
Speaker 2: It was everything I thought was it and then some.  It, those three years of Washington, D.C. were three of the best years of my life.  It was, the city was fun.  I loved the city.  I enjoyed my law school experience.  In addition to law school and working in the clinic, I got jobs, I did some contract work for private law firms.  I worked at the Federal Aviation Administration.  I worked the [U.S.] Department of Justice, and I worked at the U.S. Supreme Court for the man who gave the speech that my father heard that brought me to Washington, D.C. in the first place.
Speaker 1: So Warren Burger then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay so, so this is all--what was the toughest part of law school?
Speaker 2: The first year was the toughest part, and, and I think it was tough because there, I, I, at the time even Antioch really worked to sort of break down your mind and change the way you thought, analyzed, and saw the world.  And part of how they did that was they just loaded unconscionable amounts of work on you, and you had to do it.  And so I remember I, I use, I adopted a pattern when I was in law school, which was I'd go to, to my classes and, and study, but I'd never go to sleep on Thursday night.  So, I'd study all through the night on Thursday, so that I could finish Friday and get all my work done and get ready for the following week and then spend the weekend literally crashing.  I got a part-time job working in the library which was a godsend.  So I, I worked in the law library, so I actually got a chance to study when I wasn't in class and so that was helpful.  But the first year was the toughest without question.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite I guess course of study in law school?
Speaker 2: I did, contracts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Contracts and I, I think I enjoyed it because it, it just sort of made sense to me and over time I ended up becoming the teaching assistant to our contracts professors late in my second and third years in, in law school.  But, it was the subject that just--I don't know, it just clicked with me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the sa- the same with [HistoryMaker] C. Lamont Smith we interviewed earlier this week.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 670364
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating in '81 [1981] earning your J.D., what were you prospects?
Speaker 2: The prospects were good.  Actually when I was in the verge of graduating, I had a job that I had accepted in Washington, D.C.  I was going to work for a federal agency.  But what happened was in November, and, and I'd already wo- I was working for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] at the time, but my job was with a different agency and so what happened is in November of 1980, Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] got elected president and then in January of '81 [1981] he's inaugurated and shortly thereafter the federal government did something they'd never done before and I think they haven't done since, they retroactively rescinded all of the offers of employment to like the entire class of incoming lawyers.  And so here I am three or four months before graduation I'm coasting, I'm on easy street, I have a job that I'm working now, I have a job I'm gonna work when I graduate from law school, I know exactly what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna stay in my apartment or maybe move to a nicer one because I'll be a full-time employee with somebody making a real living, I'll be supporting just myself, I wasn't married, so I was looking forward to that and then the rug gets pulled out from underneath me and so I started scrambling.  I was part of a class action of lawyers who had accepted offers from the federal government that were rescinded and some law firm represented us and we filed a lawsuit and I think we all got two hundred dollars or something, but we had no jobs.  And so I began re-interviewing for work and by this time the impact of the Reagan revolution was felt because what also happened in Washington, D.C. at that time was a number of longstanding Democratic congress people had lost their elections and so all of their aides, many of whom were lawyers, had flooded the job market.  And so when your law firm and you have to choose between someone who was congressional aide to se- senator so and so and congressman so and so versus Penfield Tate [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III] who just got a law degree from Antioch University [Antioch School of Law; University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.], you know who you're gonna hire.  You're gonna the person who's got some political experience.  So, it was hard to get a job.  So, I interviewed, went to a number of job fairs, finally got some interest from the Federal Trade Commission.  As I interviewed, they said they were interested in me, would I be willing to relocate, and I told them sure Atlanta [Georgia] would work, San Francisco [California], Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois].  I said I'd even do L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  You know I was game to move, and that was fine because they told me I could not stay in Washington, D.C. because of this desire to, to shrink the size of the federal government.  And they said well okay we'll be in touch with you.  When they, when they called me back, they said, "We have a job for you, would you like to take it?" And I asked, "Well which city am I going to?" And they said, "Well you know we found a couple of places, but the city we'd like you to go to is Denver [Colorado]." And I'm like, "Oh man."  And I remember the person on the phone responded like, "What's wrong? Denver is a beautiful place, it's got this and this."  I said, "I know."  I said, "You know you can probably tell from my resume I'm from Colorado.  My hope was to live someplace else." But I don't have a job and I need a job, so I ended up back in Colorado graduating from law school and that was not my plan.
Story_ID: 670365
Speaker 1: So this is a job with the Federal Trade Commission?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, and what did your job entail?
Speaker 2: The Federal Trade Commission was an agency that was responsible for enforcing federal consumer protection laws and anti-trust libek- li- litigation in terms of monopolistic and other practices.  So, I was a trade regulation attorney working on cases that were primarily filed in the federal courts and conducting investigation and inquiries to see if there were any anti-consumer or anti-competitive practices going on in the marketplace here and I was working under what was then the Denver [Colorado] regional office.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, any interesting cases in this regard?
Speaker 2: You know a number of great cases, and I'll have to be vague about them because the nature of our work was always confidential except one case was not because it was a matter of public record.  Litigation against Sears, Roebuck and Company [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], and it was an interesting case because we had charged them with deceptive trade practices because Sears had a number of garment manufacturers that made what were labeled down garments.  Well most people don't realize there was a federal rule regarding the content of product before you can call it down and Sears we felt had violated that rule and so we filed a lawsuit here in the United States district court in for Colorado [U.S. District Court for the District of Colorado] suing Sears and some of their suppliers of deceptive practices.  It was at the time probably the largest case that was pending in the Federal Trade Commission, and it was an exciting opportunity for me because as a young lawyer I got to do the things that a lot of people didn't want to do and so I spent a lot of time.  I used to call myself the, the road warrior, have gun will, will travel.  I spent a lot of time in very small textile towns in Tennessee and Kentucky and other places taking depositions, tracking down the history of garments and their labeling and that sort of thing to build a factual basis for our lawsuit and, and I thought it was an exciting time.  I really enjoyed that sort of work.  I had a couple other investigations I worked on and what I really enjoyed about the job is we had the latitude where you would investigate and take a look at a situation and if you were convinced that there was nothing wrong you, you were allowed to tell your superiors I have looked at it.  You know you'd write up a memo, here's what I find, and I don't think this person's done anything wrong.  I don't think this company has done anything wrong, and we need to stay out of their way and you can do that also.
Story_ID: 670366
Speaker 1: Now Republicans today always seem to be against regulation, you know, and they cry there's too much regulation.  Was that true during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration?
Speaker 2: You know they, they cried about it a lot, and the Reagan people brought in a different type of discipline.  They actually, for reasons I will never understand, brought economists into the agency [Federal Trade Commission] to try to measure the cost-benefit analysis of whether to spend resources to pursue an action and some of us thought the proper analysis is what happens to consumers in the marketplace if you don't take certain action.  And so we had to, to fight that and, and there was definitely and anti-regulatory bent.  But, what we also saw was a need for regulation in some instances because of clear abuses.  We saw, particularly in Colorado, some of our cases, we were investigating home construction.  And we saw instances where people were building homes that they knew weren't gonna last, but they built them anyway and sold them and figured once they sold them they can wash their hands of them and that's what they would do and, and I, you know I tell people now we have a fairly rigid construction defects law in Colorado, which allows a consumer to bring an action if there's a flaw in the, in the construction of their home and I always tell people the genesis of part of that is the failure of the federal government to act back in the '80s [1980s] when we knew home builders were building substandard homes and we let them get away with it.
Story_ID: 670367
Speaker 1: Now you were with the Federal Trade Commission until 1984 right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you decided to become a partner at Trimble, Tate, and Nulan [Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.].  You formed the partnership--I mean a firm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope I went to work for my dad [Penfield W. Tate II].
Speaker 1: Oh you went to, oh okay so you were--
Speaker 2: That was my dad's law firm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so he was already the Tate in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No he, you know it was interesting when I went to law school and Antioch [Antioch School of Law, Washington, D.C.] itself had a rocky history because I, I became president of the student body when I was in law school and we were embroiled in a lawsuit because the main campus fired our deans for not turning over funds, the whole university system was sort of going broke, and our law school deans were concerned that if they sent our tuition money to headquarters we wouldn't have enough money to keep the law school open.
Speaker 1: And headquarters would be in Antioch College in Yellow Springs.
Speaker 2: In Yellow Springs, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the main campus.  Actually they did something interesting when the formed what they called the national Antioch University; they had a campus in Baltimore [Maryland] and Seattle [Washington], and they had one in Denver [Colorado] for a while.  They actually moved the headquarters to New York [New York] in Lower Manhattan and so the headquarters administrative offices were in Manhattan and so we were paying that overhead as well as everything else and so that was part of my law school career.  We actually had students in the student body, we filed a lawsuit to try to keep our deans in place and to stop the headquarters from taking over the law school.  We lost the lawsuit, and the deans ended up who were founders of the school, Ed [Edgar Cahn] and Jean Camper Cahn they got deposed and, and Ed, Edgar is now back as, as a faculty member of the sch- the successor to the school, which is now the David Clarke School of Law at the University of the District of Columbia [University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard their name Ed and Jean Camp, Camper Cahn.
Speaker 2: Edgar and Jean, Edgar Cahn and Jean Camper--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --C-A-M-P-E-R Cahn.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They were the founders of Antioch law school, and they were the deans.  And so you know there was a time when it looked like Antioch may close, so I almost transferred to CU [University of Colorado Law School, Boulder, Colorado] but stayed and ended up graduating from Antioch.  And so my father was nervous then, and then he's nervous when I get a job and say, "Nope I'm a stay at D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I'm taken care of, I accepted the job, I'll see you in about four or five years if then." Then I lose my job because the Reagan administration [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] takes it away from me, so then I'm unemployed.  Then my dad is like, "I have a job for you, come on back." And I told him, "No I wanna learn to do some things on my own before I join your law firm." And that was the Federal Trade Commission.  And, and then what was happening frankly is the Reagan administration had not relented.  They were bound and determined to close the Denver office.  They were shrinking government still.  In the three years I was at the FTC, I went from the new hire lawyer to the most senior lawyer in the Denver office of the Federal Trade Commission in three years' time.  So, that just shows you the attrition that was occurring and you know and it was work I loved and I thought we did good work, but I reached a point where I could see the political writing on the wall and just decided I didn't want to stay there until the lights got shut off.  So, in 1984 I told my dad: "Okay I'm ready I wanna go into private practice with you."
Story_ID: 670368
Speaker 1: All right so what was that like?
Speaker 2: You know it was wonderful.  It, it was a, it was an interesting experience.  My dad [Penfield W. Tate II] had always been my mentor, my best friend.  He was the best man at my wedding when I first got married.  We were always buddies you know when, when the kid growing up playing sports he taught me how to play football.  When I wanted to play baseball and pitch and whatever, he would catch in the backyard with me.  He'd let me go with him to his office and to different places, so we were really best friends.  And so when I went to work for him, it was awkward at first and I, I will never forget after about three or four months there [Trimble, Tate, and Nulan; Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.], we, we went to drinks afterwards, I took him to drinks, and I said, "Dad you know in the office you can't treat me like your son, you gotta treat me like another lawyer."  So, and that goes for not just respecting me professionally, but not, not just thinking you know, I can have him do it 'cause it's my son, when you wouldn't ask another lawyer to do this.  So, but once we got that straightened out, we, we had a ball.  I had a great time.  My dad was a very good lawyer.  We had fun.  His primary practice was he did plaintiff's employer--employment work in the federal court.  So, he basically represented people who felt they were the victim of discrimination in violation of Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII] in 1981.  We handled a lot of excessive force cases from police departments, basically beating up black people, and a number of employment cases.  My dad often joked when I joined him he was in what was then called the United Bank of Denver building [United Bank Center; Wells Fargo Center, Denver, Colorado].  He often joked that he made more in legal fees than he paid in rent to the bank because he sued them so frequently based on discrimination claims their employees had.
Story_ID: 670369
Speaker 1: Now you were with your father's firm [Trimble, Tate, and Nulan; Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.] from '84 [1984] to '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are there any particular cases that are memorable in that stretch?
Speaker 2: Ye- yeah you know one in particular.  We had a case where, and it, it actu- it may still be controlling law.  We had a case where some African Americans in the City of Aurora [Colorado], a suburb just to the east of Denver [Colorado]--
Speaker 1: Now that's a mostly black community isn't it or, or--
Speaker 2: No, it isn't, no.
Speaker 1: --or wasn't it at one time?
Speaker 2: I, I think it's safe to say there are no mostly black cities in the State of Colorado.  Aurora has a large and a growing African American population, but at the time of our lawsuit, the African American population was actually relatively very small--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --particularly compared to Denver.  And so we represented these folks who had a party in an apartment complex one time.  Their neighbors complained about noise and you know you go back and forth, and eventually the police come and essentially pull out billy clubs and start beating up people and sending people to jail.  I don't think any of our clients were ever convicted of a crime or violation, but we filed a lawsuit against the Aurora Police Department.  And it was an interesting case because we went to trial and we won, but the jury decided that our clients had no real injury, I mean nobody missed work or lost time, so they awarded what are called nominal damages.  They gave them all like ten dollars apiece, but we were entitled to full attorney's fees.  And the City of Aurora objected to our winning full attorney's fees because they said that our fee should be proportionate to the monetary recovery of our clients.  And the judge who tried the case said, "No, that's not how it works." And they appealed it to the Tenth Circuit court of appeal [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit], and the Tenth Circuit said, "No that's not how it works." You know the, the plaintiffs filed their lawsuit, they won, their civil rights were violated, under federal law they got their monetary award, but you have to pay cost and attorney's fees because the vindication of a civil right in and of itself is something that has to be upheld and respected and so you have to pay attorney's fees.  They actually filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court challenging that ruling, and the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that they weren't gonna take the case.  They just said, "Nope we're gonna let the lower court decision stand, that's the law of the case, that ends it."  So that was probably one of the victories, I don't know if it was the greatest one.  My father [Penfield W. Tate II] were he here would probably tell you he had other cases where he got a greater monetary reward, award for his clients, but that was one that I thought was important because of the principle that it upheld.
Story_ID: 670370
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nineteen eighty-nine [1989] you became a part of the administration of Mayor Federico Pena, right?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: And now was he elected in '89 [1989] or was it '88 [1988] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was elected earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was, Federico was elected I think it was '81 [1981].  It might have been '83 [1983].  It was right after I moved back to Denver [Colorado].  And Federico was a, a friend in a couple of respects.  He and my dad [Penfield W. Tate II] knew each other because Federico and his brother [Alfredo Pena] were lawyers, and actually when my dad formed the law firm that I joined, he had another law office here in Denver, he sold that building to Federico and his brother to start his practice.  And then one of my other, one of the other senior partners in my dad's law firm, served in the state legislature [Colorado General Assembly] with Federico and so Federico was the minority leader in the Colorado House of Representatives.  So, I had been around him and he'd seen me and he approached, his administration approached me and asked me to join his administration, and I agreed to do that and so I became an aide to Mayor Pena working directly in his office.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay well what, you know, I guess what was the nature of your work and what were some of the interesting things that happened?
Speaker 2: You know I, I had a couple of things.  I, I worked on airport finance and DIA development which, Denver International Airport [Denver, Colorado], I'm sorry, which was important to me because by this time in my private practice before I had left my father's firm [Trimble, Tate, and Nulan; Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.] I was beginning to develop a practice as a public finance attorney, so I'd done some finance transactions for the city at Denver International Airport and now I was getting to work on the inside on those transactions from the administration point of view.  So, I did that.  I also worked closely with and was sort of the point person for the Denver Housing Authority, which is the agency in Denver which was responsible for developing affordable housing for, for people who were poor.  And so I worked closely with that agency in helping to restructure.  They went through a lot of change and frankly a lot of controversy.  I did a lot of work outreach with Denver's black business community helping them plug into city government and even intersect with state and federal government to make sure they could take advantage of opportunities.  And then the rest of it is a mayoral aide, it's duties as assigned and so if the mayor calls you into the office and says figure this out, you go figure it out.  But, Federico was a transformative figure in Denver and Colorado politics because when he got elected he was obviously the first person of color to serve as mayor of, of Denver, but he also sort of changed the dynamics of, of the political dynamic in Denver and Colorado.  Federico was really the first campaign where the black and brown community in Denver coalesced for a particular cause.  And at that point we found that if those two communities come together, we could play a stronger role in directing our political future, and Federico was sort of the embodiment of that.  You know he was the first non-white male mayor of Denver and it, it just changed the, literally and figuratively the complexion of politics in Denver and in Colorado.
Story_ID: 670371
Speaker 1: All right so you worked for Mayor Pena [Federico Pena] from '89 [1989] to '91 [1991], I guess that's like (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Yeah, he, does he--I, I finished his second term with him and he had decided he wasn't going to do a third term.  I knew where I was go work when it was over, so I decided to stay and basically I turned out the lights with him.  And in Denver [Colorado] that's interesting because when we have, when we elect a new mayor the way the inauguration works is inauguration takes place midday.  So, on the date, inauguration day I started the day in city hall as an employee of the city working for Mayor Pena, we go to the inaugural event and then you gotta go to a bar and have drinks because you're unemployed immediately once the new mayor is sworn in unless the new mayor keeps you, and the new mayor, I was not part of the new mayor's team coming in.
Speaker 1: Okay now is the new mayor a Democrat or Republican?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Colorado municipal elections are nonpartisan, but yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the new mayor was a Democrat.  The new mayor was [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was the first African American mayor of Denver.
Speaker 1: Right, we've interviewed Wellington Webb.  And so he had another team than you.
Speaker 2: He did, he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know he had been the city auditor before, which was an independent elected office in city government, so Wellington already had a group of people who were city employees who worked for him over there in the auditor's office.
Story_ID: 670372
Speaker 1: Now your, your daughter is born in '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 2: She was born in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989] all right okay got it, got it wrong here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-nine [1989] yeah when I was working for Federico [Federico Pena].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and we'll, I guess we can discuss her later in the story.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, okay and well we didn't even cite when you got married though so let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Oh sure I was married in 1981 to a woman I'd met in law school at Antioch School of Law [University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  She was from Virginia, and so we went to law school together, graduated in May of '81 [1981], got married in September of '81 [1981], and we're no longer married.  We, we divorced in 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But during that time we had a daughter, Elleana [Elleana Tate] who was born in 1989.  Our friend is back here (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right well just, okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in 1989, and, and Elleana had a very tough time.  She was born at twenty-nine weeks gestation, so she was very premature, had a host of early health issues, and continues to, to have issues.  She is developmentally delayed.  She is legally blind, but she's doing great now.  She's twenty-seven.  She has been living in a, in a home she shares with two other young ladies for the last two years.  She has a boyfriend.  She has a job and dad has to schedule an appointment to talk to her on the phone because she's just too busy to hang around and wait for dad to call.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now I know you spend a lot of time with her and--
Speaker 2: A lot of time.
Speaker 1: --and people have noticed and you know considered your fathering as a model, you know in a lot of ways so.
Speaker 2: She, she's my buddy.  She did all of my campaigns with me.  She loved being out and about.  She is a very outgoing person, you know, in spite of her, some of her limitations, and she just loved it.  She loved being on the campaign trail.  She loved meeting people.  She loved going to events, and we just loved hanging out together.
Story_ID: 670373
Speaker 1: Now you--you're still you know associated with the law firm though, of Trimble and Tate [Trimble, Tate, and Nulan; Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.] and--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm not.  I, you know the, the, the--so I went to work for Federico [Federico Pena] and then when his administration ended in '91 [1991] I went back to the law firm.  Almost immediately, Governor Roy Romer contacted me and asked me to join his administration.  So, I went and joined Governor Romer's cabinet and served as the executive director of the department of administration [Colorado Department of Personnel and Administration].  And in that role I was basically responsible for all of the procurement of state government, the contracting.  I was responsible for all of the buildings, all of the capitol buildings, and all of the buildings as part of the state's inventory.  I was responsible for a lot of the lease purchasing transactions, which again was part of the work I did as a private practicing attorney.  I served on the state's risk management committee where basically I was one of three people responsible for deciding whether to settle claims or resolve cases filed against the State of Colorado.  So, it was a pretty responsible position, and I think at the time I was the youngest cabinet officer.  I think I was thirty-six when Governor Romer tapped me for that position.
Story_ID: 670374
Speaker 1: You're also like working with the Democratic National Committee at this point, right?
Speaker 2: I was yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And Ron Brown was the head of the Democratic National Committee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --he was first black head of the Democratic--DNC.
Speaker 2: He was and I actually met Ron because, and I should have mentioned this, one of my duties for Federico [Federico Pena] was I was responsible for all of our lobbying relationships and contracts.  So, at the time the city hired private lobbyists to serve, represent the city's interest up at the statehouse and in Washington, D.C., and Ron Brown and his then firm, Patton, Boggs and Blow [Squire Patton Boggs], were our federal government lobbyists.  So, I spent a lot of time working with Ron Brown and some of the folks in his office as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you go to the convention in '92 [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I went to the convention, I'm trying to think.  I've been to two.  I think it was '92 [1992], '92 [1992] or '96 [1996] are the two I went to, I think.  I went to the two Bill, what I call the Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] conventions, the one in New York [New York] and the one in Chicago [1996 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a delegate to both of those conventions.  And you know, and I had worked up to that point because by that point I had been a chair of the Democratic rules committee for a number of years.  I chaired the permanent organization committee for a number of years.  I chaired the resolution committee of the state party a number of years.  I was a local precinct committee person in the Democratic Party.  So, I was pretty heavily involved in Democratic Party politics, which you know just worked really well, it was compatible with my work for, for Mayor Pena and my work for the governor as well.
Speaker 1: Okay and by 1994 you're the second vice chair of the Colorado Democratic Party, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  By, by this time what had happened is I continued to work for the governor and gosh I had barely worked for him a year and my father [Penfield W. Tate II] passed away very suddenly and he was running the law firm [Tate and Tate P.C.] because I took a sabbatical to work for Governor Romer [Roy Romer].  And Governor Romer's background was his family owned John Deere dealerships in the Holly, Colorado, in the Eastern Plains.  And so I went to the governor and said, "You know governor my dad is--," and the governor knew my dad as well, and I told him I said, "I, I have two choices.  I either resign and go back and run the firm, or I have to close the firm down, there's no one to run it now that my dad is gone."  And I thought about it a long time.  A number of people counseled me to stay in state government.  I had a good position, I was well respected, but I thought about you know what the, the law firm meant to me, what it meant to my dad, what I always jo- enjoyed about having my own law firm it gave me independence in that in a lot of the political work I did if I got a political job here or there, I didn't need the job. I actually had a business I knew how to run and could run and make a living.  And so at the end of the day I decided when it was all said and done, although it was a great honor to work for Governor Romer and I enjoyed it and I was having fun, I didn't want my business to close and I didn't want the business my dad and I built to close, so I went back and I resigned from the cabinet and went back into private practice.  And I decided and I'd committed, even though I was going back into private practice, I was not gonna leave the political arena.  So, I remained active in state party politics.  I had run for secretary of the state party before and lost, and this time I ran for second vice chair of the state party and won.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in '94 [1994], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.
Story_ID: 670375
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994] is the year of the Republican Revolution, the Newt Gingrich revolution congressional where people like Tom DeLay and Dick Armey get elected and it's you know--so Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is all of a sudden hamstrung a lot of times in terms of what he wanted to do in Con- with, with [U.S.] Congress, no, no cooperation from, from Congress.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well not just hamstrung he's under attack.  You know what, what had happened at this point and part of why I felt it was so important to remain politically engaged is the Republican Party had been activated impart by this, what I considered a right wing faction, so that the moral majority, the whole religious right movement, had taken over the party and they were sort of a group that really wasn't interested in compromise.  It was their way or the highway and that, that really troubled me, and so I thought it was important to stay engaged in, in the political process and that's what I did staying active in the state party [Colorado Democratic Party] and staying active locally as, as a committee person.  And, and then what happened is you know Pat Schroeder, who was our long time congresswoman announced she's not gonna run for reelection, and that starts sort of a donnybrook where a number of people are jumping into the race.  I thought about it for a while and met with some people, but what occurred was the woman who was the state representative in the district I lived in announced that she was going to run for Congress.  And so once she made that announcement several people who had been talking to me about considering a congressional run came to me and said, "You know what you're younger than everybody in the field, you've, you've held a lot of political positions, but you've never been elected to office. Why don't you run for state house?" And I did.  I ran for state house in '96 [1996] and won a primary and won a general election and got ele- and started serving in the house of representatives [Colorado House of Representatives] in 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I kept my law firm [Tate and Tate P.C.] going the entire time.  In Colorado, the legislature is a part time job.  We're in session from the first week in January until the first week in May and then you're out of session.  And when I first got elected, legislators were paid $17,500 a year and I had a wife and a daughter [Elleana Tate], and I could not, they could not afford to live in the fashion to which they'd become accustomed on $17,500 a year, even though you know my ex-wife worked.  I needed a full-time job, and so I kept my law firm going and was able to do so and actually that was a blessing for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so the Colorado statehouse [Colorado State Capitol] is right here in Denver [Colorado], right?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, golden dome on top of it.
Speaker 2: Golden dome right downtown and my law firm, my law office was basically, gosh, twelve blocks away from the capitol, so getting back and forth was very easy.
Story_ID: 670376
Speaker 1: Now, and you were in office from '97 [1997] to 2000, is that?
Speaker 2: I was there from '97 [1997] to 2003.
Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003] okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I actually, I, I served four years in the house of representatives [Colorado House of Representatives] from 1997 through the 2000 session, and in 2000 I ran for the state senate [Colorado State Senate].  But what happened during that time when I was in the legislature is the law firm that my father [Penfield W. Tate II] and I had about the time I went to work for Governor Romer [Roy Romer] it had splintered, my dad and the other senior partner of the firm had split and so my father and I had a firm [Tate and Tate P.C.] and the other senior partner and one other junior partner went in another direction.  And so in '98 [1998] by this time my father had been gone for six years.  The other senior partner had alwa- also passed away.  So, after I'd been in the legislature for a year, the other junior partner and I started a conversation, actually another lawyer we both know recommended that the two of us ought to start talking again and we did and we ended up merging the two firms back together again in 1998.  So, at this point, still in the legislature, but also in 1998 I, I, I merge into another firm and the law firm actually is only two blocks away from the state capitol [Colorado State Capitol, Denver, Colorado].  So, I literally can drive to my office and then walk to the capitol every morning.
Speaker 1: Okay and the new firm is called?
Speaker 2: We--it was called Trimble, Tate, and Nulan [Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.].  We kept the same name because I had the same name as my dad and the two senior partners were King Trimble [King M. Trimble] who also actually held the state house seat I did before I did, and he was also a city councilman.  So, we kept King's name and my father's name and, and my other partner was Darrell Nulan.
Story_ID: 670377
Speaker 1: Well in terms of the, your district and the issues in your district, you know what are some of the memorable times in the house [Colorado House of Representatives]?
Speaker 2: Sure a, a number of them--I represented house district 8 [Colorado House of Representatives District 8] at the time, which in 1997 included a large chunk of northeast Denver [Colorado] including a number of neighborhoods, the one we're in now.  It was not a prednomin- predominately black community, but I'd say a plurality African American at the point.  It was about a third, a third, a third African American, Hispanic, and Anglo.  And you know a number of issues we had and always had was schools, quality of schools, and you know the legislature doesn't really run school districts, but we control funding, and we set laws that determine what curriculum, so schools was an important thing.  Business and, and, and trying to encourage small business to grow.  Civil rights issues were still huge, and what was still huge and unresolved in our state at that time was the plight of the entire LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender] community.  And so I sponsored hate crimes legislation every year that I was in the general assembly [Colorado General Assembly] trying to, to deal with that issue that had not been resolved in Colorado.  And we had a number of hate crimes in Colorado and in Wyoming that sort of continued to remind you that there was a lack of tolerance and acceptance that needed to be addressed.  So, that was one of the big issues that I also handled and then just a va- variety of issues.  My four years in the house of representatives I was always in the minority, so it was really a defensive action trying to stop what I felt was the religious right from doing certain things.  They tried to put voucher legislation in place that would have crippled public schools.  I had to fight against that.  Efforts to weaken anti-discrimination laws, had to fight against that.  Efforts to ensure affordable housing.  I was able, I was successful passing legislation on a bipartisan basis with that.
Story_ID: 670378
Speaker 1: But, as I look at my legislative career probably the most rewarding bill I carried was one that was brought to me by a number of constituents.  A number of my constituents including one of my personal friends came to me and asked me to carry a bill dealing with medical records.  And the law in Colorado at the time was if you are a patient you were entitled to get copies of your medical records from a hospital or a medical provider, but they had the right to and own the original records, which when you think about it you may think that's okay, but the way the law was being interpreted is that included things like X rays and most importantly mammograms.  And the, the group of constituents who came to me were all women who were breast cancer survivors, and that struck a chord with me because by that time my mother [Ellen Cooper Tate] had become a breast cancer survivor.  She had been detected with breast cancer.  She went through radiation and chemo and treatment, and she had to come to Denver [Colorado] for her treatment.  She couldn't receive it in Boulder [Colorado], so she would catch the bus every day during the treatment times.  I watched her lose her hair.  I watched her fingernails and toenails turn black.  I watched her lose a lot of weight, but, but she survived it.  And what the ladies told me was that when you take a mammogram you have the original film and it's your baseline and so when you do successive mammograms they always compla- compare this year's to your baseline to see if anything has changed.  And what was happening is health care providers in Colorado, if women changed jobs or health insurance weren't giving them their original mammograms.  They would give them copies, but the copies were so poor that the, the new treating physician couldn't read them and couldn't compare them to see if there was a problem.  So, I passed a law and it was passed on a bipartisan basis.  Actually it was a piece of legislation and when I ran it and Republicans, particularly Republican women, saw what the state of the law was they got outraged.  And when the Colorado medical association [Colorado Medical Society] rose up to object to my bill, they got even further incensed and so I passed the legislation and what we did was we made a change that said if you are a patient and you want your original records no matter what they are you're, the treating entity whether it's a hospital or clinic or doctor has to give you your records.  Now you have to pay for them to make a set of copies, but you own your original records and you can walk out the door with them.  And, and the two things we gave was you have to pay for the records and the other thing, and then I thought it was fair was if you're a patient and you demand your original records and you get them, if you lose them, damage them, destroy them, you can't go after the provider who gave you your records, and, and I thought that was fair.  No one should be able to file a claim against a doctor saying I lost my records in a fire, I'm suing you because the records should have shown something.  No, if you take responsibility for getting your records, you're completely responsible for them.  So, that was probably the, the piece of legislation that was the most rewarding for me.
Story_ID: 670379
Speaker 1: Now it was said, I, I've heard it said here that the right wing of course all over the United States had--always tries to drive a wedge between gay and lesbian rights by using the black church--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as that, that wedge.  Did that happen here?
Speaker 2: That was my experience here, but what, what I was able to do and I, and, and, and I was fortunate in this regard is by the time I'd gone to the legislature [Colorado General Assembly], I had a track record that I'd built up.  I was a civil rights lawyer who represented people who had been discriminated, not just in housing but in accommodations and excessive force cases and the pastors knew this.  Many of the pastors were the best referral service for my law firm.  I'd served for a mayor [Federico Pena], I'd served for a governor [Roy Romer], and I just, you know, frankly had a heart to heart with the pastors group, the Eastern Ministerial Alliance and they said, "We're gonna continue to support you in the state house [Colorado House of Representatives] and in the state senate [Colorado State Senate].  We disagree with you on this point," and they gave me all the religious reasons why, and I just gave them all the reasons why I didn't agree with them and they just said, "We're good.  We'll agree to disagree on this point, but we want you to continue to serve in the legislature because you're doing all of the things we care about and on this point we'll just have to disagree with you." And that's what we did.  So, we never talked about it after that one meeting.  We never argued about it.  They let me pursue something that I thought was another civil rights cause that I was committed to, and that's how we continued.
Story_ID: 670380
Speaker 1: Has the right here in the Denver [Colorado] area pushed creationism in the schools and that sort of thing (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have, they have.  Colorado still--but, but I think that, that is waning.  There have been so many efforts to push creationism and to limit a woman's right to choose, and all of these ballot measures they do down in flames by pretty resounding numbers.  I think the right has just given up trying to make the change in Colorado.  And I don't think we have a measure on the ballot this time for the first time in a long time.  But, you know, Colorado is a place where people can be fiscally conservative, but socially they're, they're more libertarian than anything else and they just feel that there are a number of things that government's got no business being involved in; and so it's hard to push a social agenda any further.
Story_ID: 670381
Speaker 1: Okay now the--another big issue it's, a big issue all over the country right now, but it--Colorado seems to have settled on, on a level is marijuana.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now it's even illegal [sic.] as a recreational you know drug here, and in 2000 there was staged something called and I'd never heard of it before and I saw on the--I laughed, the million marijuana march--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 2000 bouncing its name off of the Million Man March of 1995 where African Americans descended on Washington, D.C.  But the million marijuana march, what was that and you were the only, I think you were the only legislator in the state that, I mean that participated in it right?
Speaker 2: Oh no I didn't participate.  I, I had left the legislature [Colorado General Assembly]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --by the time that happened, 'cause I left in 2003 to, to run for mayor of Denver [Colorado], but marijuana--
Speaker 1: Did you participate in it?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay, well I got it wrong (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --I didn't participate in the march, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I'm, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, no that's quite all right, it's quite all right.
Speaker 1: But, but what did you think about it?
Speaker 2: You know I thought it was interesting.  I wasn't surprised.  And, and, and the, the whole marijuana piece has had an interesting history in Colorado.  What most people don't realize is marijuana used to be legal in Colorado until an effort to criminalize it that was really driven by a, a race- a racist campaign against Mexican immigrant workers.  And there was a campaign saying they'll smoke this stuff, they'll rape your women, no one's safe, and that's when marijuana was criminalized again in Colorado, but it was legal for many, many years.  What happened in Colorado over time is Colorado was one of the first states to adopt and allow medicinal marijuana, and that changed over time to re- people call it recreational.  I call it personal use.  Nobody talks about recreational drinking.  You either have a drink or you don't have a drink, so I, I have a problem with that label, but I, I'm not surprised and I knew the transition would come when, when, when personal use of marijuana was legalized it was an interesting campaign.  I remember talking with some of my clients who were in their thirties and forties, and they were telling me they said, "You know I don't understand this.  I'm opposed to this because marijuana is a great gateway drug to heroin and cocaine and all of this other stuff, but I, I just can't figure it out.  My mom and dad are gonna vote for this thing; they must be crazy."  And I used to always tell them you have to do the math.  And they'd look at me and ask, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Well tell me what your mom and dad, how old they were, and what they were doing in 1967 and 1968."  "Well they were in college."  I'm like, "Okay stop." You know and, and what has happened in Colorado is sort of that baby boom generation and maybe just a little bit older then baby boomers who lived through sort of the whole hippie, free love, Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California] experience of the '60s [1960s].  You know they're settled into their fifties and sixties now when these things hit the ballot and they look at their own lives and they used marijuana and they aren't crazy, they aren't criminals, they had careers, they raised families, they raised kids who aren't criminals and crazy, and you're not gonna convince them that marijuana is a bag thing or it's a gateway drug.  I, I heard one of the speakers when we were dealing with all of this said everything is a gateway to everything.  You can say hamburgers are a gateway to cocaine because people who use cocaine used to eat hamburgers, so therefore you know hamburger lead to drug use and abuse or something.  So, it was not a big surprise when that happened in Colorado and now we have it, it's legal in, in every respect here.  You can't consume it publically, but it's brought tons of tax revenues into the state at the state and local levels, so a lot of governments are pleased with it.
Speaker 1: Are minorities participating at the level they should in the business of marijuana?
Speaker 2: No, they aren't, they aren't.  And I think it's for a host of reasons.  Marijuana has often been an excuse to incarcerate large numbers of African Americans in the past, and so even, what I've noticed is even with the legalization in Colorado with only one exception I can think of African Americans involved where they're still dealing with it on the illegal side, which makes no sense to me why you would want to run the risk of incarceration now with the illegal sale of a product that's legal if you set up and license and do it correctly.  But, no there's, I can only think of one African A- two African Americans who are involved in the legal marijuana industry.
Story_ID: 670382
Speaker 1: Has anyone tried to organize the, the potential sellers of marijuana?  I mean I, I know there must be a lot of pe- people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that are still selling it, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know there, there are efforts even among those grow houses and dispensaries that are legally licensed they're trying to create trade groups and trade associations.  There's a bit of a struggle.  What I've noticed is there seems to be a split.  You have one group of folks who are kind of, they fit the stereotype that many people have.  They're, they're, the, the heads.  They're the people who are users, frequent users, and they just say, "Oh this is neat, it's cool, it's a business now, we can do it legally, let's open a shop and yeah man whatever goes."  But in the other extreme what you see is a lot of people in this industry are Wall Street level Ivy League educated business people who are treating this like a business and a business opportunity, and they're running it like that.  One friend of mine told me he was in a meeting with some venture capitalists from the East Coast who were out here talking about how they were gonna get involved and start buying up some of the small mom and pop marijuana operations to consolidate.  I don't know if that works with our licensing scheme, that's not part of my practice, but don't be surprised if, if this doesn't become akin to you know a franchise restaurant operation at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay is, is Colorado a good place to grow marijuana?
Speaker 2: Yeah, apparently it is because of the climate, but most of it is grown indoors in warehouses in climate controlled operations and in fact that phenomenon has had an impact on the real estate market here in Colorado where manufacturers who need warehouse space for distribution can't find it.  The, the grow houses have bought up a whole bunch of the warehouses around the community.  So, I have a client now I'm trying to help locate a warehouse, but we can't find one they can afford because the grow operations are willing to pay a lot more for them.
Story_ID: 670383
Speaker 1: So you're in the Colorado State Senate from 2001 to 2003--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and what, so did you represent a certain section of--
Speaker 2: I, I did.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I represented senate district 33 [Colorado State Senate District 33], which included most of my house district [Colorado House of Representatives District 8], and senate districts here are larger than the house districts.  I basically represented all of northeast Denver [Colorado], so if you start at the far northeast end of the city, which is basically Denver International Airport [Denver, Colorado], I represented that and all of the neighborhoods coming in.  So, Green Valley Ranch and Montbello, all of Park Hill, all of Stapleton, all of other neighborhoods, Swansea, Elyria [Elyria-Swansea], part of Globeville, into Five Points, into this area, Park Hill, City Park neighborhood.  I basically represented one quarter of the city.  And I ran for the senate in 2000 when another mentor of mine was term limited, we have term limits in Colorado, she had served her twelve years and so I decided to pursue the seat.  Again I had a Democratic primary, so I had someone else I had to beat.  So, I won the primary handily seventy to thirty and ran for the senate seat and won that by a larger margin.  We're a heavily Democratic region, so and then had the honor of serving in the senate.  And serving in the senate when we started in 2001, I truly enjoyed that because for the first time in my legislative career I was in the majority.  And so we had a one vote margin in the senate, eighteen to seventeen, but that meant we controlled all the committees and we were leadership.  And at the same time I went to the senate, I was elected by my peers to serve on the Joint Budget Committee.  In, in Colorado it's, I don't know it may be the same in other states, but what we have is the governor in our state doesn't do the budget.  The governor can propose a budget and has to propose a budget by November of the year that the governor submits to the legislature [Colorado General Assembly], but after that point, that's the end of the governor's role because the legislature in Colorado controls the purse strings.  The legislature writes and approves the budget and when the governor gets it, the governor can veto certain lines, but can't move money from one place to another.  And in, in the legislature, the budget starts with the six person Joint Budget Committee.  So, I was one of six legislators out of a hundred who wrote the state's budget.  And that was a huge responsibility.  It was an influential position.  It gave me an opportunity again to do a lot of things and to try to push for some change that I wanted to see in state government and in the community.
Story_ID: 670384
Speaker 1: Now in, in 2003 you resigned from office--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --to run for mayor, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a hard decision too.  I, I, I knew I was gonna run for mayor of Denver [Colorado], and, and I pro- I, once I worked for Federico [Federico Pena] I had an idea.  I said, you know this is the job that if there's a political job you want to have in Colorado, it's mayor of Denver. And I felt that way because it was the place where just the opposite of the, the state in Denver the mayor writes and controls the budget, controls the operation of city government, and controls the purse spring, strings and sets policy.  And the neatest thing about the job of mayor of Denver is you can control all of these things and make immediate change and improve people's lives and if you've made a mistake you go to bed and wake up the next morning and change it and do it right.  And so that is the position that I really was interested in having and so I had started campaigning in 2002 for the mayor's race, which took place in May of 2003.  As the campaign wound on, you know the, the relative fates of the candidates moved back and forth and we were closing in on the leaders.  And the leader, the lead in the race had changed over time, and so we thought we were pretty well positioned.  And I met with some of my campaign people and they said, "You know we know you love serving in the senate [Colorado State Senate], but one of the issues is it's hard to have you campaign when you have to spend all morning on the floor of the senate."  And the way the election calendar lined up was the race for mayor of Denver, that election, was the second to the last day of the legislative session.  And so I got to a point where it was becoming difficult to raise money to campaign to do the things I needed to do and bear, be where I needed to be and it was tough.  You know it's hard to run for office.  It's hard to get elected, but when you get elected it takes a lot of time to serve and so I weighed it closely and I just decided that I wanted, it was all or nothing.  And I know people would, they told me then and they've told me since that was not the political thing to do, but I think in my heart I wasn't necessarily concerned about the political thing to do, I was concerned about what was the right thing to do for me, what I thought made the most sense, so yes I resigned from the senate.  So Valentine's Day 2003 was my last day in the Colorado senate.
Story_ID: 670385
Speaker 1: Okay all right so pro- your prospects for mayor now, now Denver [Colorado] had just had a black mayor right first, first black mayor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb--
Speaker 1: --Wellington Webb.
Speaker 2: --and he had served twelve years.  He was serving out three full terms, which by our constitution and laws was the maximum amount of years he could serve as mayor.  So, it was an open race.  I think gosh there were twelve of us in the race and maybe it whittled down to, to nine.  But, it was an open seat and every--we knew there was gonna be a new mayor.  I was not successful.  I came in fourth out of the race and didn't make the runoff.  Only the top two go to the runoff, but I endorsed John Hickenlooper who had won the, the primary and I endorsed him and he ended up to go onto run and win the race for mayor.  And then I chaired his, co-chaired his transition team to help him select his cabinet and people to work in his administration.
Story_ID: 670386
Speaker 1: Now in 2005 you were appointed by John Hickenlooper to the Denver water board [Denver Board of Water Commissioners], which sounds like a torture (laughter), but it's not, it's not that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) No it's not that kind of water boarding.  And, and Denver [Colorado] is interesting you know people, you'll hear a saying out west that whiskey is for drinking, water is for fighting, so water was a precious commodity here.  And what happened in Denver over a hundred years ago is the founders of the Denver water company [Denver City Water Company] and one other water company [Denver Union Water Company] merged and formed the Denver Water Department [Denver Water], but the city decided, and I think appropriately so, to, to take the whole issue of water and water management out of the political arena.  So rather than keep it as a department of city government where it could be politicized by city council votes and things of that nature, they created it as a separate and autonomous department of city government, so there are five commissioners that run the department, we're appointed by the mayor, but once we are appointed the mayor can't remove us; we serve six year terms and there's no limit on how many terms we can serve.  So, yes John appointed me in 2005 and I've been on the board ever since and I'm currently president of the board.  This is my second term as president of the board of water commissioners.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is as you indicated is very important for Denver.  It's a major export of the City of Denver right is water.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well you know what has happened over the years is when this started all of the customers of Denver water were inside the city.  But, as the region has grown, literally half of our customers are outside of the City and County of Denver.  And on top of that, Denver's water supply comes from the Western Slope, the mountains.  In Colorado, most of the water supply for the Front Range communities along the eastern side of the mountains it's basically snow melt from snow that accumulates in the mountains, you know melts, goes into reservoirs, and then gets diverted across the Continental Divide to the Front Range for, for city use.  And so that's what we have in Denver.  And, and we have senior water rights because the city is so old and has been established much longer than other parts of the state, so, and Colorado has an antiquated system of water law that you don't see in a lot of other places where it's literally first in time, first in right; and Denver is first in time in a lot of instances.
Story_ID: 670387
Speaker 1: Are there any major crises from this period of time, I mean to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know a number of them.  You know we, we live in the arid west where the, the plain, the Great Plains meet the Rocky Mountain.  This is a semi-arid region, not quite desert, but it's dry.  When I talk to my colleagues around the country and we talk about different water policy and they'll ask why we do certain things and I often tell them, "Because you live east of the Mississippi [Mississippi River] and you have one thing I don't have and that's rain."  We don't get very much rain, and so how you manage, conserve, and preserve water is vitally important, and probably you know the things I'm most proud of in my time on the, the board of Denver Water [Denver Board of Water Commissioners] is we entered into something called the Colorado winter compact agreement [Compact of Colorado Communities] with probably twenty some entities of the western side of the divide where we agreed to settle a number of longstanding lawsuits and work cooperatively on how the city gets water to use and we share some of that with some of the western communities.  We'll spend some of our money and help improve their infrastructure and hopefully improve our storage capacity.  So, we did that in the mountains, and we have another project the WISE project [Water Infrastructure and Supply Efficiency Partnership] where we have partnered with our neighbor to the east, Aurora [Colorado] and with Douglas County [Colorado] to the south well you know the, the southern suburbs currently exist off of an aquifer, so they pump water out of the ground, but we're depleting the aquifer.  So, we're putting together a program where we will pipe water to them and have them stop pumping water out of the ground and in wet years we've got the technology where we can actually charge the aquifer, recharge it, then force the water back in the ground as a storage underground reservoir essentially and in dry years those communities if there's not enough we can pump, pipe to them, they'll pump it out of the aquifer again.
Speaker 1: Okay so you know, it took engineers a long time to figure this out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they're still trying to.
Speaker 2: And this is huge because as a community, as a state, as an area you can't grow if there's not enough water to sustain building new houses and having buildings reloc- businesses relocate.  So, this is, this is huge, this is huge.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, are you still, are you still involved with the wa- are you still on the water board?
Speaker 2: I'm still on the board, yes.
Speaker 1: Still on the water board and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, still on the board.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: I have at least one more year to do, so.
Story_ID: 670388
Speaker 1: The family firm [Trimble, Tate, Nulan, Evans and Holden P.C.] is, is no longer in existence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it, what happened is in 2006 the firm was still going and I, in talking with my the partners, made a decision I just wasn't comfortable with and in agreement with the direction the firm was heading and so I left the firm my dad [Penfield W. Tate II] founded in 2007 and joined another law firm, the international firm of Greenberg Traurig [Greenberg Traurig LLP] and probably two years after I left the, my dad's firm, the remaining partners couldn't make it work and so they shut the doors.  And so after nearly thirty years of existence the firm my dad founded closed and I stayed with Greenberg Traurig from 2006 until 2015 and I'm now with law firm of Kutak Rock [Kutak Rock LLP].  It's a national law firm based out of Omaha [Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay Kutak Rock in, and you, you, you, you still specialize in contract law?
Speaker 2: I, finance development.  I'm what they call a bond lawyer.  I, I help governments borrow money to build infrastructure, airports, roads, bridges, schools, sometimes mixed use developments like buildings with retail on the ground floor, commercial, and then residential up above--a host of development projects.
Story_ID: 670389
Speaker 1: Okay are there any, are you involved in national politics at again at any level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at a, at a, at a much lesser level.  I made a conscious decision not to go to the Democratic National Convention [2016 Democratic National Convention, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] this year as a delegate for Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] even though I'd been a delegate for her husband [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] twice.  And I didn't go as a delegate for President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] either, but I'm still active.  I work on campaigns.  I support a number of candidates for office.  I raise money for them.  On occasion, I'll provide political advice and guidance and support.  And, and I stay active in another way.  I'm a political commentator now, so I--we have a local TV station Channel 12 [KBDI-TV, Broomfield, Colorado], it's public broadcasting.  We have a show that runs every Friday night 'Colorado Inside Out,' and I'm one of the regular panelists.  I appear roughly every other week, and then the local CBS affiliate, Channel 4 [KCNC-TV, Denver, Colorado], I've done election day coverage for them for probably the last six years.  This year just because of the very odd and unique dynamic of this presidential election, they've asked me to provide some additional support, so I've actually been on the air literally once a week doing a feature with them since the Republican National Convention [2016 Republican National Convention, Cleveland, Ohio].  I started out commenting on what occurred at the RNC, then the next week commented on what occurred with the DNC and since then, especially now every week on Friday evening I appear on Channel 4 and we talk about what's occurred in the political environment over the prior week.  So, and I'll do that until election day and I'll, I'll work election day coverage for Channel 4.  So, I stay involved in politics in that respect also.
Speaker 1: Have you ever written a column?
Speaker 2: I've never written a, well that's not true.  I've done some guest columns, yeah, for the newspaper; I have, mostly the local newspapers.  Because I was the elected representative in my current neighborhood for over six years, they on occasion will ask me to write a piece about what's going on just so people can have that locally.  I've never written for The Denver Post though.
Story_ID: 670390
Speaker 1: I know you spent a lot of time in the, your, your prime years you know doing special fathering for your daughter [Elleana Tate]--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause she needed, you know, more attention.  Now that she's grown and, and living on her own are you considering political office again or?
Speaker 2: I think the, the way I'd put it is yes and it depends on the opportunity.  But, you know politics is often about timing and so you know you may have an interest, but if there's not an opening that occurs when you have an interest it can be difficult.  In, in the political environment today unseating an incumbent is very difficult, and, and I live in an area where most of the elected representatives are incumbent Democrats.  I could have run for the senate seat this year.  It was vacant because the person who held the seat was term limited, but I'd made a decision that I didn't want to go back to the state senate [Colorado State Senate], so I didn't run for that seat and I don't want to run for the state house seat.  I'm not interested in going back into the state legislature [Colorado General Assembly].  Who knows--if an opportunity to run for mayor of Denver [Colorado] comes up again, I'd have to take a hard look at that.
Story_ID: 670391
Speaker 1: What are your views on the national election this year?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, you know it's a very interesting time.  On the one hand when you look at Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], I, I would say just objectively based on her resume of what she's done, she is probably the most qualified person to serve as commander and chief that we've seen in the last fifty years, someone who's become a candidate.  I, I don't know any--she's more qualified now than her husband [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was when he got elected president.  There's just no, no question about it.  She's heads and shoulders I think she's got those qualifications.  But, for some reason there's been this image created about likability and there I think is a perception people don't like her and they don't trust her.  I do think there's some self-inflicted wounds.  I don't think she's handled her explanation about the emails very well, but you know gosh from my perspective no one's charged her with leaking state secrets.  No one's claimed that the country has been damaged or harmed.  I understand the concern about you wanna make sure your elected officials are careful with classified information, but based on everything I've seen and heard she has been 'cause there's been no breach of classified information.  So I, I'm a bit stunned about a lot of the conversation there.  And then I look at the other side, well not the other side, three sides 'cause I wanna talk about Gary Johnson and Weld [William F. Weld] also.  But when I look at Donald Trump [Donald John Trump] I see, and I know I'm a Democrat so I have a particular point of view, but I see the exact opposite.  I see someone who could not be less qualified and more ill suited for the position of commander in chief.  This is a person who has a temper, flashes it frequently, and from my perspective without any regard to the potential impact it has on things around him.  I think he's said some things that you can be as polite and diplomatic as you want, but some of the things he's said have been racist, have been sexist, are offensive.  He offended, you know he ra- in the primary process he ran against a bunch of people I may not like, but I respect them.  You know I, I respect Rick Santorum.  I don't agree with him, I respect him.  I respect Jeb Bush.  I, I respect Kasich [John Kasich], the governor of Ohio.  I don't agree with them, although I respect them, I'm not convinced he respects them and I'm disturbed.  I don't know who he respects other than himself.  And I know that's a dangerous thing to say because he may get elected president of the United States, but that's my opinion.  And so this is a very interesting time for America again, a very interesting time because I think the support that you see that he's garnering tells you something about where we still are with this country.  And when you look at this political campaign in the context of the shootings in Orlando [Florida] and in Oklahoma and in other places you have, you have to be concerned.  You have to be concerned.  And I was talking with someone the other day, actually someone who does the Channel 12 show ['Colorado Inside Out'] with me, and we were commenting on the fact how can an unarmed black man be stopped in Tulsa, Oklahoma and killed when an armed bombing terrorist in New York [New York] miraculously--after a shootout gets captured alive and they can interrogate him.  Something is wrong with this picture.  And, and so that, that whole, this whole phenomenon I think sort of serves as the backdrop for this political campaign and this, this certain political time in context for America.  We're, we're truly in, in difficult and interesting times; and, and I think there's a reason to be concerned about the choice America may make.
Story_ID: 670392
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I, I think as a community--it's interesting.  Integration has helped the black community and in many ways has hurt the black community.  I think there's a lack of cohesion and, and by cohesion I don't mean we have to be wed to group think.  I've never believed that every black had to be a Democrat, that every black had to be a social liberal, that every black person had to be this, no I, I think we all have different experiences.  We ought to be all over the political spectrum, but there are some common denominators that I think you've gotta realize.  Black kids still aren't doing well generally speaking in public schools and privatizing all the schools and making all the schools charter is not the solution.  We still I think have missed the boat in many ways in terms of economic development and economic self empowerment.  You know I look at in Denver [Colorado] we used to have a historic Five Points neighborhood where the district and the businesses were predominantly black owned, and ironically segregation is what helped them thrive because blacks couldn't shop or go other places for goods and services they had to go to Five Points.  Well that's now changed and as you travel Five Points now, which was in both of my legislative districts when I served [in the Colorado General Assembly], most of the properties there have changed hands and they're owned by Anglos and the neighborhood now is no longer predominantly black, it's predominantly white.  And so you know some of the, the commonality, the common thread, the whole concept of collective action and mutual support is being lost.  And you know it's a shame if all of these police shootings is what brings the community back together, but I think we need to be mindful of that.  And, and I think it's important because I, I, I have this conversation and debate with a number of my colleagues often.  To have a cohesive black community or Hispanic community does not mean you're excluding anyone else.  It's about promoting and being aware of common interest.  The majority community doesn't think about it that way because they just take it as a given.  It's like I've always hung out with Joe and Betty Sue and Fred here, that's, we're neighbors, we're friends we, we have common interests.  You do, but your coming together indirectly excludes some people.  You know I'm a member of a couple you know black fraternities and people often ask me, "Why are you in black fraternities," and I said, "They exist because when my predecessors were growing up they couldn't join white fraternities." And so that's why these black organizations exist now and need to continue to exist because as long as, as for me, so long as I see these shootings and, and killings in Chicago [Illinois], in New York [New York], and Tulsa and Orlando [Florida] I know we still have a racial issue in this country that needs to be addressed.  And I think the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is right. We have to learn how to talk about it and talk to one another about this issue.  We can't sweep it under the rug.  It's not going anywhere 'cause just when you think things have settled down, you get a Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Story_ID: 670393
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, when we were talking about the election this year, you had mentioned that two major candidates, but you also mentioned two others, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah th- th- and I, and I, I think Jill Stein with the Green Party is an outlier, but I think Gary Johnson, the former Republican governor of New Mexico and his running mate, the former Republican governor of Massachusetts, Bob Weld [William F. Weld] are, they're, they're interesting in that more people are focusing on third party candidates than I think they have since the, the candidacy of Ross Perot.  Ralph Nader I think took the hit for costing Al Gore the election, that psycho, and, and I think there's some, some logic to that, to that belief but he was more protest, an angry protest.  What's different this time around is I think with, with Johnson and Weld you actually see some people gravitating to the Libertarian Party thinking you know I agree with much of their message about limited government and, and fiscal control, but social liberalism or at least government staying out of people's way in terms of social issues.  Now the Libertarian Party stands for more than that, and I think if people want to support Libertarian candidates they need to understand that this is the party that wants to radically shrink the federal budget and they want to shrink it by abolishing the federal income tax system and dismantling the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] and so you've gotta ask yourself how do we fund any services that we all agree we need to have.  How do you fund the [U.S.] military if you do some of these things?  How do you have a [U.S.] Department of Education, homeland security [U.S. Department of Homeland Security]?  How do you do these things?  So you know there, there are some things the Libertarian Party stands for that I think if people take a closer look at their platform they'll, they'll say whoa maybe not, but what I think is going to happen and what we may see happen is the Libertarian Party may moderate a little bit in some of its views in order to broaden its net and get more people.  This may be the first time around for the Libertarian Party in terms of playing a major role in a presidential campaign.  But depending on what that party determines to do, it may not be the last.  They, their popularity may continue to grow.
Story_ID: 670394
Speaker 1: Do you see something like maybe the Black Lives Matter movement morphing at some point into a party?
Speaker 2: I think there's a possibility.  It--probably not a stand alone party, it would probably coalesce with something else, perhaps out of the Latino community.  It's interesting you've got Black Lives Matter on the one hand and you've got this insurgent, you know, sentiment growing partly in response to Donald Trump [Donald John Trump] talking about sending a bunch of people back to Mexico and building a wall.  You know and we, we really have this issue in Colorado with a group they call the DREAMers [Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act] who came here at two, three, four, and five because their parents crossed the border without documentation.  But, the only country these kids ever remember living in is America, and they don't speak much Spanish, if any, and they've been educated in U.S. schools their entire lives, and now they're graduated and ready to go to college and they're finding out for the first time or maybe realizing for the first time, I'm undocumented, I'm not a U.S. citizen, but I've lived the last seventeen years of my life in the United States of America, you send me back to Mexico what am I gonna do?  It's not a country that I'm really a part of and it's not part of me.  And so I, I see that potentially coalescing into a movement also depending on how some things shape up here in the election process.
Story_ID: 670395
Speaker 1: All right, so as we sit here today you are the last Penfield Tate III [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and is there anything we haven't asked you that, that we need to talk about before I ask the last two questions?
Speaker 2: I don't know if there's anything you haven't asked me.  Let me just go back and comment on a couple of things real quick.  One thing that I forgot to mention when I talked about I didn't like Oklahoma, but I loved Chicago [Illinois] and it sort of ties into something we talked about a minute ago about integration and its impact.  One of the impacts of segregation is because we weren't allowed to live on the [U.S.] military base we lived in the city and I told you I went to Chicago Public Schools.  Well one of the neat byproducts of that was our home was next door to a renowned band leader, Red Saunders and his wife Violet [sic. Ella Saunders] was a dancer.  Well, you know, Mr. Saunders had a nightclub [Club DeLisa] on the South Side of Chicago and as kids on occasion we got to dress up and go to the club and we'd see Ella Fitzger- Ella Fitzgerald and Duke Ellington and all of these people perform.  But the other neat thing was on occasion Mr. Saunders sort of had an afterhours club in his basement.  So, as little kids, we used to get dressed, you know wash up, and get in our pajamas and we'd be able to sit in the windowsill or sit in the corner and watch all of these luminaries roll up in limousines and cabs, Lena Horne and Count Basie and all of these folks and got to hear them sort of perform impromptu and stuff.  That, that sort of just, that exposure to that glamorous experience was also part of why I liked Chicago so much.  It just, it was, it was, it was a neat place to grow up as a kid, and, and it, it was at a time and you know where at least I never experienced all of the gang stuff and everything else, the killings that we see going on there now.  But, Chicago was a neat town.  It was one of my favorite places I've ever lived.
Story_ID: 670396
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to--well it's, it's, it's about legacy.  You know I, I start off by saying you're the last Penfield Tate [HistoryMaker Penfield W. Tate III] right now.  I guess there could be another one, but, but sir how would, what today do you consider to be your legacy and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I think my legacy is as a father and because my daughter [Elleana Tate] had special needs and because much of her life I was in political or elected office and was visible, her circumstances were pretty well known and documented in this community and also I think my role as a parent and as a daddy, and I use the term 'cause that's what, she still calls me daddy, were always on display.  And it's probably the thing I'm proudest of.  I've gotten a lot of awards in my life, and the one that, that I'm probably most proud of is the father of the year award from the American Diabetes Association because when I got the award my daughter did the introduction for me.  And because of her visual impediment, it wasn't written, it wasn't scripted.  She did it all in her, off the top of her head and she was so poised and so elegant and so confident.  And, and there wasn't a dry eye in the house by the time she was done.  So my daughter is part of my legacy.  I, I you know she's on the right path towards having a full rich life and, and I'm pleased that I was able to contribute in some way to help her put her on that path.  I think the other legacy I'd like to have unless something very odd happens there will not be a Penfield IV.  I'm at an age where I think that ship has sailed.  I'd like to be remembered as someone who really cared about the community and invested in it with what my church calls your time, your talents, and your treasures.  I've invested money and given money to a number of different causes over the years because I truly believe about them and care about them and in people and in candidates.  I've given countless hours to a number of nonprofit organizations in the community because again I care about them, I'm concerned about them, and I think they can make a difference.  And as both a lawyer and an elected official, as a lawyer I've given countless hours of pro bono assistance to businesses and causes in the African American community because I think they need to have them and, and I knew that if I didn't step up no one else would and, and so I did.  And there were times when I was sort of disappointed with the result, but I'm not disappointed with the fact that I've decided to make the effort and give the effort.  I think that's important.  My father [Penfield W. Tate II] used to always tell us, my sisters and I, that nothing is ever forgotten, that often a contribution, no matter how small, someone remembers it somewhere.  And, and I'm continually reminded of that.  Not a week goes by where someone doesn't say something to me about, "I remember your dad or your dad and I did this," and, and even today you know just last week I had someone call me at my office asking for help on a case I can't help them with anymore, it's not my practice, but they said, "You and your father helped me back in 1989 when I had this issue," and, and so you know people always remember the things that he did and he always encouraged us to do our best, give our best effort because everything matters and everybody's paying attention.
Story_ID: 670397
Speaker 1: I will always remember something--I'm trying to remember what grade the young man was in, a fifth grader said to me when I spoke at my daughter's [Elleana Tate] continuation.  I was talking to the kids about you know moving forward, going on to junior high school, I think we call it middle school now, this that and other thing and, and setting a good example, and the young boy said to me afterwards he said, "Thank you, my mom and dad said I have to thank you for coming."  I was like, "Okay thank your mom and dad for having you thank me."  And he said, "I paid attention to what you said about setting a good example."  I said, "Okay." And he said, "'Cause we're watching you even when you don't know we're paying attention."  And I'm like wow that was very interesting (laughter), and it just got me thinking you know this is a fifth grader telling me this that, and it, it just struck home.  Another thing that I get from my public service is when I was in the senate [Colorado State Senate] and in the majority and therefore we controlled the budget I had a practice.  I sent letters to every kid at every school that made the honor roll, every school in my district [Colorado State Senate District 33].  And I remember going around the corner to the dry cleaners one day and I went to pick up some stuff and the young woman was waiting on me and she saw my credit card and she rang up my, me paying for the services, she said, "And I hate to do this, can you wait here just a minute, just a minute I'll be right back."  I'm like, "Okay," and she ran out the door.  I'm like what did I do, she has left.  In about five minutes she came back holding this piece of paper and it was a letter I'd written to her on my senate stationery that she kept because I congratulated her for making the honor roll when she was in high school.  And she told me she said, "I wanted you to know I've always kept this.  I just ran home and took it off the refrigerator 'cause I still keep it posted on the refrigerator."  It was the only time in her life she ever made the honor roll in school, and I wrote her a letter and sign- I signed them all personally, I'd sit there for hours and sign them all, and that gave me a, a great feeling to know that she cared enough about that--that she's kept it after all these years.  So, just that I tried to make a difference and tried to help.
Story_ID: 670398
Speaker 1: That's me.  That's my sister Paula Tate.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, okay let me, let me check.  Okay go ahead, you're good, I'm sorry, you're okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay that's my cousin Patricia Cooper [ph.].  That's my sister Gail Tate.  That's my cousin Beatrice Green [ph.].
Speaker 1: This one here?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't tell who that is.
Speaker 1: Okay this one?
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Speaker 1: This one?
Speaker 2: My sister Roslyn Tate, my cousin Stewart Holland [ph.], my cousin Karen Green [ph.], and my cousin Charles Cooper [ph.], and my cousin Darmone Holland [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is before 1992 we know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I know, I know what year it is now.  It's actually 1991.  I didn't talk about this, but in '91 [1991] my mother had four older brothers [sic.], one died in '91 [1991], my dad died in '92 [1992], and another one died in '93 [1993] and all of them died in an eighteen month time period so that was yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's my father Penfield, II [Penfield W. Tate II].  That's my aunt, Shirley Cooper [ph.].  That's my cousin, Barbara Holland [ph.].  Right, hold it, right behind her is her sister, Beatrice Green.  That's my uncle, Elliot Cooper.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Lean back a little.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Not, you can lean forward.  Go ahead a lean forward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah that's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry you have to do that over again--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --because you were blocking--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, it's okay go ahead.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my father Penfield Tate, II.  That's my aunt, Shirley Cooper.  That's my cousin, Barbara Holland.  That's my cousin, Beatrice Green, my uncle, Elliot Cooper, my uncle, Charles Cooper, my cousin, Richard Green, my co- that's my mother.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Ellen Tate [Ellen Cooper Tate].  My cousin, Roslyn Green [ph.], and my grand uncle, Douglas Green [ph.].
Speaker 1: That's my mother and I in 1993, the American Civil Liberties Union gave my father an award posthumously and that's my mother and I accepting it for him.
Speaker 2: Okay good.
Speaker 1: And that's, and Larry [Larry Crowe], you had talked about it, that's why I'm wearing the beads 'cause I had did that--
Speaker 2: Oh okay yeah.
Speaker 1: --sort of in, in memory of him.
Speaker 2: And this I'll replace with another photo, but this is my wife Paulette [Paulette Tate] and I and another couple at the National Minority Supplier Development Council conference.  And my wife is the shorter woman with the long dark hair.  In one photo, she's kissing me and I have the green glasses on.
Speaker 1: This is me and former speaker of the house, Andrew Romanoff at I believe this one's the 1972 [sic. 1992] convention in New York.  We were both delegates to the convention, and that's on the convention floor.
Speaker 2: Starting from the left that's former first lady and former state representative, Wilma Webb [HistoryMaker Wilma J. Webb], to my immediate right in the picture, then me in the middle of the picture.  To my immediate left in the picture, is Wilma Taylor who was a neighborhood activist here in the community.  And to the far, my far left in the picture is Hattie Portis [ph.].  This again is from the 1992 Democratic National Convention in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: This photo, the three faces you can see in the far left is the late Reverend Jesse Boyd [Jesse Langston Boyd Jr.], pastor of Shorter A.M.E. Church [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church, Denver, Colorado].  In the middle was then Mayor Wellington E. Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], and then I'm on the far right.  I, I think this is a picture when I was in the state house we're at a breakfast meeting at Shorter A.M.E. Church around the corner here.
Speaker 2: A picture of me and former first lady and secretary of state, Hillary Rodham Clinton.  This photo was taken on a visit, taken on a visit she made to Denver [Colorado].  I think it was 1993.  It was after President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had been elected.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and former state senator and former state representative Joyce Lawrence.  We're on the floor of the state senate [Colorado State Senate].  This was the last day that I served in the legislature [Colorado General Assembly].  Hold on let me see if this is it. (Pause) Nope, I'm wrong let me say that again.  This is former state representative Joyce Lawrence.  This is my last, one of my last official days on the house, the floor of the house of representatives because I ran for and won election to the state senate, and I had already declared before the end of the legislative session that I was running for the senate and I, I had to file and once I filed it was known I would not be returning to the house--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so gave me this certificate when they knew I would be coming back to the House of Representatives.
Speaker 2: This is my daughter, Elleana, E-L-L-E-A-N-A, Elizabeth Wilson Tate [Elleana Tate].  She has two middle names.  And this photo is--I think if we turn it over on the back, Larry, I can tell you how old the photo is.  It may have what grade she was in, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is when she first started school.  I just wanna provide a little context for this.  Because my daughter was, had developmental issues, Denver has a program where kids with special educational needs can actually start school at three years old.  So, this is her picture when she's three years old when she first started what we call Early Learning Center, ELC, in school.  That picture you have in your hand, Larry, in the pink sweater I think that's when she was in the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photo from 1997 I had just been elected to the Colorado House of Representatives.  I was just beginning my tenure as a state legislator, and this is a picture of a portion of the Democratic legislative caucus [Black Democratic Legislative Caucus of Colorado].  Two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen, eighteen, so there are six of us missing.  There were twenty-four.  There are sixty six members in the house.  There were only twenty-four Democrats when I first got elected; that's all but six of us.
Speaker 1: This is a story that ran in the newspaper when I accepted the appointment to serve on Governor Romer's [Roy Romer] cabinet, and this is the picture and the press release of my appointment to the governor's cabinet.
Speaker 2: This is the photo, once I took the appointment with the governor, this was sort of my official photo as a state employee and as the executive director of the department [Colorado Department of Personnel and Administration].
Speaker 1: That's my dad, and that picture I picked it because it's interesting, it's actually a photo of him doing something he and I used to do.  We made a house call to a client who wasn't able to get to us, so.
Speaker 2: Oh really okay.
Speaker 1: This is the day I graduated and got my B.A. from Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado].  On the far left is my father, I'm in the middle, on the right is my mother, and in front of me is my cousin, Charles Michael Cooper [ph.].  He and I were born forty-nine days apart in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so we've always been like brothers.  But, he, he started school at Delaware Valley College [Delaware Valley University, Doylestown, Pennsylvania] and transferred to CSU, so we graduated from CSU together.
Speaker 2: This picture dates back to 1974.  It's me, right behind me is my sister, Paula Jane Tate.  Standing and to the right is my sister, Gail Allyson Tate, A-L-L-Y-S-O-N; and the, the little girl immediately to my left is my sister, Roslyn, R-O-S-L-Y-N, Lurye, L-U-R-Y-E, Tate.
Story_ID: 670399
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me when I was in law school.  It's actually a picture taken--some of my classmates held a surprise birthday party for me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, please. Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my law school graduating picture nineteen seventy--1981 Antioch School of Law [University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and Federico Pena when I worked for him as an aide in the mayor's office.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's one of my grade school pictures, and I think it says on the back what year it was 'cause I don't remember.
Speaker 2: It is seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh grade, so that would have been 1968, '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: This is a picture from college, CSU [Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado] specifically, the summer of 1976 when I worked full-time for the university.  I was a student there.
Speaker 1: That's another one of my class pictures.  I don't remember which one.  Again it should say on the back where that's from.
Speaker 2: That's ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Ninth grade, so that would have been 1970 through '71 [1971]
Speaker 2: This is the picture of my sixth grade class in 1967, Mrs. Pollard's [ph.] class.  This was my first year going to school in Boulder, Colorado.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please.  You can keep talking.
Speaker 2: University Hill Intermediate School [University Hill Elementary School, Boulder, Colorado].
Speaker 1: This is my class picture from Charles S. Deneen Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois.  It is my first grade picture.  I went to kindergarten and first grade at De- Deneen Elementary School.
