Story_ID: 533203
Speaker 1: Our HistoryMaker today--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: --and Mr. Thompson [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], welcome, thank you very much for giving us your time.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you for being here--
Speaker 1: I would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and thank you for asking me to do this.
Speaker 1: Thank you. I would like to start by asking you, your full name, and if you would please, spell out each name.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It's Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N, Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: Jr., all right. And where are we today?
Speaker 2: We are in Los Angeles [California] at my home in Westwood.
Speaker 1: All right. And the very difficult question of what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I think is April 17, 2007.
Story_ID: 533204
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you some People magazine questions--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) meant to relax you, and to relax me. And I'll begin by asking you, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I suppose it would be, maybe yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be swordfish probably.
Speaker 1: Okay. These are very unusual answers. And your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation spot is St. John's [sic. St. John], the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year or season?
Speaker 2: The spring or the fall in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], spring or fall in L.A.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, finally, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, let's roll, I suppose.
Speaker 1: All right. Let's roll, that's a good one.
Story_ID: 533205
Speaker 1: I'm now going to ask you about your place of birth and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Yes. I was born in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania on October 25, 1943.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your parents, I'm going to ask you first about your maternal, and then your paternal. Let's start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace her family, her--a family history?
Speaker 2: It's very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First, I'm sorry, give me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Emmitt, E-M-M-I-T-T, Nickens was her maiden name, Emmitt Nickens Thompson.
Speaker 1: Okay. And her place of birth is?
Speaker 2: She was born in Steelton, Pennsylvania--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right outside of Harrisburg. Well, maybe Bressler [Pennsylvania], B-R-E-S-S-L-E-R, which is also right outside of Harrisburg.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the date of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1920. She's now deceased--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --'cause she died in, in 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a month or, and or day?
Speaker 2: She died in July (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm sorry--birth?
Speaker 2: Her, her birth?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Was like April 6th--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --two thousand twenty [sic. 1920]--April 6th, 5th, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not too good on dates, but it was some--I know it was in April.
Speaker 1: Okay. And she recently passed?
Speaker 2: She passed in, in July of 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, good enough. And now, let's, let's go to your father.
Speaker 2: My father is Samuel Coleman Thompson [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sr. once I was born. He was born on December 19th. I do know his birthday, December 19, 20--1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he died in 1999 at eighty-nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Excuse me, eighty-eight--he was almost eighty-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay. And his place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Coatesville, C-O-A-T-E-S-V-I-L-L-E, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 533206
Speaker 1: And, again, let's go back to your mother's [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] side of the family. And how far back can you trace her family tree or her roots?
Speaker 2: Well, depends of whether you're talking about her mother's side, or her father's side?
Speaker 1: Let's start with her mother's side.
Speaker 2: Her, her mother's side, her mother was Helen Nickens [Helen Wilson Nickens], who was Helen Wilson, and she was from Sach, Virginia [ph.]. And she was half-white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Sach is S--S-A --
Speaker 2: S-A-C-H.
Speaker 1: --C-H?
Speaker 2: S-A-C-H, Virginia. And she is, she was half- half-white. Her father was a doctor, I understand, a Dr. Wilson, and her mother was a, was a black lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, you know, I, I recently made some inquiries in this regard because I have a new son [Samuel C. Thompson III]. And I wanted, wanted to alert him to these issues, but I haven't been able to trace that back any further than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And then--
Speaker 2: On her father's side--
Speaker 1: --on her father's side?
Speaker 2: Her father's side is Robert Carroll Nickens [Robert Nickens], and this is very interesting. The Nickens family can trace its ancestry back to '8 [1608], 1609, or 16--it's going to be 1680, or thereabouts in, in Virginia--
Speaker 1: Wow. Right.
Speaker 2: --to a gentleman named Black Dick [Richard Nickens], who was, who was freed by his, by his slave owner [John Carter II], and who subsequently took the name of Nickens.
Speaker 1: Okay. In 1680?
Speaker 2: Sixteen eight- and it's, it's in a book, and I have the book. I can give you the exact date, but sometime like 1680.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he lived in Virginia, and that's where my grandfather was from. My grandfather, Robert Carroll Nickens--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was from, was from Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay. What part of Virginia are we talking about?
Speaker 2: They were, they were from, Black Dick was from the Tidewater area [Virginia], but my grandfather was from Fauquier County [Virginia]. A place called Hume, Virginia was, was, was the town that, that, that I think he grew up in. And I know several of his siblings that lived there. And we used to visit there when I was a, when I was a, when I was a kid from Pennsylvania. But another interesting thing in this regard is that one of the Nickens fought in the Revolutionary War.
Speaker 1: Wow, that does go back, okay.
Speaker 2: A James Nickens.
Speaker 1: James Nickens.
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know whether James is a direct descendant, whether, whether, my grandfather and I am a direct descendant of James. But, but in any event, there was a Nickens who did fight in the Civil War [sic.], and received a pension for having fought in--
Speaker 1: The Revolutionary--
Speaker 2: --the Revolutionary War.
Speaker 1: The Revolutionary War.
Speaker 2: The Revolutionary War.
Speaker 1: Okay. And received a pension?
Speaker 2: And received a pension--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --for his, for his service.
Speaker 1: And, and was a, a resident of Fauquier County--
Speaker 2: Now, he was a resident, I think, of down in the Tidewater area.
Speaker 1: In the Tidewater area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's a, that's quite a, that's quite a history.
Story_ID: 533207
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side, Samuel Coleman [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes, and my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and he was born in Coatesville [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: He was born in Coatesville.
Speaker 1: And how about on his mother's side?
Speaker 2: Okay. His mother's side, his mother was Lovina Fray [Fray Thompson], I think it was. And--
Speaker 1: Spell, spell Lovina--
Speaker 2: F-R-A--I don't know exactly how it's spelled--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it's like L-O-V-I-N-A, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Fray, F-R-A-Y. And she was born some place in Chester County, or raised in some place in Chester County.
Speaker 1: Chester County, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Chester County, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Near--Coatesville was in Chester County--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --or, or if not in Chester County, some place close, close to Chester County.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do we have any sense of a date of birth?
Speaker 2: Sometime around the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, we can say, or 1860?
Speaker 2: Eighteen six--sometime in the 1860s or '70s [1870s].
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: Maybe a little later. My father was born in 1910, and he was the youngest of, like twelve kids. So, if she started having kids when she was twenty at, in 1890, let's say, so she was probably born sometime around 1870.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm trying to get my history straight here right. Samuel was born in 19--1910?
Speaker 2: In 1910, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, good enough.
Speaker 2: Now, on the, on my, on my father's father's side--
Speaker 1: Paternal, okay.
Speaker 2: --we can, we can, we can trace it back to 1788 and 1789. And what's, what's really interesting here is we have Jacob Thompson, my great-great-grandfather, and his wife, Prudence Ann Thompson, side by side, in a cemetery, in a place called the Compass, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Spell, spell the--
Speaker 2: C-O-M-P-A-S-S in the cemetery of a church, the St. John's Episcopal Church [Gap, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of which they were members. It's a white Episcopal church. And they were members of this church in the early 1800s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And right next to, right next to Jacob and Prudence Ann is James [James Thompson], his--their, their son, and Mary [Mary Coleman Thompson], who was his wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were also members of this church.
Speaker 1: And are they buried there also?
Speaker 2: And they're buried there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's Prudence Ann and Jacob are in one grave, you know, side by side--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and next to them are James, and James and Mary Thompson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, throughout, scattered throughout the, the, the cemetery are their children. One, one of them was Edward [Edward Thompson]--
Speaker 1: Okay, your--
Speaker 2: --my father's father--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --one of whom was Samuel Coleman Thompson [Samuel C. Thompson], my, my father's uncle, my great uncle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father's not buried there, however--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I will be buried there.
Speaker 1: Now, your father was named after his uncle (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His uncle, after his uncle--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Samuel Coleman Thompson, who I knew. He was born in, he was born in 1869 [sic. 1874], I think. He died in 1963 or so.
Speaker 1: Well, he lived a fruitful life.
Speaker 2: He lived a fruitful life. He, he lived on a family farm that had been a farmhouse, and a farm that had been constructed in Compass back in, back in the early 1800s. He lived in that--that, that home had been in our family from the 1800s to when my Uncle Sam had to go into a nursing home.
Speaker 1: This church in Compass, is it still standing?
Speaker 2: The church is still standing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it, it was established, like in 1720, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a white Episcopal church, and it had black parishioners before the Civil War.
Speaker 1: That's amazing history.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's amazing history. Okay.
Speaker 2: And my, my wife [Becky Sue Thompson] and I are going to be spending some time this summer in Pennsylvania. And we, we hope to have my son [Samuel C. Thompson III] christened in that church.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's wonderful. How old is your son by the way?
Speaker 2: He's six months--
Speaker 1: Six months?
Speaker 2: --six months and two weeks.
Speaker 1: All right. Congratulations by the way.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you. This is my--I waited a long time. This is a--I'm sixty-three years old, and I got a six month old baby, so I got to live a long way, live a long time (laughter), and so I can take care of him.
Speaker 1: Yeah. When he's a teenager, you're going to be put to the test.
Speaker 2: That's right. I'm going to be put to the test.
Story_ID: 533208
Speaker 1: Let's come up to now, your mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.]. Any knowledge on how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: My, my brother [Edward N. Thompson] or sister [Fray Safiya Thompson] might know better than I, but I think that they were introduced--yes, I do know, I do recall. They were introduced by my mother's first grade teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was also my first grade teacher, a lady named Hat- Mrs. Hattie Smothers. She arranged some kind of, some kind of social event for several of the young girls in Steelton [Pennsylvania] to meet some young, young--some gentleman. I think she met my father at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: All right, okay. And this was in Steelton, right?
Speaker 2: This was, this was in--he lived in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] at the time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she was in, this took place either in Harrisburg--I think it took place in Reservoir Park in, in Harrisburg.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I know Harrisburg, so the, the, so they, they were introduced by this first grade teacher. And the courtship apparently went well because he was well recommended--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and they, they got married?
Speaker 2: They got married, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: They got married at the Mount Zion Baptist Church [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church] in Steelton, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And so, you've got that history--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, which was my, which was the church I grew up in.
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right, okay.
Speaker 2: Although my father, my father's side of the family have always been Episcopalians from the time they were members of the St. John's Baptist, St. John's Episcopalian church [St. John's Episcopal Church, Gap, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Church, right.
Speaker 2: So, my father is an Episcopalian. He went to, and he went to an Episcopal church in Harrisburg, but my mother went to a Baptist church in Steelton. And we were sort of raised, we were christened in an Episcopal church, but also baptized in the Baptist church. But because the Baptist church was closer, and most of our friends went to the Baptist church, my sister, and brother, and I always--we all went to the Baptist church in Steelton.
Story_ID: 533209
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little about your siblings. And from the oldest down to the youngest, could we get their names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. My, my, my oldest sibling is her, her given name is Fray [Fray Safiya Thompson]--
Speaker 1: Fray?
Speaker 2: Fray, F-R-A-Y--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Thompson, but she's taken the name, Safiya. She's a Muslim.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's taken the name, Safiya, S-A-F-Y-A [sic.], something like that. I--some--I can't remember the spelling of it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: She is, she's five years younger than I am. She's fifty-eight, I think--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she is--
Speaker 1: So, she--
Speaker 2: --so she was born in 1948.
Speaker 1: In 1948, okay.
Speaker 2: And she, she went to, she grew up in Steelton [Pennsylvania]. And then she, she graduated from Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], was a teacher, went to--met, met some folks, and went to, went to Saudi Arabia with them, lived in Saudi Arabia for fifteen years, became a, a Muslim, and had four--one, one stepchild, and four children, four, four girls, all born in Saudi Arabia. But now, they, they, they live in, they live in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. The--okay, that's the youngest, I imagine?
Speaker 2: No, that's the oldest bro- oldest, my oldest sibling.
Speaker 1: Okay, You, you are the oldest child?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, I'm the oldest, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, and then comes Fray (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fray--
Speaker 1: And next--
Speaker 2: Is Eddie.
Speaker 1: Eddie?
Speaker 2: Edward [Edward N. Thompson].
Speaker 1: Edward, okay.
Speaker 2: And Eddie is ten years younger than I am, so Eddie is fifty-two, fifty-three, something like that.
Speaker 1: He would have been born in 1953.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953], yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay. Do you have any exact dates on, on them?
Speaker 2: Eddie--
Speaker 1: I won't put you through--
Speaker 2: --both are, both are born in August.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: August of, August of the year. And one is born in early August, and one is born in late August, and I can't remember.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay, that's, that's Edward. And then, is, is it just the three of you?
Speaker 2: Just the three of us, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, fine. And you're, you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 533210
Speaker 1: How about some of the earliest years you can remember as a child? How far, how far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I don't have--
Speaker 1: Any--
Speaker 2: I don't have any great memories of childhood, other than I think I remember the first day I went to grade school [Hygienic School, Steelton, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay. What was that day like?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I was scared. Before that, I remember moving from my grandfather's house, my grandfather and grandmother's house, where my mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and I lived when my father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] was in the [U.S. military] service, and then, when, when we, where we lived, when my father returned from the service. But we bought a house right across the street from their house. And I remember the move--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I think that, that came before I was five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, 'cause I went to school when I was five. And I remember, I remember sort of the first day of school, you know, getting ready to go to school.
Story_ID: 533211
Speaker 1: Let's skip back a few years. I guess, your dad [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] was in World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any particular memories that he talked about what it was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know--
Speaker 1: --for black troops?
Speaker 2: --he didn't do a lot of talking about it. But, you know, my father was a lieutenant in the, in the [U.S.] Army, in the infantry--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in World War II, and fought in the battle of Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at his, at his, at his funeral, I, I gave a tribute to him. And I'd gone back and looked at some things that, that--and so I was writing a tribute. And I discovered that he had received the rifleman's badge for courage in taking out a German machine gun nest--
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in Italy. And after he returned from, from the service, he stayed in the Army Reserves [U.S. Army Reserve]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for, and he stayed probably until twenty-two, twenty-two years. And he retired as a captain in the, in the, in the Army Reserves.
Speaker 1: Okay. When he came home, what was his profession back in Pennsylvania, back in Steelton [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's very interesting. My father, my father was a college graduate, but he went to Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] in the 1930s, the first person in our family to have gone to college. And the job he had, before he went into the Army, was as a mail carrier in the state office in Pennsylvania. So, the best--here's a college, he's a college graduate and the best job he could get was carrying mail to, from office to office--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in, in the, in the state capitol [Pennsylvania State Capitol, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he, he went off to the, he went off to the war. He got commissioned. He fought bravely as an infantry soldier in Vietnam--I mean, in, in--
Speaker 1: Italy?
Speaker 2: --in World War II. And he came back, and his job was the same job he had when he left (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was waiting for him.
Speaker 2: Carrying mail. So, here's a, here's a gentleman who's a college graduate and a, and an officer in, a distinguished officer in the [U.S.] military. And the best job he could get was carrying mail.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But he left, fortunately, he left that job and he, he got a job at the federal government.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And he worked at the Mechanicsburg Naval Depot [Naval Supply Depot, Mechanicsburg; Naval Support Activity Mechanicsburg] in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania with the federal government. And he had, he had a good job as a, as a government office worker. I don't know exactly what he did, but he worked at the Naval Supply Depot in, in, in, in, in Mechanicsburg. And as I was thinking about this, you know, I mean, this is a, this is a, this is about history.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And if, and, and one thing I was thinking about--a comparison. I, I served in the Vietnam War, and I was an officer in the Vietnam War. And when I got out of the, got out of the service in 1969, I know I had a job offer. I ended up going back to law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I had a job offer to go work for a New York [New York] bank that was, that offered me more money than my father was making at that time. And I think that, that the difference between my father getting out of the Army in World War II, and me getting out of Vietnam, out of the Vietnam War, in the late '60s [1960s] was that, was the revolution that occurred in this country--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --between the, between those two wars. I mean, the revolution is still going on, but the, but the main battle in that revolution was fought and won in the late '50s [1950s] and the early '60s [1960s]. And it, and it, and it opened up opportunities for, for people like myself that my father never had. So, you, so in, in, you know, in, in, in large measure, the success, you know, I, I owe my success, I owe my success to the time I was born (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: If I had been born five--
Speaker 1: And to people like your father.
Speaker 2: --and, and to people like my father, but if I had been born five or six years earlier, I don't think I would have had the opportunities I had--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --during my lifetime.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was she principally a homemaker, or did she work also?
Speaker 2: My mother worked also, but my mother, my mother stayed, even though they didn't have a lot of money, my mother stayed home with, with, with, with the kids until my brother [Edward N. Thompson] went off to school, my youngest brother went off to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that point, she got a job with the state government in, in Pennsylvania working for the, working for the Department of Labor and Industry. And she worked there--
Speaker 1: In Harrisburg [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: --in Harrisburg. And she worked there for the Department of Labor and Industry for, until she was sixty-two years old. So, she probably went to work--my brother--she went, she went to work, I can tell you exactly. My brother was--she went to work, when my brother was six, and I was sixteen, so she went to work when she was about thirty-six, and worked until sixty-two.
Story_ID: 533212
Speaker 1: Those early years in school, what kind of student were you, or were you--
Speaker 2: You know, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) mischievous?
Speaker 2: --you know what, it's interesting. I went to a, I went to an all-black grade school in Pennsylvania. And you may say, well, how could they have all-black grade schools? In, in Steelton, Pennsylvania, there was this all-black school where the black kids went. And it's because of--this was before Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] so I, so, so the Hygienic School in Steelton, Pennsylvania is where I went to school, and where I got an excellent education from all-black teachers. At junior high school, I went--there, there was a combination junior high school. So, after you, after the sixth grade, you went to, you went to a junior high school that was an integrated high school [Steelton-Highspire High School, Steelton, Pennsylvania]. But I can tell you that I was as well prepared to go to junior high school as any of my white colleagues from other parts of, other parts of Steelton. So, I got really good, good, good training at, at Hygienic School. And the one thing that sort of sticks out in my mind about Hygienic is that how average I was. I mean, there were, there were, you know, there were a lot of, a lot of girls, and a lot of guys in my class who were a lot smarter than I, than I was. Unfortunately, they haven't had maybe the opportunities to do some of the professional things that I've done in life. And I think it's probably because, you know, they had to go to work--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --after, after high school, whereas I had an opportunity to go to college.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, but by no means was I one of the smart guys in my, in my, in my grade school class.
Speaker 1: If you had to name a few teachers that particularly motivated you, or that you remembered because of the way you felt for their teaching--
Speaker 2: Well, well, you know, one of, one of the grade teachers that sticks out in my mind is, is Mr. John Garnett [ph.], who's now deceased. He was a tough guy, and, you know, a real disciplinarian. And then, another one was Mr. Cole [Samuel Cole], so he was the principal of our school, who's, who's also deceased. And after the school got, got, got, you know, after the schools were integrated--by the way, they were integrated as a result of Brown v. Board of Education. And one, and I specifically remember my father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] saying around the dinner table, I think--I specifically remember we were talking about the fact that Steelton--they were going to do away with the Hygienic School, as a result of Brown v. Board of Education. And my father was saying, it was just an absolute shame, here we are, within eyesight of the capital of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. And they have this segregated school here in, here in, here in Pennsylvania within eyesight of the, of the capital of Pennsylvania. But, anyway, that all ended with, with the Brown v. Board of Education and like Topeka, Kansas, which had a similar situation where--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --where, and it, and it was the Board, it was Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas. Topeka, Kansas had a similar situation to Steelton, I should say. Steelton had a similar situation to Topeka with segregated grade schools, but integrated junior high and high schools.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell that story. I read it, of course, but tell the story because the Hygienic School was still segregated, even after the Brown versus--
Speaker 2: No, they, they desegregated it. They closed it down--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after Brown v. Board of Education, they closed it down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the school no longer exists.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so I, I misread that.
Speaker 2: So, they, so yeah, they, they closed the school after Brown v. Board, within a year of, within a year or two after Brown v. Board of Education. The, you know, with, the board of education of Steelton decided that, you know, we, we can't maintain the segregated school anymore. So, they closed the school, and integrated the schools after--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --after, at that point.
Speaker 1: And what school was that, that was integrated, that all, all-black and white school?
Speaker 2: Then every, then all, and then all--what, what they did, they built a new school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a new high school, combination high school, junior high school. And they took the old high school, and made it, made it a grade school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for all of Steelton, Pennsylvania--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for all kids in Steelton.
Story_ID: 533213
Speaker 1: Now they're closing down the Hygienic [Hygienic School, Steelton, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Hygienic--
Speaker 1: Hygienic--
Speaker 2: --grade school, yeah.
Speaker 1: --grade school. And you're moving on to an integrated school, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: What was it like there? Was it--animosity among some of the teachers or sense--
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't, we didn't, I didn't experience any animosity at all.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any highlights there, that you can--
Speaker 2: My grade, my junior high school--I, I don't, I don't recall any.
Speaker 1: Okay. How about high school, any?
Speaker 2: Oh, in high school, you know, I got interested in sports--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and ran track, and I wrestled, and played football in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember, I remember in my senior year, I had, in, in past times, participated in oratorical contests through the Steelton Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World]. So, there was an oratorical contest held among the high schools in, in, in the Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] area. And the, the, the title of this, of the, of the speech that you were supposed to give was something called the 'Christmas Spirit: Our Hope for Peace.' And I, since, since I had participated in the, in the, these oratorical contests through the Steelton Elks, I decided I would participate. And I remember my English teacher who, a lady named Ms. Diver [ph.], a white lady named Ms. Diver, said to me, "Well, you know, you shouldn't participate because you'll be embarrassed." So, I, I--that, you know, I thought that was a little wacky (laughter). So, by the way, she had been my mother's [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] English teacher as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was an old time English teacher, and still nice, but still nice--high, high school system. So, I went home, and told my dad [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] who got furious. And, and, and he said, he said, "You're, you're, you're not only going to participate, you're going to win this thing," and--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --he took me to--I had a--I, I wrote a speech, which was a pretty good speech. And he took me to a guy named John Grigsby, who was a, a black lawyer in town, and to, to get some advice on how, how to speak. And I remember when John gave me one of the fundamental principles of, of public speaking. He says, he says, "Now, remember when you're giving the speech, you got, got to talk to people on this side, and you got to talk to people in the middle, and you got to talk to people over here." And the, the speech was held at the capitol [Pennsylvania State Capitol], the competition was held at the capitol of, in, in, in Harrisburg. And, and I won the contest of all the, all the high schools in the, in the area, and Steelton [Pennsylvania] wasn't--
Speaker 1: What, what year was this by the way?
Speaker 2: This was in 1961.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This was in the spring of 1961, early, early spring of 1961. And so, they, they asked, "Would," you know, "would, would Sam's [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.] father and mother come?" And they were, obviously, there to support me. "Can his representative from Steelton-Highspire High School [Steelton, Pennsylvania] come?" And there was no representative from Steelton-Highspire school--high school, because nobody from Steelton, you know, even wanted me to participate (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, right.
Speaker 2: So, so, so, anyway, I, I won this, I won this, I won this oratorical contest, and it was, it was a lot of fun doing it. And it was, and it was recognized by my, by my, by my students. I mean, I was, I was voted the most beneficial to the school by my graduating school--most of whom were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they recognized it. But, you know, this teacher, for whatever reason, I don't know whether she was, you know, I don't know whether, whether it was discrimination, or what, that she just didn't think I could do it or whatever. But many then, I, I thought it was, I thought it was really sort of stupid of her to, to discourage someone from undertaking to do something (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the fact that she had taught your mother probably was paternalism a little or, or I don't know what it was but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know what it was.
Speaker 1: Right. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know what it was.
Story_ID: 533214
Speaker 1: But as you were growing up, you were determined, your father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] had gone to college [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Your mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] had gone, gone--
Speaker 2: No, my mother did not go to college.
Speaker 1: Oh, she did not go.
Speaker 2: My mother is--was the smartest person in our family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --bar none (laughter), but she did not go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's the only person that didn't go to college (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. The--but your father wanted you to go to college, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean, I--it was a foregone conclusion that I was going to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My father was a member of the, the Ques fraternity [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: That's where they caught--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I recall sitting around the table when we were, when we were, you know, I was about thirteen years old. And my father had just become active again in his, in his fraternity in the graduate chapter of his fraternity. And he said, "Oh, Tommy [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], when you go to college, you'll probably become a Que," and I, I remember the conversation. I said, "But dad, I'm going to go to college, but I'm not going to become a fraternity guy." And my mom said, "Oh, yes, you will." And I said, "No, I won't." And I, I've not become a fraternity guy because I've just never been interested in, in doing, I wasn't interested in it then, and I'm not interested in it now. Now, that's not to, that's not to take a shot at fraternities--
Speaker 1: Right, no.
Speaker 2: --but it's just that I was, you know, it's something--not something I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: I, I certainly under- understand.
Speaker 2: By the way, I know Stan Womack [Stanley Womack] from, from Harrisburg [Pennsylvania], who you know, through the--
Speaker 1: The Ques--
Speaker 2: --through the Que because he was, he was a frat brother of my father.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay. The, the--you, but, but you were interested in going to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your interest? What career did you want to follow?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I didn't--when I graduated from high school [Steelton-Highspire High School, Steelton, Pennsylvania], I didn't, I didn't really know. I wasn't really directed that, that, that well. I know I, I'd gotten, I'd played football in high school. And I got a scholarship offer to go to Dickinson on a small--I wasn't a great football, I was a pretty average football player. But, you know, but Dickinson offered me a scholarship--Dickinson College in Pennsylvania [Carlisle, Pennsylvania]. And I, and Millersville [Millersville State College; Millersville University, Millersville, Pennsylvania] wanted me to come, and play football for them. And Millersville was a state teachers college, and Dickinson was a liberal arts college. And, but, you know, I was sort of short sighted, and was more interested in football than, than, than the quality of the education, so I went to Millersville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played, played football at Millersville. And, and my--I played on, I played on the varsity team my freshman year and, and our second--
Speaker 1: So, you were a fairly good player? You were--
Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was a fairly good player, but not a great player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But our, our second, and, you know, it's interesting, I scored two touchdowns in my college career. One was my first game, and one was my last game. So, I, I--my first game at Millersville, we played East Stroudsburg [East Stroudsburg State College; East Stroudsburg University, East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania], and I scored the only team for--the only touchdown for our team. But the second game of the year, we played a team called West Chester State College [West Chester University, West Chester, Pennsylvania], and they beat us 56 to 6. And I had a friend of mine, who'd come down from, from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to see the game. And after the game, I said, look, I'm not putting up with this for another three years. I'm transferring to West Chester. So, I played out the, the season at Millersville. And we ended up having, like a 6 and 4 season or 5 and 4 season, so we had a pretty good team. But I transferred to Millers- to West Chester the, the following year--so I could play on a really good football team (laughter). So, I had to sit out a year, and then, I played my junior and senior years at West, at West Chester.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by now, you were beginning to take interest in certain career fields?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, but I was, I was, you know, at, at, at both of Millersville and at West Chester, my, my major was secondary education.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and I, and I was being trained to be a teacher. And so, that was, you know, sort of a general idea that I wanted to be that. I, I don't think I really wanted to be a teacher, but, but for an extended period of time, but I, I had some interest in it. And I was going to schools that only trained teachers (laughter) pretty much.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When I was at West Chester, they, they adopted liberal arts, but I had already--a liberal arts program, but I had already started on a teaching thing. And my mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] said, "If you get a teaching degree, you'll always be able to get a job," so that sort of stuck, stuck in the back of my mind.
Speaker 2: So, you were really more interested in just getting through college than pursuing a specific area (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes--
Speaker 2: --of, of learning?
Speaker 1: --yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was, I was more interested in getting through, in getting through college, I wanted to get through college. I didn't, I didn't have a, you know, I wasn't motivated to get really good grades. I worked, you know, I worked, every semester I was in college, except my last semester when I student taught. I worked in college. And, and so, and one, in my junior, and my sophomore and junior years at West Chester, I had, I had a job with something called the Devereux Foundation, where, which is a school for children, children with learning disabilities. And they provided me with housing and a job where I worked thirty-five hours a week. So, I worked there, played football, went to school, so I was, you know, mainly interested in, in, in, you know, in getting my degree, and which I got in three and a half years and, and moving on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 533215
Speaker 1: And then, while I was in--I, I don't know whether I'm jumping ahead or not--
Speaker 2: No, no, go ahead.
Speaker 1: --but, but while I was in, while I was in, while I was at West Chester [West Chester State College; West Chester University, West Chester, Pennsylvania] during the, the summer between my sophomore and junior year, and the summer between my junior and senior year, I enrolled in something called the Platoon Leaders Course through, through the [U.S.] Marine Corps which leads to a commission. And when I graduated from West Chester, I was commissioned into the Marine Corps as a second lieutenant.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And that lead you off towards Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Well, I, I got a deferment to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got a deferment, and I, I--
Speaker 2: What year are we talking about now?
Speaker 1: We're, we're talking about--well, I, I graduated from West Chester in January of '65 [1965]. And I was able to complete my undergraduate work in three and a half years. And then, I, then I, then I got a deferment to, from the Marine Corps, to do some graduate studies. So, I did some graduate studies at Penn, but I also taught (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: University of Pennsylvania, but I also taught in the Philadelphia school system [School District of Philadelphia]. So, my first job after West Chester was teaching in the Philadelphia school system at a school called the Daniel Boone School, which is the disciplinary school in Philadelphia. So, they fed all the disciplinary kids, the kids with disciplinary problems to the Daniel Boone School, and I was one of the teachers there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and I was twenty-one at the time. And most of the kids were like, fifteen, sixteen years old, so I was just a couple of years older than those kids. And I can tell you, that was the toughest job I've ever had in my life--
Speaker 2: Facing some of the kids?
Speaker 1: --try, try, trying to take care, trying to be a good teacher at that school was the toughest job I faced. So, I worked there for, for four months. And that, that was too tough and, and I got, I got an offer to go to work for the Philadelphia Department of Human Resources [sic. Department of Human Services].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I started there, like in May. And in July, I got admitted to law school--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --at the University of Pennsylvania. So, I went to--
Speaker 2: What, what was the motivating force, but your wanting to go to law school?
Speaker 1: What was the motivating force? It was not a strong motivating force. But I tell you what--I, I can tell you how, what got me going, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was taking, I was teaching in the Philadelphia school system. I was taking some graduate courses at the University of Pennsylvania. And I had this deferment. I didn't have to go into the Marine Corps right away. And I was walking across the campus one--at the University of Pennsylvania, 'cause I was taking some courses in sociology. And I said to myself, let me go in here, and talk to the admissions office, and see what the man is talking about. That's what went through my mind. So, I walked into the law school, and there's no, there's no exaggeration in the story, okay?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I walked in the law school, and I walked into the admissions office, and said, "My name is Sam Thompson [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]. I'd like to see the admissions officer." And to my surprise, they let me see the admissions officer (laughter). So, I walked in and this guy, this guy's name was Bill Shane [William Shane], S-H-A-N-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I, I went in and sat down, and said, "Hi, my name is Sam Thompson. I went to West Chester College. I played football. I worked my way through school. I don't have great grades, but I want to go to law school." And he says, "Well, did you take the LSAT score--LSAT exam?" I said, "No, what's that?" He said, "Well, that's the law school admissions test you have to take." And he got up and he says, "Here, here's, here's the, here's the application. Apply and take it, and then come back and see me once you've taken it." And he probably thought he was never going to see me again. But I signed up for it, and I took it, and I remember the day I got it. I looked at it and it said--it looks pretty good to me. So, I'm going to go back down to law school. I went back down to the law school, right in the admissions office, "I'd like to see the admissions director."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And to my surprise, again, they said, well, they sent me right in, and there was Mr. Shane. I said, "Here, you told me to take the LSAT. I took it--here's the, here's the, here's my results." And he looked at it, and he says, "This is about what I got on my LSAT" (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, he could identify--
Speaker 1: "Here's an application. I think I can get you in" (laughter). And he gave me, and he gave me, and he gave me an application, and I applied. And they took a long time to admit me, but they finally admitted me. And, and I ended up going to the University of Pennsylvania Law School, which was the, which was, you know, the--there are turning points in your life--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that was the turning point in mine.
Speaker 2: And a very distinguished law school--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Story_ID: 533216
Speaker 1: So, while you were in law school and going through this, did that sort of change your life, or get--shape your thinking as to the direction you wanted to go, or you were just letting events create the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the point, you know, I remember, I remember, I remember the conversation with my dad [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] about law school, and my mom [Emmitt Nickens Thompson]. I, you know, when I got in the, when I got in the University of Pennsylvania, it was a surprise to everybody because, you know, there weren't a lot of blacks who had ever gone to the University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the only reason I got there was because of affirmative action.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 2: You know, without affirmative action, I would never have gotten there. As a matter of fact, I think I'm the first person from West Chester State College [West Chester University, West Chester, Pennsylvania] to graduate from the University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I don't think--I'm, I'm not sure of that, but I think, to my knowledge, I am.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, you know, they don't--you don't see a lot of people from West Chester going on to Penn.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And most of my colleagues were from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and places like that. And I remember saying to my dad and my mother, I said, "Look, all I want to do is graduate. I don't care whether I'm the 176th guy in, in the class--all I want to do is graduate." So, I mean, I, so when I went there, the only thing I wanted to do was graduate. And it was the first time in my life where--and, and they gave me a scholarship, the first time in my life where I begin to apply myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, to, to, to studies.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, and I worked, I worked hard. I, you know, I went to class. I read what they told me to read. I didn't quite understand it the way I should have understood it, but I mean it was the first time in my life that I, that I really began to focus on, on academic stuff. At West Chester, you know, I got a good education, but I didn't, I didn't throw myself into my studies. But at Penn Law School, I began to get excited about the learning process.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember, I remembered, I remembered it as clear as if it had happened yesterday. I remember being in, in, in, in the first day of law school and saying, you know, I'd like to be like one of those professors up there because I was so struck by the high quality of the, of, of the professors--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the methodology they were using, the Socratic Method of going back and forth to students. And I said, I'd like to be like one of those guys someday. And, fortunately, I've had the opportunity to become a law professor.
Speaker 1: Right, right. And I was wondering how you got on to that track, and that's a good explanation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just, it was, it, it was, it was fortuity. I mean, if they, if, if Shane [William Shane] had said to me, "There's no way you can come to Penn, Pennsylvania Law School. You went to West Chester. You don't have good grades. You are, you know, there's no way--get out of my office." I probably wouldn't have applied to law school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 2: I probably wouldn't have applied to law school.
Story_ID: 533217
Speaker 1: You're in the University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. You're surrounded by all of these--were you the only black in that class (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there were, there, it was the largest number of blacks in the history of Pennsylvania Law School up at that point. There were two in each section (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were, so there were four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were two of us in each--there were two sections of, like eighty each, and there were two blacks in each section.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you did have someone to sort of look over (laughter) at, in, in there. But what about the other students who had gone to Penn--Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and all of these other prestigious schools--and had gotten into this very prestigious law school? Were you intimidated by them in any way or--
Speaker 2: I was intimidated by them, yes. I mean, I was, you know, I--I mean, I was probably, I mean, I was, you know, I was impressed by them. Intimidated--I don't, I wouldn't say in- I was intimidated. I mean, I was willing to sort of mix it up, and then kind of throw myself into the process, maybe because I was too dumb to know otherwise. But (laughter), I mean, but I, I wasn't intimidated by them. And, and, you know, and I have, I have one, one of the--one of the guys from that class, who went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] by the way, is a, is a friend of mine to this day--a guy named Howard Shecter [Howard L. Schecter], who practiced law in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], became the managing partner of the Morgan, Lewis Bockius firm [Morgan, Lewis and Bockius] in Philadelphia, now practices out of their New York [New York] office. And Howard has run various M and A programs for the PLI Institute [Practising Law Institute], and he--I used to speak at his M and A programs. And now, I run mergers and acquisitions programs for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California], and he speaks at my, he speaks at my M and A program. As a matter of fact, I just heard from him last week about, about something relating to one of our programs (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanted you to explain that for the audience, the M and A--mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. The, the, the--so, you're moving along there in the University of Pennsylvania. Any highlights, any challenges that you face that you--are very memorable?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I remember, I remember in, in the first--I remember getting a letter from the, from the [U.S.] Marine Corps because the Vietnam War was escalating, saying we want you to come into the, we want you to come into the Marine Corps, and, and they wanted me to come in January of my first year. So, I wrote back and said, "Hey," you know, "I'm in the middle of my first year of law school. Can't you at least let me, let me finish, finish, finish law school?" And they said, "Well, you have two options--you can resign your commission or, or you can come into the Marine Corps." And I said, "Wait a minute, you can't make me come in right now. All I want to do is delay this thing for, for a couple, couple of months." And they wrote back and said, "Well, when is your, when is your, when is your first year of law school up?" So, I went around to the, around to the registrar's office and they said, "May 28th is the last day of finals," so it's Friday, May 28th. So, I wrote back, and said, "May 28th is the last day." They wrote to me and said, "Fine, you report to the Marine Corps on May 30th, Sunday, May 30th" (laughter). So, I reported to, so I finished out the year, took my exams, closed down my apartment, went home, took my stuff home to my mom [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and dad's [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] house, and headed the next, on Sunday, headed--I did that on Saturday and Sunday I headed for the Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 533218
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps a day, two days after I finished my first year of finals [at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And they sent you to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I, I spent a year, I spent a little under thirteen months in Vietnam, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How many, how long did you spend in the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three, three years all, all together?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Any highlights, or motivating forces that may have hit you there, outside of staying alive was very important.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, staying alive was, was very important. And, you know, when I was in Vietnam, I, I was, I went into Vietnam as a supply officer with the 3rd Battalion of the 5th Marines. And then I became a--I was promoted to captain, and I became an assistant logistics officer, and the regimental supply officer for the 5th Marine Regiment. And then, during the Tet Offensive in '68 [1968], I was elevated to be the CO of the, commanding officer of the headquarters company of the 5th Marine Regiment, which was south of Hue City [Vietnam], and I was in Hue, I was in Hue City during the battle of the Tet Offensive--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: But were you in any battles there or just a supply--
Speaker 2: That was not--fortunately, I was not, I, you know, I, I was in mortar attacks, and had been shot at, but I've never, never been in an actual far- firefight where I had--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I've had folks across the street shooting at me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was fortunate not to have that experience.
Story_ID: 533219
Speaker 1: We come to the end of your service time--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) three years, and is your ambition to go back to law school?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My ambition was to go back to law school. So, I went back to, I went back to Penn Law School [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. And they accepted you there?
Speaker 2: Yes. I, you know, I--they had, they had kept me. And since I was in good standing from my, from my first year, they--I had the, I had the right to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And so, you went back to law school, and any special motivating--
Speaker 2: Well, before going back to law school, I was stationed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a year, before going back to law school, and 'cause I was still in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. After, after, after Vietnam, I was stationed in Philadelphia for a year. And I, I completed my master's in business and applied economics at the, at the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during that year. While I was working in the Marine Corps, working at the Marine Corps, I enrolled in this program. And then, I grad- I got the, I got discharged from the Marine Corps in, in May of 1969, and I was able to go to school that summer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and take, take a full load that summer, and finish my master's degree before going back to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was Bernard Anderson there at that time, or maybe I, I've been--
Speaker 2: Bernie, Bernie Anderson, I know him, but, I know the name, but I don't--
Speaker 1: Okay. I was thinking he may have been at the--may- maybe he wasn't there at the Wharton School.
Speaker 2: I think maybe, I think, I don't know, I don't know. The name sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay. Or any of the outstanding names that you can think of, of, that was there at the time when they have gone through the course that you went through at--
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: --at, at Wharton, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --at Wharton?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No. While at, at several, several, I had several friends who went to the, who got their M.B.A.'s at Wharton after I--I mean, at the same time I was in law school. As a matter of fact, my, my best friend, who I met in the Marine Corps, has his master's from--M.B.A. from, from the Wharton School.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he got it, he got it during, during the two years I spent at the law school. My last two years of law school were his two years at the Wharton School.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, I was asking, any important incidents that shaped your life happen in those two remaining years at the University of Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean, I, I, I, you know, when I went to, you know, being in, and having, being in the Marine Corps, and getting the maturity that the Marine Corps gave me from being a, a, an officer, and having, you know, significant responsibilities, gave me an enhanced maturity, and then having completed my master's in business and applied economics over at the Wharton School, it gave, it filled in some gaps in my educational background.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It meant--I was better prepared to study law when I got back. And I did, you know, I moved from the bottom of my class to, to pretty high up in my class--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as a result of, result of the, the, the experiences I had between my first and second years of law school.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, there was a maturing process?
Speaker 2: It was a maturing process and, and it opened up, it just gave me a, a different perspective, and my performance was, was a lot better.
Story_ID: 533220
Speaker 1: So now, you're about to graduate from the University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what's your next steps?
Speaker 2: Well, be- before I gradu- before I graduate, let me just tell you that I, I, I, I wrote--I mean, I got interested in corporate issues, corporate law issues, and business law issues. And from my studies at the Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the like, and I wrote a paper for, for my--you had to write a piece, a senior thesis at Penn. And I wrote my senior thesis on something called, something I titled, 'Black Ownership: An Analysis and A Proposal' [sic. 'Black Business Ownership: An Analysis and A Proposal,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]. And I ended up publishing that, that paper in something called the Black Business Digest, which is no longer in existence. But, and they serialized it into four different issues 'cause it was a pretty long paper.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I remember I, I talked in this, in this article by about, you know, I sort of did a survey of the state of black economic development, black business development. And I, and I just laid out a proposal in here for, for a, a way that blacks could go about creating a lar- one of the largest companies in the country, and have it black-owned. And basically, the theory was to have the black churches subscribe to stock in this company, and, and to own the voting stock in the company, so that the stock would--the company would be owned by, by, by black churches. And a portion of the contributions to the church would go to purchase the stock in the company. And I, I worked out a, I did some figuring about how much it would take to build enough equity, so you would have a similar equity base to that of companies in the Fortune 50 or so. And I would, and, and so the paper sort of showed how that could be, how that could have been done. So, that sort of stands out in my mind as something that that my, my studies at Penn kind of led me to think about.
Story_ID: 533221
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you about the paper ['Black Business Ownership: An Analysis and A Proposal,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.] that you wrote and whether it received--it, it was in the Negro Digest.
Speaker 2: The Black Business Digest.
Speaker 1: The Black Business Digest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you receive a lot of national interest in it or local?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I did not. I mean, I, you know, I, I was very happy to publish it, but I didn't--it didn't get any nat- large following.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, and you were maturing and moving up academically.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I graduated, and I graduated. I accepted a job with the Davis Polk and Wardwell firm in New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a law firm in New York. And I, so I went off to New York, took the bar, and, fortunately, passed it, and worked at Davis Polk and Wardwell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for a year. And while I was, while I was at Davis Polk, I got a call from one of my former teachers at Penn [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a guy named David Ruder [David S. Ruder], who is, was a professor at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], who visited at Penn. He, he taught me securities regulations at, at Penn, and also a seminar in, on Rule 10b-5, which is the anti-fraud provision of the securities laws [Securities Exchange Act of 1934]. And David said to me, he said, "Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], you know, when you were in law school, you indicated you might be interested in teaching. Would you be interested in coming to teach at Northwestern?" And I said yes. So, I went out and they interviewed me, and they offered me a job at Northwestern to come and teach. And so, I, so I, I was working in--at Davis Polk, principally, in the tax department. And I was taking some classes at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], working towards a master's in tax. So, I arranged to go to Northwestern in January of 1973, so that I could take a full semester at NYU, and complete my master's in tax law at NYU before going to teach--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Northwestern. And so, I worked at Davis Polk, and then finished work in Davis Polk in the summer of two thousand--uh, '72 [1972], and spent that fall semester at NYU completing my master's degree in tax, and then went off to teach at, at Northwestern. And I, so I just completed my master's in tax law, and I went and taught tax law at Northwestern which was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Now, while you were teaching tax law at Northwestern, were you still affiliated with Davis Polk or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, I was not, no, I was not--
Speaker 1: So you, you had left there.
Speaker 2: --no, I was not, no, I was not, but I did go back to Davis Polk after a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, one of the interesting things is Davis Polk and Wardwell, one of the, one of the principal lawyers at Davis Polk is, is John W. Davis, who argued Brown v. Board of Education--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --on behalf of the, of South Carolina (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he argued against Thurgood Marshall in Brown v. Board of Education. And in the Davis Polk library, there's a huge portrait of John W. Davis walking--I think it's walking out of the courtroom after the, after the argument in Brown v. Board of Education. But I remember spending many, many nights in the, in the, in the library at Davis Polk, you know, slaving away under the, you know, working on their, working on a brief or something and, or memo, or something, in, under the gazing eyes of, of John W. Davis. So, that was my first job out of law school. And my second job was I went to Northwestern to teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I taught in the hall at Northwestern called Lincoln Hall. And Lincoln Hall had a big portrait of [President] Abraham Lincoln because Abraham Lincoln was a professor at Northwestern law school.
Speaker 1: Oh, I did not know that.
Speaker 2: And so, it was sort of ironic that my first two jobs out of law school--one, I'm working for, I'm working under the gazing eyes of John W. Davis, who argued on the wrong side of Brown v. Board of Education (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, the Clarendon case [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952], right.
Speaker 2: And on the second job, second job, I'm working under the gazing eyes of Abraham Lincoln.
Story_ID: 533222
Speaker 1: So, was, was your first love, mergers and acquisitions or tax--
Speaker 2: Well, I'd gotten--
Speaker 1: --or both?
Speaker 2: I'd, you know what, a lot of taxes is mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, you know, I, I'd kind gotten involved, kind of interested in mergers and acquisitions in law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, you know, I was, I was very interested in mergers and acquisitions in law school. I didn't know much about it, but I was very interested in it. And, you know, and when I graduated from law school, I either wanted to be a corporate lawyer, or I wanted to be a tax lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the reasons why I went to Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York] is that they gave you the opportunity to kind of do some work in corporate work, and do some work in tax work. And, and so, I gravitated towards tax, but a lot of tax is mergers and acquisitions and, you know, tax aspects of mergers and acquisitions. So, I've, I've--over the years, I've developed an expertise in, in the tax aspects of mergers and acquisitions. And, you know, most of my, most of my career, up to the time I came to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California], was dealing with tax aspects of mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One reason I left practice to come to UCLA was because I wanted to sort of branch out from just the pure tax aspects of mergers and acquisitions, and do a broader aspect of mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I have, I've spent time learning about corporate aspects of mergers and acquisitions, antitrust aspects of mergers and acquisitions, valuation aspects of mergers and acquisitions, and have written in, in virtually all areas of mergers and acquisitions.
Story_ID: 533223
Speaker 1: You've gone to Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] now, and on taxes and teaching. And what about your personal life? You're not devoting it all to Northwestern, I, I hope.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what about my personal life?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm, I'm, I don't want to talk a lot about my personal life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm, I have a, I have a, I have a, I have a great wife [Becky Sue Thompson], and I have a great son [Samuel C. Thompson III], and, you know, my son is six months old.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he's the only son I have, and the only child I have, and, and his mother is a great mother, and we have a great family, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's my personal life.
Speaker 1: Okay. What I was trying to do was just give a side of you--I imagine you developed new, new friends out there at Northwestern so--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, let me, let me, let me just mention to you. One of my, one of my, one of my very best friends is a, is a, a guy who I met at Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York], who is a, who's now a partner at Schiff Hardin and Waite [Schiff Hardin LLP]. And it turns out he went to Northwestern law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, he was--I, I knew him at Da- at Davis Polk. And the first day I, the first day I arrived at Davis Polk, he took me to lunch--this guy named Richard Hoskins [Richard J. Hoskins]. And we, we went to lunch, and we, you know, we became friends. And he--we, we were, we were at a, we were at a party for new--of another Davis Polk associate, a guy named Dale Matchalot [ph.]. In November or December of 1971, and Richard and I started talking about what we wanted to do. And I said, "Well, you know, what I think I want to do is, I think I want to go into law teaching after, you know, after a while." And it so happens that one of Richard's very good friends was a professor at Northwestern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --named Robert Childres, who was an outstanding professor at Northwestern. So, when David Ruder [David S. Ruder] indicated that I might be interested in teaching at Northwestern, probably ought to look at me. By the way, I think that they were looking--I know they were looking for a black professor. And Childres called--Professor Childres called Richard Hoskins, and said to Richard, you know, "What do you think about Sam Thompson [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]? You think he might be interested in teaching? And do you think he'd be a good person for us to look at?" And Richard lied and said, "Oh, yeah, I think he'd be a good, good person for you to look at, and I know he's interested in teaching," 'cause I had just told Richard that I was interested in teaching. And that led to the phone call from David Ruder--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to, to go out there and interview. And that was a, you know, that was, it was a great experience being at, being at, being at Northwestern and, and being on that faculty, and having the opportunity to teach there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By the way, let me--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --let me, let me mention to you that, that, you know, a lot of people have, a lot of blacks have had bad experiences in work environments. And I consider myself extremely fortunate. I had, I had very good experiences in my work environment at, at Davis Polk. I had very good experiences in my work environment in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. I had very good experiences in my, my work environment at Northwestern. And I've had very good experiences in my work environment at Schiff Hardin where I, where I worked for many years, and at Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] where I taught for many years--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] where I am now. So, so my, my--I, I've been fortunate in that I've had very good experiences in, in, in, in my work environments.
Story_ID: 533224
Speaker 1: We're at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] now, and that experience, and I want to sort of round it out. How long did you stay there--
Speaker 2: I stayed there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, and where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I stayed, I stayed at Northwestern for--I, I went there in January of two--of 1973 and in 1975, I went back to Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York]. I took a leave of absence at, at Northwestern. They gave me a two year leave of absence. I went back to Davis Polk. I spent a year at Davis Polk. And then, I went to the U.S. treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] in the tax policy office of the U.S. treasury department where I worked in the tax legislative counsel's office [Office of the Tax Legislative Counsel] and the international tax counsel's office [Office of the International Tax Counsel] for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and the, the president at that time--
Speaker 2: Was, was Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Gerald Ford, right?
Speaker 2: Gerald Ford, Gerald Ford.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, I was hired by the Gerald Ford administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that I was the first black to be an attorney advisor in the tax policy office of the U.S. treasury department. And it's interesting that I was hired by a Republican administration.
Speaker 1: Right, right. And the--
Speaker 2: And, and then, then the Carter administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] won. And I stayed over for a while before going to the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And there at the University of Virginia, you were teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was that like? What was the experience like--a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was a, it was a, it was an excellent experience. I mean, you know, you, you think about--I mean, Virginia, being the, the, the capital of the Confederacy, which it is, and but the law school was a, was a perfectly decent place to, to be. I mean, I had some good friends there. I still have good friends at the University of Virginia--many good friends at the University of Virginia. So, it was, it was, it was a, it was an excellent, excellent experience. And I've been back there since I, I left, and went into practice and the like, but I've been back as a, as a visiting professor there. And, you know, I have nothing but the utmost regard for, for the people at the University of Virginia.
Story_ID: 533225
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this because all of this is happening against the background that was going on. Obviously, things were getting much better for African Americans in this country. Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], even Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] to a large extent and, of course, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and so forth, come- coming in. Were there any bad experiences, either outside of where you were teaching, or on the job that you can remember that may not have been as pleasant?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, there, there, obviously, were some things that were, were, were, were not as pleasant, but on balance, I must say that my, that my personal work, personal work experiences have been, have been, have been, have been excellent. And, you know, and I, I have, you know, I, you know, at Davis Polk [Davis Polk and Wardwell, New York, New York], I never had a problem with either a lawyer in the office, or with a client. At Schiff Hardin [Schiff Hardin and Waite; Schiff Hardin LLP] I never had a problem with a lawyer in the office, or with a client. At Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], I never had a problem with a, with a, with a, with a, another faculty member or with a student. I never had problems with faculty members or students here at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've had problems with faculty members at University of Virginia--I mean excuse me, University of Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, when I was the dean there, but that wasn't racially based. It was a difference of, difference in educational philosophy, but it was, certainly wasn't racial, racially based.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so my ex- you know, my experiences have been, have been, have been very good. Now, you know, I know several people, when I was at Virginia, had, had some students, some students had some problems. And, you know, I tried to help them work with those problems, and the same at, the same at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], but on a, but on a personal front, I cannot, I can't say that I have been discriminated against.
Story_ID: 533226
Speaker 1: Now, while at the University of Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida], let's just stop there for a--you were one of just a few people who've been deans at a majority white, white schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know I can think of Ron Davenport [HistoryMaker Ronald Davenport] over at Duquesne [Duquesne University School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and there may have been one or two others, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: There, there have been several others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There, there's a, there's a--the dean, there's a black dean [Christopher Edley, Jr.] at, at Berkeley [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California] now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. And I forget his name, but he's, he used to be at the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay. And can you think of any more?
Speaker 2: Greg Williams [HistoryMaker Gregory H. Williams] used to be the dean at--I think it was Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Law; Michael E. Moritz College of Law, Columbus, Ohio], a black guy who went on to become the president of a university in, in New York [New York]. And, and a, a Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --was a black professor at, at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], was the dean at Oregon [University of Oregon School of Law, Eugene, Oregon] at one point, I think.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So, there have been, there have been, oh, Marilyn, Marilyn Yarbrough Ainsworth, who's a graduate of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California], was the dean at the University of Tennessee [University of Tennessee College of Law, Knoxville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there have been--and, and the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Law, Oxford, Mississippi] has had a black dean [Louis Westerfield] who, unfortunately, had a untimely death (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Law school black dean?
Speaker 2: University of Mississippi--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: University of Mississippi had a black dean.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, there have been many more than I even thought (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there have been many more, many more.
Story_ID: 533227
Speaker 1: Let's go, chronologically, Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] to the Car- Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and then the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: The University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Following that, was the University of Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida]?
Speaker 2: No. Then I moved, then I moved to Schiff Hardin and Waite [Schiff Hardin LLP].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was at Virginia, I was of counsel with the law firm of Schiff Hardin and Waite, and worked in their Washington [D.C.] office one day a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in the summers, I spent some, spent some summers working in their, in their office in Chicago [Illinois]. And then, in 1981, I took a leave of absence from the University of Virginia, moved to Chicago. After a year, I became the head of their tax department working as of counsel, and after a year, they made me a, a general partner in the law firm. And I resigned my position at the University of Virginia, and stayed at Schiff Hardin for, throughout the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, we're, we're in the '80s [1980s] now. You are enjoying life. And, and what do, what do you do next? You--just trying to think--from, from there, what, what, what, where do you go?
Speaker 2: Well, throughout the, throughout the, throughout the '80s [1980s], I practiced--I mean, from 1981 through to 1989, I practiced law at Schiff Hardin where I was head of the tax department. And, you know, that's, that was a, a demanding job. And during that time, I, I published the book called 'Federal Taxation of Business Enterprises,' a three volume treatise with, with several of the, of the lawyers at, at Schiff Hardin. Paul Wysocki [Paul R. Wysocki], who's no longer there; Bob Pluth [Robert R. Pluth, Jr.], who is there now, is the head of the tax department; and a lady named, Catherine Jacobson [Catherine A. Jacobson]. The three of--the four of us wrote a book called the 'Federal Taxation of Business Enterprises,' which is a three volume treatise on tax that looked at corporate tax, partnership tax, subchapter S tax, and international tax. So, that was, that was an exciting project. And then, I worked on really some fascinating, fascinating projects at, at Schiff Hardin. A lot of them had to do with mergers and acquisitions, spin-offs, and other types of things. And then, also, I was fortunate enough to be, to represent the Chicago Board Options Exchange [Chicago, Illinois] with respect to their tax issues--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during the '80s [1980s]. And this was a time of, of a lot of changes in the tax with respect to the taxation of options and futures transactions. And I represented the Chicago Board Options Exchange as their, their principal tax advisor on a, with respect to that legislation, and got to work with [U.S.] Congress. And, indeed, through our offices at Schiff Hardin and Waite, we, we, we wrote the outline of some legislation that had gotten acted in 1983 to deal with the taxation options. They're still in existence today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, it was great fun working with the chairman then, a guy named Wally Auch [Walter E. Auch], and their, their, their general counsel, Arne Rode. And Arne, and I, and Mike Meyer [Michael L. Meyer] from Schiff Hardin, and would spend a lot of time in Washington, D.C., and in New York [New York] in dealing with various parties on this legislature and early options issues. That was really some exciting work. And it was groundbreaking work because we were dealing with the House ways and means committee [House Committee on Ways and Means], the Senate finance committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Finance] on this, on this legislation. And, and we, because the Options Exchange was--it's, it is, the Chicago Board Options Exchange is the biggest player in that market. And we were--Schiff Hardin was general counsel to them. And I, as the head of the tax department, ended up being their principal tax counsel on, on those issues. It put us in the center of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --some very exciting work.
Story_ID: 533228
Speaker 1: I noticed you also were, was a delegate to the Democratic National Committee outside--
Speaker 2: Convention [Democratic National Convention]--
Speaker 1: Convention, I meant (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from Hardin [Schiff Hardin and Waite; Schiff Hardin LLP], yeah.
Speaker 1: The, the outside of that, being a delegate, were you involved in the politics at all or and--
Speaker 2: I really haven't--I mean, I've been, I mean, one of my, one of my best friends at Schiff Hardin and I, Wayne McCoy, when we were in Chicago [Illinois], we did a, you know, we, we did a little bit of work in support of Harold Washington and his campaign. As a matter of fact, we had a, we had a, we had a fundraiser for Harold Washington at the Metropolitan Club in the Sears Tower [Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois] one time. And I think Wayne and I were the principal sponsors of that, of that, of that fundraiser. And I've done, you know, things here and there, but I have not been an active in the political scene.
Story_ID: 533229
Speaker 1: And you're teaching out here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and tell us a little about that.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm, I, I teach at UCLA at the law school [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California]. I teach mergers and acquisitions. Sometimes I teach securities regulations which I'm teaching now. Sometimes I teach anti-trust. Sometimes I teach tax aspects of mergers and acquisitions or corporate tax.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I teach international tax. So, I teach a lot of things, either directly related to mergers and acquisitions, or somehow related to mergers and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: And the other thing that stood out for me is the number of books you've written. Do you want to go through those for us because I know you've been quite prolific.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, the first book ['Pension Reform: How to Comply with ERISA,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.] I wrote was a, was a book dealing with pension reform back in 1976. And I wrote it for the Illinois Institute of Continuing Legal Education [sic. Illinois Institute for Continuing Legal Education, Springfield, Illinois]. And, and it was the basis of several CLE programs [continuing legal education].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, on, on pension reform, and this was after the ERISA Act [Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974]--I think, which came out in 1976, so, that was my first book. And then, when I went into teaching at, at Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], I published a book on the taxation of business enterprises ['Federal Income Taxation of Domestic and Foreign Business Transactions,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.] for, for a--which is a teaching, a law school teaching book. And that was my second book. My third book--I think was the taxation, 'Federal Taxation of Business Enterprises' book, which I did when I was at Schiff Hardin [Schiff Hardin and Waite; Schiff Hardin LLP], which is a three volume treatise on various aspects of business taxation. And then, when I came here to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] the first time back in 1990, I did a book called the 'Reform of the Taxation of Business'--a 'Taxation of Mergers and Acquisitions' [sic. 'Reform of the Taxation of Mergers, Acquisitions and LBOs,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]. And then, after I left here, and went to Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida], I published several books--one on international tax ['U.S. Taxation of International Transactions,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]; another on 'Taxation of Business Entities' [Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]; one on anti-trust aspects of mergers and--'Practitioner's Guide to the Anti-Trust Merger Guidelines'--'to the Economics of the Merger Guidelines' [sic. 'A Practitioner's Guide to the Economics of the Antitrust Merger Guidelines,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]. And then, and then, I'm, you know, and then also, I published my, the principal book I teach out of now called 'Business Planning for Mergers and Acquisitions' ['Business Planning for Mergers and Acquisitions: Corporate, Securities, Tax, Antitrust, International and Related Aspects,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], which is now going into its third edition. As a matter of fact, I'm working with the publisher on the galleys for the third edition of that book--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which will be out sometime this summer. And then, I have a book that's dedicated to my son [Samuel C. Thompson III] called 'International Tax Planning and Policy' ['Internal Tax Planning and Policy: Including Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions,' Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], which is, which will be out within the next six weeks or so.
Story_ID: 533230
Speaker 1: And at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California], you're a founder of a Center for Mergers and Acquisitions [Center for the Study of Mergers and Acquisitions] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little about that.
Speaker 2: Well, well, when I was at Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida], as the dean at Miami, we started having these institutes on mergers and acquisitions. We started with an Institute on Corporate Securities and Related Aspects of Mergers and Acquisitions. And then, I added a tax symposium on an Institute on Tax Aspects of Mergers and Acquisitions. And then, when I, when UCLA asked me to come back, and I talked to the dean at Miami and said, you know, I'd like to bring these institutes here to UCLA. He agreed, so we moved, so I moved the institutes here to UCLA when I came back in 2003. And, and the, the institutes do--the, the two main things that the institutes do--one, we put on annual seminars on, on the one hand, corporate securities and related aspects of mergers and acquisitions, which we hold in October in New York [New York]. And then, we, we do one called Tax Aspects of Mergers and Acquisitions, which we'll hold, which we hold in New York. It'll be held next week--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --April 25th, 26th, and 27th, next Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, in New York at the New York Bar Association [New York City Bar Association] which is our co-sponsor. They're also the co-sponsor of our corporate program, and then we'll have an antitrust aspects of M and A, also held in New York in October at the New York Bar Association. We held them the first year out here in 2004, but we, subsequently, held them in New York because that seems to be the center of, of where folks are interested in, in the issues that we, that we deal with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, we have something called our First Monday Forum which we hold here in L.A., and we have a--it's a discussion forum for, of M and A issues that's held right here in, in Los Angeles [California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --every, every month, once a month.
Speaker 1: Oh, once a month?
Speaker 2: Once a month, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  The--this is a, a field that not many of us hear about, but I know it's a very important field. And it seems to me--would it be fair to say that you enjoy teaching law more than any other aspect of it, especially--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 533231
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the--you was a consultant to South African president Nelson Mandela at one time?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was a consultant to the South African treasury department [National Treasury].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I didn't work directly with Nelson Mandela, but I, but I worked with the, I worked in the Ministry of Finance--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for a, for a little over a year, the Ministry of Finance and also the South African Revenue Service--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for, for a little over a year.
Speaker 1: And, basically, what you did in just a few words.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the tax policy advisor to the, to the, to the Ministry of Finance, and then to the, to the South African Revenue Service. And I helped them with a project to modernize their income tax. And we, we, for example, they, during that time, adopted what's known as a capital gains tax. They did not tax capital gains prior to that time, and they moved to what's known as a worldwide, a modified worldwide system of taxing foreign income, as opposed to the system that they, they previously had, which was a, which was a basically, basically something called a territorial system that did not tax income earned by South Africans out of South Africa, outside of South Africa (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I, those were sort of the principal things I worked on when I was in South Africa.
Story_ID: 533232
Speaker 1: You've had a long and successful career, and I'm sure you must be very, very proud of it. What I wanted to ask--if there's anything that I may have overlooked in this interview that we could cover at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, one of the things I suppose I would mention is that (laughter), I was talking to my wife [Becky Sue Thompson] about this the other day. When I was in law school, my first year of law school, I went with two other people--a white guy and a black lady, down to Mississippi during Christmastime to work on a civil rights project in a place called Leland, Mississippi, a place called tent city, where some sharecroppers had left their sharecropping jobs to work in this, to work in this, to, to work in this--I mean, to, to build a new life for themselves. And we were going down from the University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to help them put up this, this community center. So, we went down and to, to work with them. You know, it was the height of the Civil Rights Movement. My parents [Emmitt Nickens Thompson and Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] didn't want me to go. They were, you know, frightened.
Speaker 1: Right. What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was in 1965.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This was in December of 1965. They didn't want me to go because of the, you know, fear for what, what might happen.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I remember as we, as we, we drove, we were driving down to Mississippi. And we stopped--I think, it was in Nashville, Tennessee. And the, we stayed in a black area in a black hotel. And the, you know, the, the, the lady, the black lady didn't have anything romantically to do with either the white guy or myself. But when we stopped in this hotel in, in, in Nashville, they made me and the white lady--me and the black lady--stay in a room. And they put the white lady--put the white guy in another room by himself. And they said, "Now, you, you can be in there, but she can get up, and go into his room after," (laughter), "after we check you in," or something like that. I thought that was awfully funny (laughter). But, but it, you know, when, I remember distinctly when we were, how we felt when we crossed the border into Mississippi, you know, the fear we felt.
Speaker 1: Apprehension then--
Speaker 2: Here, we, you know, a white guy and two--and a black lady and a black man--going to Jackson, Mississippi, or Green- we're going to Greenville, Mississippi, going to stay in Greenville, working on this project, in Leland, Mississippi. We were, we were frightened, we were intimidated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I, I was just telling my wife, I was more intimidated driving into Mississippi than I was going to my first assignment in Vietnam as a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps]. And it's, it, it, it--those, those, you know, the people of Mississippi, who, who, who built that system of intimidation, you know, were, were, were doing something very evil.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it was, and, and, and to do that to people in, in, in, in their own country is just sickening. And, and for, for the federal government to have permitted it to happen is even, is even worse.
Speaker 1: Right, right. I would certainly, certainly--
Speaker 2: So, you know, that's, you know, I, I, just drawing the comparison between, you know, driving, for, for an American citizen to be more frightened driving into Mississippi, than he is going into Vietnam in a combat situation in Vietnam, is just, it's just, you know, it shouldn't be.
Speaker 1: It should, should not be.
Story_ID: 533233
Speaker 1: Going back a little ways, I noticed that you were president of your NAA- student NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter was--
Speaker 2: I wasn't the president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the principal organizers of my NAACP chapter.
Speaker 1: At West Chester [West Chester State College; West Chester University, West Chester, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: At West Chester. It was the first, first time that we organized the NAACP chapter. I was one of the principal organizers. I, I might say that I--my recollection is that it was my idea (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to, to, to do it. I remember one of our professors, white professors saying, "Oh, no, you shouldn't do this thing." But we, we organized it, and this was in 1962, '63 [1963], or something like that.
Speaker 1: Right, and so--
Speaker 2: Yeah. And, you know, I mean, there was no--I mean, there was, as a matter of fact, one of our, you know, one of our white colleagues ended up, a couple of white students ended up joining the NAACP at that, at that time. And it was something that I'm, that I'm very proud of.
Speaker 1: Well, it was still, you had to be bold even, even in the North to start an NAACP chapter, and even in Pennsylvania, a Quaker country so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 533234
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that we may have left out that we should cover?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I'll, I'm sure I'll say, darn, I should have mentioned this, but as we go forward, I may, may--if you give me a chance, I'll come back to it, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure. Let, let me ask you this.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there is something I want to--
Speaker 1: Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --there's something that I want, there's something I want to cover. You know, I mean, you were here, you know, interviewing me for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. And, you know, I, I'm, I'm, I'm not a history maker. I'm just a guy that was born at the right time, that's a hardworking guy, and is sort of forward looking person, and I get that from my mom [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and my dad [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.], and my grandpop and my grandmom. I mean, they were forward looking people.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You don't, you know, you don't look back. You don't consider your--you don't, you don't focus on the negative. You don't say, oh, somebody's out to get me, you know, you, you move forward in life. And I'm, you know, so, I'm not a history maker. I'm just, I'm just the beneficiary--my--on a professional basis, I'm, I'm a beneficiary of, of, of the fact that this country had affirmative action in the 1960s. I'm a beneficiary of that. There was a turn in this country, and I was born at a time where I was one of the first people to be able to get that benefit. And there were so many other people, for example, in my class in Hy- the Hygienic School [Steelton, Pennsylvania], who were a lot smarter than I was, but just didn't have the opportunities that I had.
Speaker 1: Well, it takes the breaks, it takes an opportunity.
Speaker 2: It takes breaks, it takes breaks--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --it takes breaks. Now, one thing I can say that I will pat myself on the back for, that when I got a break, I realized it was a break, and I took advantage of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't shy about saying, damn it, I'm going to go, and I'm going to seize this thing.
Speaker 1: Right, right. The fact that you walked into the dean's office there at the law school, University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was the right time, the right place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was the right time, right ta- right place, and, you know, and, you know. And when he [William Shane] gave me the thing and said, "Go take the exam," I didn't, you know, I went and filled it out right away, and took the exam, and went right back to see him. And you know, I mean, that, those are things that I get from my mom and dad and my grandpop.
Story_ID: 533235
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered by your friends and family and the associates--
Speaker 2: Be- before, before we go, before we go forward, you know--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --the, the, you know, one of my, one of my very best friends at, at Schiff Hardin [Schiff Hardin and Waite; Schiff Hardin LLP] who's, had, had an untimely death was Wayne McCoy, who was a black partner at, at Schiff Hardin, one, one of the first black partners in any major law firm in, in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Wayne was a--Wayne and I were, were, were very good friends. We, you know, we drank a lot of liquor together, and worked hard together on, on projects at work. And I'm, I'm really sorry that he's not here with us today. I'm certain that, that you would have, you--I mean, he, he was, he was a history maker. And you would have, you would have, you would have, you certainly would have had a conversation with him, and could have learned an awful lot from him because he grew up in Louisville, Kentucky. He went to the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], then on to the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and he was a, he spent his entire career at Schiff Hardin, starting off as a summer associate before--
Speaker 1: Where was it, where did he go to law school?
Speaker 2: He went to law school at the University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And during his summer between his second and third years of law school, he clerked at--he was, he was a summer clerk at Schiff Hardin and Waite. He went to Schiff Hardin and Waite. He, he worked his way up. He started off as an associate. He worked his way up as a, as a, to become a partner. He, he did municipal bond work, something that not a lot of black lawyers do. He was an outstanding lawyer, a really brilliant man. And we, you know, I miss him, and, and all of his friends (laughter) miss him.
Speaker 1: Well, you were helping to make him a HistoryMaker, so when, when did he come out of law school if you know?
Speaker 2: Wayne came out of law school in like, I think, like 1973--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [sic. l972] and he went, as I said, he went right to Schiff Hardin. He was a, he was a very creative lawyer, and a hard worker, has a great family. His, his son is also a lawyer, went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], undergrad, University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And his daughter [Kamilah McCoy Allen] went to Michigan, and then went on to, to--I think, graduate school at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. His wife is a--Sharron [Sharron McCoy] is a librarian. They have a great, a great family. And he would, he would have been one of your History- real HistoryMakers. Wayne had a phenomenal sense of humor. We used to always go to the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival]. Wayne and I would go to the Penn Relays, and we would fun at the Penn Relays. And we would go to the Penn Relays on Saturday, and then that following Sunday, we would go to mother--mom [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and father's [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] house, mother and father's house, and, and have dinner. And Wayne would, you know, keep people in stitches. And I remember my mother saying, "Wayne, Eddie Murphy better be glad you didn't become a comedian because you would have put him out of business" (laughter). He, he had, he was just that clever, and had, had that type of, had that type of, had that type of sense of humor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, anyway, I miss him. My, my, my, my friends at--I know my friends at Schiff Hardin miss him. I know my friend, Jim Griffin [ph.] in, in Washington, D.C. misses him. And I have him in my--a picture of Wayne and myself, and Jim Griffin, in the, in the bathroom. So, whenever I go to the bathroom, I take a look at them (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Exactly, exactly. Well, this means that many more people will remember Wayne al- also.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um--
Speaker 2: And I think that Julie--I know Julie Richardson [Julieanna Richardson] of, of, of The HistoryMakers, I know, she knows Wayne, and probably did some work with Wayne when he was, when he was alive.
Story_ID: 533236
Speaker 1: I wanted to just drift over to how--what do you think will be your greatest legacy that you're, you're leaving to your friends and colleagues?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, at this point, I'm, I'm worried about leaving a legacy for my son [Samuel C. Thompson III] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And what's the greatest legacy for my son? You know, my, my wife [Becky Sue Thompson] and I have been, have talked about this. We want that kid to be honest as he can be. We want him to be hardworking, and we want him to be a decent person. And that is, you know, the--those are the three things. I want, you know, I would hope that I, you know, I haven't, I haven't--I think, in most cases, I've been honest. And in most cases, I've been hardworking. I couldn't, I don't know if I could be much harder working. I don't know if I could be harder honest, being honest, I could have been a decent, more decent person in certain ways. And I would want my son to be, to be honest, to be hardworking, and to be a decent human being.
Story_ID: 533237
Speaker 1: And tell us about your siblings. They are, they're still with us?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what are they doing now.
Speaker 2: My sister [Fray Safiya Thompson] is a, my sister is a school teacher in the Harrisburg school system [Harrisburg School District].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother [Edward N. Thompson] is a, is an administrator at, at Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my, my wife is, is a--she's, she's been a law student at Chapman University [Dale E. Fowler School of Law, Orange, California], but she's taken off time for our baby and who we, who we had just six, six and a half months ago.
Speaker 1: And the baby's name is--
Speaker 2: The baby, the baby's name is Samuel Coleman Thompson III [Samuel C. Thompson III]--
Speaker 1: The III.
Speaker 2: --and we, we call him Tommy, which was my nickname. So he's got--his, his mother insisted that he would be Samuel Coleman Thompson III, and I'm, I'm glad she did. And, and I said, "Well, if he's going to be Samuel Coleman Thompson III, I know, I always enjoyed the name, Tommy, so he's got the name Tommy," and then--
Speaker 1: And your wife's name?
Speaker 2: And my wife's name is Becky, Becky Sue [Becky Sue Thompson].
Speaker 1: Okay. And Becky was a native of California?
Speaker 2: No, Becky's a native of State College, Pennsylvania. And my brother introduced us. My brother said to me, said, "Tommy, when you're out here sometime, you need to come up to, come up to State College, and, and, and I got somebody I want you to meet." And I went up and met her. And about a week later, we started talking on the phone, and that was back in 2004. And we've been communicating with each other every day since then--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --no matter where I've been. I mean, we nearly spent a, spent almost two years on, you know, with the bicoastal relationship, and wherever we've been, wherever I've been in the world or, you know, traveling or whatever, we've always talked every day. And, you know, it's just great having a, a great relationship with Becky and with, with my son. And, you know, having a young son, and people--I used to hear people say, you know, I want to have a son, so I can take care of him, and so he can take care of me. And I've, I've never, I've never had that, that feeling and I, I don't today. But I do have the feeling that I want to stay alive, so I can take care of him--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so, so, what I want to do is to try to take care of myself so that, so that I'll be here when he, when he's an adult.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.] is a--with us, right?
Speaker 2: No, my father, my father passed in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: In '99 [1999]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 533238
Speaker 1: One of the things we might go back to is the Miami--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --issue. Let me, let me just spend a couple of minutes on Miami (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: I went down to the University of Miami in 1994 as the dean of the law school [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida]. And there was a great deal of enthusiasm among the students and among the faculty for me there. And one of the things, you know, I'm, I'm very proud of a couple of things at the University of Miami. One, the University of Miami, before I got there, never had an endowed chair. And, and they now have two endowed chairs, which, which, which I got. I led the, the campaigns for--one, the Hauser [Richard A. Hauser] chair, and one, the Minnette Massey [M. Minnette Massey] chair. Now, I don't, not to my knowledge, they don't have any additional endowed chairs. But we raised--I think $2 million for the Hauser chair, and about maybe a little less than $2 million for the Minnette Massey chair. And I had extremely good relationships with the students at Miami, and with the alums at Miami. I had a rocky relationship, however, with the faculty at Miami. And the principal reason, from my perspective, for that rocky relationship, I had good friends on that faculty, but the principal reason for that rocky relationship is that I, I, from my perspective now. When I went to Miami, I went around the country before going there, talked to a lot of people at a lot of different schools about what Miami needed to do to, to, to, to move forward.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the, the word was, "Well, Miami is a good school, but it's not a great school, and, you know, it, it's, it should be maybe more ambitious." And so, when I went to Miami, I said, "Look, you know, I think that we need to become recognized as a more of a premiere school than we are. We need to be recognized as one of the country's great schools." And the faculty's view was, or many of the faculty's view was, "What do you mean? Be recognized as a great school? We are a great school." So, there was this clash--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of, of views with me wanting to, wanting to say, we ought to move forward. I, I remember saying, the school, we ought to try to emulate is the University of Southern California law school [University of Southern California Gould School of Law, Los Angeles, California], which is a great law school. And I said, and the, and the model there is, is obvious because USC is a large urban institution, as is Miami. USC is best known for football, as is Miami. Yet, USC has a preeminent law school, and most people would not say our law school is preeminent, so we ought to be focused on becoming a preeminent law school. And so, that was the, those were the battle lines between me and the, and the faculty. And the, the key to becoming a preeminent school, in my judgment, was dramatically reducing the size of the school because they had a whole bunch of students, too many students.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And as a consequence, too many students were graduating without good job opportunities.
Story_ID: 533239
Speaker 1: As I was saying, you know, from my perspective, you know, I felt that the school [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida] ought to--we ought to set a strategy to move ourselves forward dramatically and quickly. And many of the faculty said, "Well, you know, we already are a great school. People don't, just don't recognize it." My point was, if people don't recognize it, then we got a major problem because it had, it has an adverse effect on our students. And when I was there, most of our students did not have jobs when they graduated, which was not the experience that I had had at any of the schools I had ever taught at.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And it was really sort of heartbreaking to have, you know, several hundred students come across the podium at graduation time and get their graduation, get their degrees, be very happy, but not have a, a job prospect--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because they're putting, they were mortgaging their lives to come to law school because most of them were borrowing twenty dollars, twenty-five thousand dollars a year to come to law school. So, law school was costing them, you know, putting a mortgage of seventy to eighty thousand dollars a year on their, on their lives. And a lot of them didn't have good job prospects. And it's clear that the, the more, elite a school was perceived to be, the better its, its students during the job market.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And one of the problems was we were, we were, we were too large. So I, so it, during my fourth year, I finally convinced the faculty to reduce, dramatically reduce the size of the, of the, of the student body. And this was a faculty decision. It was not a decision that the president of the university would make, but the faculty had to make it.
Speaker 2: And you reduced it from--
Speaker 1: Well, we, I think we had, like five hundred students, in the, in the--and I wanted to reduce it to two hundred and fifty per year. And other, you know, the faculty, I think, negotiated with me, and we ended up setting a target of three hundred and some students per year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway, it was a dramatic, a dramatic reduction. And I, I spent a lot of time figuring out how it could be done from a budgetary standpoint. And I remember the president [Edward T. Foote II] saying to me that he didn't think I'd get the faculty to, to agree with it, but I got the faculty to agree to it. The, the irony is that shortly after the faculty agreed to it, they, they get to, the faculty gets to vote on you every four years of whether to retain you as dean. So, the faculty voted and, and a fifty person faculty--it was like thirty some faculty members that voted. So, about twenty did not vote for whatever reason, and there were seventeen who voted against me, and fourteen who voted for me, or something like that is my recollection. And the president of the university asked, asked me to leave--in essence, said, I want you fired. He wanted me to resign rather than, rather than, rather than him firing me. And he, but, but, you know, he, he made the decision that he didn't want me there. And I, you know, I felt that that, that it was, you know, I felt that, I felt that I had provided extraordinary leadership for the university. And I thought it was ironic that the faculty would vote to undertake this massive change, and then for the president to say, "Well, you aren't providing the kind of leadership that I need for this school."
Story_ID: 533240
Speaker 1: And as a consequence, I left but, you know, there's a silver lining in every, in every rain cloud, they say. And I stepped down as dean and the next semester, I taught at the Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] for a semester as a visiting professor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, and then I left for South Africa--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --where I was the tax policy advisor for the Ministry of Finance doing much more important work than being dean at the University of Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And the, the years you were there in South Africa are--
Speaker 1: I was there from 1999 to 2000.
Speaker 2: Of 2000, okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]--so, I was there under the Nelson Mandela gov- government, although Thabo Mbeki became the president of South Africa while I was there. So, I was originally under the Nelson Mandela government, and then under the Thabo Mbeki government.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And you were there--the ambassador, U.S. ambassador at that time was--
Speaker 1: Was a, was a black man from--I forget his name, I forget his name. I should remember his name, but I forget his--
Speaker 2: John [sic. HistoryMaker James Joseph], no, we'll, we'll fill it out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I asked that question 'cause I, I knew his name (laughter).
Speaker 1: I met him. Yeah, I met, I met him and, as a matter of fact, I think he still lives in Cape Town [South Africa], or at least, has a home in Cape Town.
Speaker 2: Six months out of the year, the rest are at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And the--right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's at Duke, he's at Duke, yes.
Story_ID: 533241
Speaker 1: In, in, in any event, let me just say--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one, one last thing about, about the Miami [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida] thing. The, the--while I was there, the New Times paper [Miami New Times] did a, did a--it was, it was the local sort of free paper, but gets distributed with a lot of advertising and stuff like that. They put me on the, on the cover page, and did a, and the title of the article was 'Sam Thompson's Vision of the University of Miami Law School Has Some People Seeing Red' [ph.]. And it was the faculty that was seeing red. But, you, you know, that my disagreements with the faculty there were not, to my knowledge, based on race. They were based on differences in, in, in, in, in policy.
Speaker 2: Right. And it would be fair to say that the president of the university gave in to the faculty, as opposed to forming a decision that he wanted to fire you? In other words, that faculty vote being seventeen against, then--
Speaker 1: Fourteen.
Speaker 2: --fourteen pro?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: He just went along with, with that vote?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I, I don't want to, you know, I can't ascribe any motive to him. I don't know what, what his, you know, what his, what his reasoning was, but I, you know, I, I just found it a little ironic that I, that I spent the time and the effort to, to convince the faculty--I mean, this is, this is public, this is on the public record.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I spent the time and effort to, to convince the faculty to make a dramatic change in the direction of the university. That's number one. And within another couple of weeks, this vote on whether I should be retained or not comes, and, and the president said, you know, the faculty has voted seventeen--what he said to me was, "The faculty has voted seventeen, they don't want you, and I, and, and you ought to resign."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, you know, I, I would have thought that, that if I had, had, if I were president of a university and had a dean who had said to the, said to the faculty, "Hey, let's move in a different direction," and the faculty was going to move in that direction. Then I, I would have, I would have, I would have foc- I would hope I would, would have supported him.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, you know, and so, I think that, I think it was a mistake for him not to have supported me, but I haven't been hurt by it because, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm going on with my career. I'm at U- I'm at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, School of Law, Los Angeles, California] now. I have my institute here at UCLA. I'm happy that, I'm happy as I could possibly be here at UCLA with, with my mergers and acquisitions institute. So, yet, it didn't hurt me, but I, I feel like, I feel like I left some, left some business undone at Miami, and that I may have let down some, some students, some former students, some students, and some graduate because I was, I was there talking about well, let's move our law school forward. And then, all of a sudden, you know, I'm walking out on them.
Speaker 2: The president--now, a little after that, the president of the University of Miami--
Speaker 1: How did you know that?
Speaker 2: I, I read, I'm, I'm a news junkie.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And--
Speaker 1: --shortly after that, the president was gone, yeah.
Speaker 2: Replaced by the former, the Clinton health and [U.S. secretary of health and human services]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, by Donna Shalala.
Speaker 2: Donna Shalala.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was Ted Foote [Edward T. Foote II] who was the president when I was--Ted hired me and Ted, Ted fired me (laughter).
Story_ID: 533242
Speaker 1: There were a couple of cases I did want to ask you about. Although this is not your area of law, I'm sure you, you might have an opinion. The first one was the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] back in the, back in the '70s [1970s]. And, of course, that was the University of Davis case [University of California Davis School of Medicine, Davis, California].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: On, on--in, in the case, Justice Blackmun [Harry Blackmun] came down and gave a sort of peripheral victory to affirmative action. Any comment on how that case was resolved, and what it meant for the country?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--well, it meant for the country as, as a practical matter, that affirmative action could continue. And, and the Grutter case [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003], the University of Michigan [University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], sort of follows on. I'm, I'm not a constitutional law scholar, but I mean, it, it, it, it, in essence, enunciates basically the same principle with a little, with a, some whistles and bells on it that allows affirmative action to go forward, at least for the next, you know, seventeen years or so with Grutter, said, and put it in twenty year, twenty year sunset on the, on the decision. A couple of things, you know, one of the things that, you know, my first article, as a law professor, was on this topic. It was, it was an article that was published in the American Bar Journal [American Bar Association Journal]. And a professor [Paul G. Haskell] at, at a law school--I think it was a, I think it was a law school in Cleveland [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], had written an article in the American Bar Journal called Ac- the 'Academic Plantation Theory' [sic. 'Legal Education on the Academic Plantation,' Paul G. Haskell] talking about this was just at the time of affirmative action. This was in the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s]. And he was, he was--it was, it was an argument against affirmative action. And I wrote an article in the, in the, in the American Bar Journal challenging his academic plantation theory. And saying that from my experience as a, as an affirmative action admittee at the University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and from having, from working with the students, I was working with at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], you know, these were hard--I was hardworking, these are hardworking students. And, you know, given the opportunity, they're going to do very well, but it was a basic, basic theme. And that's been my, that's been my experience with, with most, most black and, and, and other students of color who, who were affirmative action admittees at various, at various schools. And I'll give you, I'll give you a classic example. And this gentleman will not mind me mentioning any of this. One of my, one of my research assistants at the U- when I was at the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], is a, is a guy named Glenn Carrington [Glenn R. Carrington], who lives in Washington [D.C.] now. And Glenn came to the University of Virginia from Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]. He was a basketball player at Norfolk State. And Norfolk State is a, is a, is a solid institution, but it doesn't generally send people to the University of Virginia. So, I remember Glenn came to the University of Virginia and, and he had a rough start his, his first semester. And I remember talking to him. I said, after his first semester, I said, "Glenn, how did you do?" He said, "You know, I didn't do too well, but I'm--," but I remember he pumped his fists. He said, "I'm coming back." It's like it's down in, in the last quarter of the basketball game, you got to come back--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, "I'm coming back." And he came back. And he, you know, he, he did well his second semester. He, you know, he did well his second year. He did well his third year. When he graduated, he went to the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] in a honors program. He, he moved over to the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] in an honors program. He left there and went to the Caplin and Drysdale law firm, a major tax law firm, in Washington, D.C. He went back to the Internal Revenue Service. He's a high level official in the chief counsel's office at the Internal Revenue Service. He left there and went, had several job offers at major firms to be a partner, including at Caplin and Drysdale. He left and he went to, went to Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP], headed up their tax, and ultimately headed up their tax practice, became the number one man on their tax practice in Washington, D.C. And then, when, when Arthur Andersen imploded, he went--moved over to Deloitte [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], and he's now at, at, at, at Ernst, Ernst and Young [Ernst and Young LLP] in Washington in their, in their tax group. And just recently did a--published a book on, on accounting aspects, tax accounting aspects of mergers and acquisitions ['Tax Accounting in Mergers and Acquisitions,' Glenn R. Carrington]. So, here's a guy that starts out, you know, slowly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because he's, you know, because he hasn't had the experience.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, you know, he's, he, he's, he's at the, he's done as well as anybody could have possibly have done in his class.
Story_ID: 533243
Speaker 1: And, and this is, this has been my experience with affirmative action. I've seen folks like myself who start off slowly. I started off slowly, but who get, you know, you get excited about the experience you're having, you get excited about the, the professors you're having and at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], you get, you get sparked, you get stoked. And, and even though, even though, you know, you may not be starting on the same starting line as a lot of guys who, who come from a more privileged background, you can make up that distance.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You can make up that distance. And that's been my experience with affirmative, with affirmative action, that, as one student said, one student said to me--University of Virginia, who's now a partner in a Milwaukee [Wisconsin] law firm, he said to me, "Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], I am a Thompson theory student." I said, "What do you mean a Thompson theory student?" He said, "A Thompson theory student is a student that starts slowly, but finishes fast."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's, and that's been my experience. Now, not everybody does it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but it's my experience that large numbers of, of blacks who've gotten the benefit, and Hispanics, and others who've gotten the benefit of affirmative action, have taken advantage of it, have moved forward. And, and as I said in a, in a speech at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida], we had a little problem with a student who stole some records of some black students and, and had made these, these records available to the general public, and the black students were up in arms. And I gave a speech to the student body, and I said, "I want you to know that I am proud to say that I was an affirmative action admittee to the University of Pennsylvania. But I'm even prouder to say that I'm not an affirmative action graduate of the University of Pennsylvania." And that's been my experience with most students. There, there may be affirmative action--
Speaker 2: That's a--
Speaker 1: --admittees, but there aren't affirmative action graduates, and that's where the test comes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's where the test comes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. That's a great story, that, that is a great story.
Story_ID: 533244
Speaker 1: Let me come back to one other thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In talking about affirmative action and the like, it's just one thing that comes to mind that, that I'd like to mention that I'm, that I'm proud of. I told you that the first article I wrote, as a law professor, was a challenge to Professor Haskell's [Paul G. Haskell] academic plantation theory. As a matter of fact, my mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] has the, has a copy of the article in a little scrapbook she put together and we can take a picture of it if you like to have but--
Speaker 2: We'd like that.
Speaker 1: But when I was at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois], I organized several of the black students and one white student to publish articles in a special issue of something called the Black Law Journal [National Black Law Journal] which is published by UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. I think it's not published as much now, but it used to be published, used to be published frequently by UCLA. And all of our articles were around advising small companies on various issues, like I wrote an article on tax. Another person wrote an article on securities regs [securities regulations]. Another person wrote an article on pension law. And another person wrote an article on drafting the corporate, corporate minutes. And it's very interesting that, that all of the people who participated in that program have been very successful in, in writing articles for that special. And one of them became the president, a guy named Clinton Bristow [Clinton Bristow, Jr.] became the president of a, of an, of a school down in Alabama [sic. Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi]. I forget the name of it.
Speaker 2: I know the name of it--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: I, I know--
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, but, but that's something that I, that I was very proud of that we, that, that we got together and did that. And it was a good experience for me, and it was good experience for the students, and they got something published, and they had to think hard about various, various business, business topics.
Story_ID: 533245
Speaker 1: This is a picture of after I returned from Vietnam. And it's got my, my various medals, including my [U.S.] Navy Commendation Medal with Combat V.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Do you know the approximate date?
Speaker 1: This was taken sometime in 1968 or early '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The date again?
Speaker 1: I think it was taken sometime around November 8, 1968.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: It was taken earlier in 1968 because I have my (unclear) on which is a, a, you know, only be worn by people in the 3rd Battalion, 5th Marines, or 5th Marines [5th Marine Regiment]. And so, it was at the time I was shortly, shortly after I got back from Vietnam.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken at a student rally at the University of Miami [Coral Gables, Florida] in support of me after the president asked me to leave the law school [University of Miami School of Law, Coral Gables, Florida]. And I had--the students had a rally in support of me. And I'd given a speech explaining to them, to them, why I was leaving. And this--I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm saying a few words to Professor Richard Hauser [Richard A. Hauser], one of our esteemed professors who's now deceased.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother [Emmitt Nickens Thompson] and father [Samuel C. Thompson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the approximate date there?
Speaker 1: I think it may have been taken about 1980.
Speaker 2: It's on an old--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay. That's my grandmother [Helen Wilson Nickens] and grandfather on my mother's side. So, that's Robert Carroll Nickens [Robert Nickens] who, whose ancestors first got their freedom, like in 1680.
Speaker 1: Me in front of the headquarters company of the 5th Marines in a place called Phu Bai [Phu Bai Airfield; Phu Bai International Airport] in Vietnam, south of Hue City [Vietnam] during the Tet Offensive in '68 [1968] and I--it says CO [commanding officer], Captain Samuel C. Thompson [HistoryMaker Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.], CO of headquarters company. And that's one of the pictures that I'm most proud of. I was this, at twenty-three years old, I was this company commander of the headquarters company in the 5th, of the 5th Marines.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife, my wife, Becky [Becky Sue Thompson], and my son, Tommy, Samuel Coleman Thompson III [Samuel C. Thompson III], who's sitting on my lap now, being a really good boy, and myself. And we're at a track meet at Drake Stadium at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] just a month ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and father, and my sister [Fray Safiya Thompson] and brother [Edward N. Thompson], and myself. And it's for their--I think it's their fifty-fifth wedding anniversary, which was like in 1995 or '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Okay. This is a picture of the first page of a, an article that I wrote in the Black Business Digest. It was published in 1971, and it's the article that was based on my senior, third year of law school writing paper. And the, the title of the article is 'Black Business Ownership: An Analysis and a Proposal' [Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). This is, this is a pic- this is a picture of my first article as an academic when I was at Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois]. And the title of the article is 'A Response to Professor Haskell's Academic Plantation Theory' [Samuel C. Thompson, Jr.]. The article is published in the American Bar Journal [American Bar Association Journal] in 1974. And it is challenging a professor's argument that affirmative action should be ended. And I was arguing in support of affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is an announcement by Schiff Hardin and Waite [Schiff Hardin LLP] that I'd become a member or partner in the, in their firm. It was in April, or I guess, July, of 1983.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay. This is a picture of--that I took, of Don Newcombe and Charlie Neal of the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers]. It was either taken in 1955 or '56 [1956], the World Series in 1955 or '56 [1956]. I remember my, my parents took me to that World Series game. And I reached over the bullpen and took that picture of them. Don Newcombe was the--at my recollection--was a big time pitcher. And Charlie Neal was a--I think he was a short stop or second baseman. And what's interesting in that, I think it was in that game 'cause I think this was taken at Ebbets Field [Brooklyn, New York]. In that game, Jackie Robinson stole home on, on Yogi Berra. And I don't, I, I have never seen anyone steal home, other than Jackie Robinson. By the way, at the track, we were at a track meet last Saturday at--over here at UCLA. And they, they were announcing that, that Jackie Robinson is the only four letter sports person ever in history of UCLA, in that when he was at UCLA, he, he participated in track, and won the national championship in the broad jump. He jumped twenty-four feet in the broad jump and was the, was the NCAA champion [National Collegiate Athletic Association].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. This is a picture of my mother and me at, in my office at Schiff Hardin and Waite. You can see me surrounded by, surrounded by my tax books.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. This is a picture of Jim Griffin [ph.], my good friend from Washington, D.C.; Wayne McCoy, my colleague at Schiff Hardin, partner at Schiff Hardin; and myself. It was taken after the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival] in 1999. Jim and Wayne and I would always go to the Penn Relays together, and then we'd come up to my mother's house on Sunday for, for, for dinner. And so, we were up there for dinner, and this was after my father's death, which was about two weeks before then, but in, in any event, we were there. And I think I was barbecuing, and we were having a, we were having a good time as you can see.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --Oy, a principal corporate lawyer, and Jim is a businessman in Washington, and Wayne was his principal corporate lawyer.
Speaker 1: A picture of me at the gravesite of Prudence Ann Thompson and Jacob Thompson. And it says, "Prudence Ann born in 1788," excuse me, 1787--I guess it is, and Jacob was born in 1788. And they were--their, their burial sites are at this church, the St. John's Church [St. John's Episcopal Church, Gap, Pennsylvania] in the Compass, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And 101 years, too.
Speaker 1: And, yes, she was 101 years old. And I think when Jacob died, he--I guess he died in 1880 something. So he was close to 100 as well.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Eighteen eighty-one [1881].
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-one [1881].
