Story_ID: 14526
Speaker 1: Could you please for the record tell us your name, if you have a middle name and could you spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Morrie Nolten Turner.  My real name is Morris, but I adopted Morrie.  (Unclear) my son is named--we, we started calling him Morrie, and I called, and I kind of liked that so I started calling myself Morrie.  Nolten, N-O-L-T-E-N, and that's after a doctor, Nolten Ashley who I understand, my mother always says he saved my life when I was one year old.  So they gave it my middle--his first name has become my middle name.  I had pneumonia or something.  And those were the days that were, you know, a doctor would come to you.  My dad was shining shoes at the time, and on Seventh Street and, in Oakland.  And he--Dr. Ashley was one of his patients--patients?  One of his customers, and I was so sick he called Dr. Ashley.  And he came to the house and took care of me.  And you don't hear about doctors doing that anymore.
Speaker 1: No, that's right.  That's a wonderful--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: But that, they used to do that a lot in those days.
Speaker 1: Right, could you spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: M-O-R-R-I-E, N-O-L-T-E-N is the middle name, and Turner, T-U-R-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you please tell us when you were born and where?
Speaker 2: December 11, 1923 in Oakland, West Oakland.  And at Highland Hospital.
Speaker 1: Highland?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And today's date?  Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is, I think it's April the 6, 19--2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: At my home, 2761 Doris Street, in Berkeley--
Speaker 1: Okay, and your--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: My home, my family home, you know.  This is where I came first as a teenager.  I was sixteen years old.  My dad was a Pullman porter, and he bought this house here.  One of his Pullman porter friends became a realtor, and he, he loaned my dad money for the down payment so he could buy this house.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: The total cost of this house was, at the time, was three thousand dollars. (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, that's wonderful.
Speaker 2: All right, sorry, we're still getting adjusted.  This is a little confusing.  Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm a cartoonist.
Story_ID: 14527
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? Well, my favorite food, I can't eat any more.  Meatloaf, I love meatloaf.  Of course, you know, if somebody would make a meatloaf with turkey meatloaf, I could probably eat it, but you can't get that in a, in a restaurant.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year, you know, it used to be, it used to be Christmastime, but not anymore.  It's summertime.  The only thing I don't like about summertime when it's, in the change of time, you know.  I just, I just have a lot of trouble getting out of bed.  And it's just changed, and it's difficult for me.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, your favorite color?.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Blue?
Speaker 2: Yeah, turquoise blue.  It's pretty definite.  And my birth, birth color also, birthstone (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, if you were to go on a vacation, where would you like to go?  What's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: You know, I--the only place I haven't been yet that I want to go is Jamaica.  I' not a--I travel so much in my business, you know, that I'm not anxious to go any place.  I'm not--I love right where I am.  And I, you know, when I was, when I first started as a cartoonist, I said, I'm gonna move.  You know, you, you always think that some place else is, is better than where you are.  And I, I looked for a lot of places to, I, I thought that I might move to.  There's only one place I found that, Princeton, New Jersey.  You know, I liked it very much, but then I came back to Princeton in the wintertime, and I erased Princeton.  So I'm, this is perfect here, absolutely perfect.  And not, not too hot, and it's never too cold.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I'm known for it.  "Keep the faith".  That's the name of a--somebody did a biography of me, some people in Los Angeles.  They're a group of women called Heaven Sent--Heaven Sent Productions.  And they did a, they're doing--they're in the midst of doing it now.  And it's very good.
Speaker 1: And why is that your favorite?
Speaker 2: They call it, "Keeping the Faith with Morrie".
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is, why is that your favorite saying?  What meaning does it have for you?
Speaker 2: Why is it my favorite thing?  I, I stole it from--I, I heard (laughter)--I borrowed it.  Let's, let's do it another way.  Adam Clayton Powell, he used to say "keep the faith".  And it's, it--I played with that, and it means something to me.  And it always meant something that, hang in there, you know; don't give up.  And I can tell people, other people, don't give up.  I mean you, you can do it--just keep the faith.
Story_ID: 14528
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your mother?  What was her name, when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Natchez, Mississippi.  And she--I have a, a graduation of her--there were eight people in, her, her graduating class, her nurse's graduating class, eight, at Xavier, Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And it was very, you know--I mean when you look back 1800's and something, you know, and it's--I'm really proud of her that she should do.  And I just recently found that.  My brother gave it to me, the graduation, and he had all that information.  And that took a lot, you know, that took a lot.  And then she became a nanny for some--a woman in--I met the woman once in Denver, not--in Colorado in one of those richer areas of Colorado.  I wish I could think of the name of it, but I can't.  And she was always--she, she was nanny to this woman, and she--this woman was always looking out for my mother.  I mean when things got--like the Depression time, she could always call on her for, for a little help, you know.  And it was amazing that, what, what went on between those two.  And I met her when I was on a trip--we were going back to, to pick up my grandmother in Mississippi, and bring her back.  And I met her then, and I didn't want to, I didn't want to have anything to do with her because, you know, that--it was unfair for me to, to take that approach, but I did.
Speaker 1: When was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Natchez, Natchez, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: No, when, what year?
Speaker 2: I'm not--I'm sorry, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: All right, so she was in the nanny for this lady in Mississippi or she worked in Colorado?
Speaker 2: No, see they trav--she traveled with her.  She traveled her.  That was before, and before she married my dad, and had four kids, which I was the fourth one, the baby, you know.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not a lot.  I, I could see some things back then in Natchez when we, we used to go back there during the summer.  My dad, being a Pullman porter, had to get passes so we would, we would travel back there to see grandma, and, and I could see what kind of--it was a farm, it was not a huge farm, and, you know, almost, almost big as this, big as this house, you know, with chickens in the backyard and animals in the backyard.  And the house was separated from the, from the kitchen, with a walkway.  I remember that very well because I was afraid of the animals, you know, afraid of walking--they had a cow--you know, I'm a city boy.  What do I know about a cow?  And a little cow was never gonna hurt you, but I didn't know that; didn't ask anybody either.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you tell us about your father?  How--when was he born and where?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], and I'm sure of the date.  I'm sorry.  I don't have a, I don't have all that information.  I'm finding out, my cousin is looking--roots.  But he was, I think he's the third, the third, the oldest of--I think there were seven, seven kids, you know.  And he did an amazing thing.  He brought of them out here, I mean the ones that survived.  They had--let's see, one, two, three, four, four, yeah, and his grandmother, and his mother, I mean he brought all of them out there, out here, yeah.  And I don't, I don't understand how he did it.  I never asked him, you know.  I should have, but he did it, you know, cause you're not--when I was, you know, I wasn't concerned about money.  Just give me something to go to show--got to the movies.
Speaker 1: Right, did he tell you anything about his background, about stories when he was growing up?  His schooling?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I--I found out a lot about him--I mean not a lot, but I know there were, I know that there were other kids.  I know there were actually--there were other boys, and which went--which would have made me the seventh son, you know.  So I met, met two of them, and the third, I, I never met.  He was in--they were all scattered around.  And I remember, I remember--I had the phone number of the one of them that I--and he was in--and I used to go to (unclear) 'cause I went, I was with King Features [Syndicate] then.  And somebody said, here's the phone number of your, of your half brother.  You ought to call him.  So--and when I was little, you know, he'd, he'd come up, up from New Orleans, and he stayed out here, and he was--and he used to call me Peewee.  I don't know he had, a little guy.  And, but he'd look out for me 'cause he was, he was a grown man when I was a little kid.  So, then he went to New York on a ship, on, working on the ships and stayed there.  And every time I'd call, I'd go back to New York, everybody was sure this was the right number.  And I'd call, and they said, no, no, nobody by that name lives here.  So one, one day I had an inspiration.  And I said, well, if he should come, come, you just tell him, tell him Peewee called.  And he said, "Is this here, Peewee"? (Laughter).  So it was, it was him all the time, you know.  He was--I'm not sure what kind of life he was living, but it was interesting.  I went, I went and visited him in Harlem and had a great time.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no--all, this much I do much I do know, is that our relatives before them and our heirs--they're not heirs, what's the word I want to use?
Speaker 1: Ancestors or grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, they all--they were in slavery at the same place, some place in, in, just outside of New Orleans.  I had the, the--I had the location.  I went back there one time to New Orleans and I visited--I have some of my relatives still in New Orleans.  And I'd told them about this place, and I wanted to--I didn't want to go by myself.  So I wanted them to go, but there wasn't--and they didn't want any part of it.  Well, that was a different time.  It was a different time.  And we've--now, we're all interested, but, you know, in those days, we just had nothing to do with our past.  In fact, my mother didn't talk much about her past, you know.  Life started now.
Story_ID: 14529
Speaker 1: Do you know about your grandparents?  Could you tell us something about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell her--and her--I know we used to visit her a lot, but I didn't--she was already a widow when I, when I first saw her.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Esther, and I'm not sure of it--it might have been Queen Esther.  I'm not sure if anybody was called Queen Esther during then (laughter).  She was a sweet woman, yeah, very sweet woman.  And we brought her, brought her out here, and she was at a loss I think.  She was very, very unhappy being here.  And I could never understand that, 'cause you're in California now, you know.  Well, what do I know, you know, you know.
Speaker 1: What about your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Just my, my grandmother.  And she was--I knew her.  I, I have my--I have material on her and where she was, where she was born, and where she lived and cous--my cousin is--her granddaughter is researching it now.  And she had given me all the material.  And I glossed over it and gave it to my son so he, he and his, his children and his grandchildren can have a lot of information.  I didn't think I was gonna need it, didn't think you were gonna nail me to the wall with this, so.
Story_ID: 14530
Speaker 1: When your parents, your parents met, and they got--when did they come to California?
Speaker 2: Just before I was born.  So that was probably '22 [1922], 1921 or '22 [1922].  It must have been '21 [1921] because it's, my brother who's just older, a year and a half older than me was born here too, born in California also; just the two of us were born in California.
Speaker 1: All right, so you have three brothers, right?
Speaker 2: Four.  Or three, three, I'm sorry, yeah.
Speaker 1: And there's just four of you all together.  Could you tell us something about your brothers, their names and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, they're all deceased now.
Speaker 1: Are they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed was the oldest.  He was a big guy, and he was probably the smartest too.  And they shipped out on the--I remember him shipping out on merchant, merchant seaman.  Then it became, after that he got into--he ended up in real estate, but he was a supervisor at one of the hospitals out at, medical, naval hospital, when he was in, in East Oakland [California].  Of course, he was retired when he died.  They were living in Antigua--married.  And my next oldest brother also gone.  I'm the only one left.  He, he worked for the PG&E, no water company, the water company for his whole life.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Marion, we always called him--he was Buster to me.  He always, been Buster ever since he was a little kid.  He was a, he was the fighter.  He was a--he was, at the drop of a hat, he could duke.  Well, all of the, all of the Turner brothers could fight, except me.  I never knew I couldn't fight.  Well, you know, when I was a kid, they, you know, everybody would, wouldn't mess with me because I was one of the Turner brothers, you know.  I didn't find out until I was (laughter) in, in the, in the military that, that I couldn't fight.  The guy didn't know about the Turner brothers' reputation.  So I, I was forced to fight my own battle, and I lost.  So I was forced to, to deal with humor to get out of it.  That's how humor became very important to me, you know.  He was a fighter too.  He was, he was, thought about becoming a pugilist when they used to have smokers down on, in West Oakland.  And Pop Lewis, who's John Henry Lewis' father--John Henry Lewis was the light heavyweight champion of the world when Joe Louis was, was fighting.  And at Pop Lewis' they used to have a gym down there.  And at that time, I was, I was  in, into music.  And they would have smokers down there.  And my mother thought that th ey would fight, you know.  That's all my mother knew.  But they had dancers down there, and I came home bragging about what, what, and what the dancer had told me.  And she would--she said, when they want to, they would grab the, grab the curtain, you hit the cymbal.  So she told me how good I was, and I went home and told my mother how, what this dancer had told me.  And she said, "you what?" (laughter).  She didn't know anything was, this sort of thing was going on.  Now, that ended my-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I guess about ten, twelve, yeah, but I was, I didn't know.  We were with the, the Strayne (ph.) Brothers, all of us were little--pretty young.  We just liked our music.  And we could do those things in those days.  Nobody stopped you, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the third brother is--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Joe.  J.B. everybody used to call him, Joseph Borden (laughter) or Joseph Borden.  He was, he was the one that was closest to me.  In fact, we look alike.  Yeah, we, we looked so much alike that the people would look at me and say, I just thought I saw you, yeah.  So we looked pretty much alike at that time, so not in--and we spent a lot of time together in our, our later years, especially after my mother died.  I, I just decided that if I didn't--see, he was living in the South, and, and my wife was up at--alive--'cause we were out living somewhere else.  So I decided that if I didn't make an effort, that I wouldn't see him, you know, that we would all--because my mother was the one that was, that we all gathered around.  And if I didn't make an effort, I would probably never see him again.  So I would--every Sunday morning we would go out for breakfast.  And I made sure of that, cause my wife understood that, what I was trying to do, you know.  And when he got sick, I just--he was here, and I just, I just stayed with him, you know, at night, you know.  I'd sleep on the couch, you know.  He had cancer, and it was, you know--and we'd have our, our time together, and we'd drink, (chuckle), we'd drink brandy together.
Story_ID: 14531
Speaker 1: You had mentioned before that our father had brought his sister, his family here also.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you describe what your extended family was like, your aunts and uncles, your cousins?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, my cousin, Heather. She used to, she used to live with us when she first came out here--and cute girl, you know.  Her daddy looked just like her.  And she's the one that's doing the, the researching.  And, yeah, in fact, her father is, was my wife's cousin.  So (laughter), in some ways, (unclear) she's now researching her father's side, so she's actually researching my wife's side of the family too.  And there was Aunt Rosa who was out here--see, Uncle Seth was, he came out from the, from the South, from New Orleans [Louisiana] first.  I don't know how he happened to come out here, but he, he did.  And I think he came out running (laughter), you know, a lot of people had to come, had to leave the South running.  And he got a job as a Pullman porter, and he talked to my dad about--he suggested my dad come out, that he would get him on as a porter.  So my dad came out, you know, and he didn't get on right away.  He had to shine shoes for a while until he, until he became a Pullman Porter.  And that was "the" job for, you know, and there wasn't very many jobs--we, the people you, we looked around to see who, the better are, were a couple of street sweepers and Mr. Straine was, S-T-R-A-I-N-E, and he was a mailman.  He was the only person, the only black mailman in the city, I believe, yeah.  Then we had Ida Jackson who was the only black teacher in Oakland [California], and there was one black teacher, and I can't think of her name, and she's in my book, in, in Berkeley, who, who eventually became my son's teacher-- Ackney (ph.), Ruth, Ruth Ackney, yeah.
Speaker 1: This was in the early 1920s, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your father come first, and then brought you and your mother--your brothers and sisters--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: My Uncle Seth came first, Seth and Rosa, they came.
Speaker 1: Right, and then your father came?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then he brought--did you all come with him or did you come later?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born here and so, yeah, it was before I came.  I was born after he got here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my bro--me and James were born after he got here.  So--and then it was years, years.  I was a teenager when he started, started to bring his family out here.  And he brought his sisters--I think it was four sisters, three, or three sisters, and then the fourth.  And they all lived here--they all married here and died here.
Story_ID: 14532
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory when you were growing up?  Your earliest memory when you were a child?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory was constantly going to church. Church was, what it was all about.  I mean you, you spent your day in, in church.  You--if you didn't go to church, you didn't go to, go to the movies.  And then in the summertime, you, you went to church for what they called summer school.  And they always had the trips.  And all, we would always go to, to Santa Barbara [California] or some place.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?  Was it--is there a particular church?  What was its name or?
Speaker 2: Parks Chapel, Parks Chapel AME [West Oakland, California].
Speaker 1: Is it still--?
Speaker 2: It's still there, but it's in a different location, you know.  And we used to go to, oh, Beth Eden, cause that's where all the girls went to (laughter), the pretty girls went to Beth Eden.
Speaker 1: Can you share any memories of your family, the holidays, how you shared--celebrate the holidays?
Speaker 2: Yes, Christmas was a big thing with my family, a huge thing and, and Thanksgiving, it was huge once we all gathered around the, around the table.  We just spent the day together.  But we'd be out, I remember we'd be out in the street playing football.  There was no traffic, you know, and you could play football and the kids in the whole neighborhood play.  And stick ball and football, and at, at Thanksgiving time, it was football.  So then you played until time to eat, and you scarfed and I mean you got older and older, you will--they would, later even maybe you would drink, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you go--did you have any chores, any jobs you had to do around the house?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I, I always complained because they were nothing for me to do.  That was, the main thing for me to do was to stand, and we had a pantry in West Oakland.  They had--the row homes, homes were, were mansions, you know.  I mean they were really mansions because they had pantries and had--separate from off, off the kitchen.  And as they washed the dishes, I would stand in the door near the pantry and, and they would throw it to me and I'd catch it and put it on, on the shelf.  That was my job, yeah, yeah.  And, and the other thing, the other job I had was, you know, we had, had buckets where we would in--to urinate in.  And, you know, each room, and I would have to empty the, empty the, the buckets in the--.
Story_ID: 14533
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what was Oakland [California] like in the early 1920s, 1930s?  What was it like growing up in Oakland?
Speaker 2: It was terrific.  It actually, actually there was the Depression going on.  And when you look upon it, you know, everybody was very poor, but I had no idea that we were poor cause it--you had nothing to judge it by.  I mean you, you had, life was beautiful.  I had a great time.  And when I started my comic strip and people asked me, and where did get the idea of having an integrated comic strip, I tell them, that's the way my youth was.  And they didn't believe me.  Nobody believed me at that time, but it was.  I mean it was, it was--everybody was there.  I mean we used to--I think next door they had the, I think the, you know, the Portuguese a religious celebration where they would come by and they would have a parade, you know, through your neighborhood and pick up the queen.  The queen would live next door.  And we would just follow, the follow the parade to the church.  And then we'd eat.  Everybody would eat, you know, and we never thought about any, that it was anything special.  A great church was there, Nick McFetridge, and his brother, Gus, were friends of the family.  Nick, who became a state senator, and he was there, a couple of blocks away from me.  Ernie Lombardi who played baseball, and he was in the neighborhood.  I mean there was peo--and the Romani Brothers, they played for the Oakland Oaks, and they were in the neighborhood.  It was, it was nothing--you didn't think about these people as, as special.  They were part of the regular neighborhood, people that you saw.  You, you knew who they were.  You know they were, they were special.  But they were neighbors, not big stars, you know.  And that, that was great.
Story_ID: 14534
Speaker 1: And one of the reasons, one of the reasons why we never felt poor is because (clearing throat) excuse me, when my dad came--my dad used to go to Chicago.  And one of the things he used to say, (singing) I'm going to Chicago, saw that; that would make my mother so mad (laughter).  Yes, and he would, when he would go--and he would be gone for seven days.  And when he came back, we would all meet him, you know, the four boys, would meet him at the train station, on 16th Street station and ride to the mall with him.  And there was a reason for that.  He would--the reason was that the, the guys from the, from the dining car, who were his friends, and they would give him all kinds of food.  And he had plenty hands, and we were carrying bacon and all kinds of goodies away from the, from the train station.  And we had enough food that, not only to last for, for the, all the family, but we'd have enough to give people, give away to friends.  So we never, we didn't lack any food.  That's, that's the key to--so we'd lack anything.  I remember though once, I remember once (unclear), that's--my dad hit me with his hand, with his open hand only once in his life, and that was on the train station, on the train.  And I thought this was such a, I thought this was such a, I thought that it was a great life.  I had no idea.  He (unclear) moved and traveled on the train.  I realize he was working, but I thought that was so nice.  He'd go to the all the, and the conductor said, what do you want to be when you grow up?  When I said, a Pullman porter, my dad, pow, hit me right in the mouth (laughter).  I, I understand.  I mean I didn't understand then.  I under--I, I, later I realized, what a stupid thing, you know.  And he must have been, and I'm killing myself for this (laughter) kid, and he wants to be a porter.  I tell the one good thing he did for me though was when there was--the Pullman porters used to meet at, at the pool hall, Dellum's pool hall, C. L. Dellum's pool hall.  It was unclear uncle to--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: The Congressman.
Speaker 1: --and they used to meet there because that's where, where the union was, and everything was happening.  And when, Randolph, A. Philip Randolph, Asa Phillip Randolph would come to, to speak, my dad would take me.  And I would be the only kid in, I'd be the only kid at the meeting.  And we would sing, sing with--sing "Onward Christian Soldier" as the opening of the meeting.  And I would sing "Onward Christian" at the top of my lungs, you know.  And I don't know if you ever heard Randolph speak, but he, he pre-dated Martin Luther King.  This man had such a voice, a deep basso, his diction was perfect.  And he was the closest thing to God I'd ever seen.  And he put his hand on my head and said, told me what a great singer I was.  And, you know, for a long time, I (laughter) fell for it (unclear) I could sing.  God told me I could sing, right (laughter), so I must be able to sing.  And so they couldn't shut me up or drive people crazy.  I still, I'm still not sure that I can't.  I enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story.  So how long was your father a Pullman Porter?
Speaker 1: He retired as a Pullman Porter.  (Unclear) There was, I heard, not--see, well, a lot of things you have to understand, they always looked at me as the baby.  And they didn't share things with me.  I mean they just--the baby doesn't need to know, right.  Don't hurt the baby's feelings.  So I found out a lot later that he had an accident--he was, got, was drugged or fell (riding?) the train, before he was retired.  And I don't know what kind of other injuries he suffered.  But he retired, but not from the injury, but he retired.  But he got sick long after--not long after, I mean a couple of years, yeah, he became very sick.
Speaker 2: Did your mother work outside the home?  Or was she a housewife?
Speaker 1: No, no, only during the Depression time, you know.
Speaker 2: And what did she do then?
Speaker 1: She did--I'm not sure what she did.  She did, you know, there were all kinds of jobs they made up, cause I, during the Depression, I had a little job too on, cleaning the, at that school.  You know, they called it--all the kids had something to do, you know.  They gave you, maybe a few bucks.  It went to the family.  But--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: So she didn't--you had mentioned that she had graduated from nursing school,--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: But she didn't use it?
Speaker 1: No, no, just only, only--being the nanny, that was the only thing that, that she used as I know, no.
Story_ID: 14535
Speaker 1: You mentioned that, you know, one of your earliest memories was going to the church.  So it played a big part in your family life?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah, my mother was very, a very religious person.  In fact, it, you know, it played a role in, in my art life because, you know, when we were kids, they used to have these little cards and the latest which, with sayings on them and with pictures and coloring.  And I used to copy those.  I used to--in fact, I used to try to, I used to get an old--I wonder now how I did it, but I used to get a old window, window shades.  That was my canvas, and I would take my crayons, and I would make, make religious drawings for my mother.  And we--I loved those drawings because those pictures with, with the robes and the sha--the shading, and it was just incredible.  And I used to love to do that.
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that, if you--you had to go to church so you could go to the movie theater.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was Oakland [California] like when you left your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: What was Oakland like?
Speaker 1: Yes, were the theaters segregated then or?What was downtown
Speaker 2: They had neighborhood--they had neighborhood theaters.  And they weren't segregated.  They were just, everybody went to the same theater.  It was the Peralta, I just can't remember the name of the--there was one way down on Seventh Street, and there was about three, three theaters.  And they had, you know, they had, not first-run movies, had the double, double-bill "B" movies, you know, Charlie Chan.
Speaker 1: Were there black and white movies?  Did you see black cowboy movies?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Herb Jefferies, black cowboy, yeah, yeah.  I used to be involved in the Black Filmmaker's Hall of Fame.  So I was pretty much involved in that too, and I enjoyed myself reminiscing about the old days.
Speaker 1: Well, are there any sights or sounds or smells, is there--that you, when you smell something it just clicks and reminds you of childhood or any sights, you know, if you're going down the street, and you see something and it just--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I go down, the old, where the old ballpark used to be, and the old Oakland Oaks ballpark, and now it's, that's where the animated studios.  I can't think of the name of it right, but that's where, that whole block was, was the baseball.  And I used to, and I, I marvel at how--I used to walk from West Oakland to the, to the ballpark, and that's a long walk.  I didn't realize it then.  But we were just happy to go to a baseball game.  And we used to get, we belonged to what they called the Naho (ph.) game.  I don't know how we got in it.  I don't know what the Naho game was, but we got in the games free, yeah, and on certain, certain times and certain periods, yeah.  And I remember, I remember sitting on the, on the--and one of the things I used to do is draw the, the ball players, and after the game run out and try them to autograph the drawing.  And one of the, one of the great pitchers for the Seals, San Francisco Seals, was a guy named Bob Joyce.  And I had drawn Bob Joyce, and I was waiting, sitting there waiting for, to--at the end of the game so I could, and a guy behind me said, "my God, that's my son".  He was the pitcher, he was Bob Joyce's father.  And he was an artist, and he lived in Crockett, and, and he had a--we used to correspond and he would check my work.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: Twelve, maybe fifteen, I'm not sure, old enough to walk down from, from West Oakland, yeah.  I don't think I was in high school yet.
Speaker 1: Did any of the black baseball teams come through Oakland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Satchel Paige, we went to--and then Joe Louis had a, had a softball team that, and it was amazing.  And we used to go down to--I saw Joe once--twice in my life.  I went, and it really seemed strange cause I was a little kid when he, when I first saw him.  He, after the base--he was down in West Oakland eating.  And it's amazing to me.  He would let, he would let, they let groups of us kids come in during the--he was sitting, and we just standing there.  We'd come up (unclear) sit there and look at him.  And when the next, they would say, well, the next group of kids.  I thought that was--and thinking back later, I thought it was marvelous.  And the next time I saw him was, I was in the service in the hospital, nothing, tragic, probably goofing off.  But he came through, he and Sugar Ray Robinson came through, and, you know, shaking hands.  And it seemed like, you know, it's just yesterday I was a little kid and looking at this guy, you know.  And there he is again shaking, shaking hands with me, you know.
Speaker 1: Twice.
Speaker 2: That was amazing.  Yeah, I'm always, I've always--these things will happen to me sometimes.  I remember when a guy wanted to--I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I, I got an award.  And a guy told me that he would take me--I'm trying to think, oh, he wanted to know if I wanted to meet Paul Robeson.  And I said, no, not right now because I, I wanted to go, I wanted--and it would have been too much.  I mean I would have--I wanted, if I was gonna talk to Paul Robeson, I really want to go, I wanted to go some place and think about it, and think about what he's done, and think about all--this man is so incredible that I wanted to think about it first.  Of course, I never, I never did.  I never did.
Story_ID: 14536
Speaker 1: Whenever, when I got home I was telling a, telling a friend of mine, Joe Johnson, who was very active in the, in the labor union.  And he says, he's a good friend of, he was a good friend of Paul Robeson.  He's a good friend to everybody.  He--in fact, when, when he, he--I did Nelson Mandela on, on the "Soul Corner", he came over to the house, he said, can I have that picture of Mandela?  And I said, well, why?  He said, I'm gonna take it to him.  And so he took this (laughter), so the pic--he took the drawing to him.
Speaker 2: What was his name again?
Speaker 1: Joe Johnson.  He used to, he's dead now.  He, he was a very close friend of my brother's.  He's, oldest, he was older than my oldest brother.  And he, his father was the first, was Rocky Johnson, who was a street cleaner.  He's, one of the best jobs I ever--when I was a kid.  So I knew the whole family, the whole family were, we were all close, yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't --(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And he was very active with Harry Bridges.  You remember with, with the longshoremen in San Francisco [California].  They, very, very active in making a whole train full of longshoremen, and they tried to call, you know, they used to call Harry a Communist.  And, of course, they tried to smear, used to smear Joe the same way.  But they were on (unclear)--and then he became, Joe became an aid to, what the woman--she's a senator now.  She was mayor at the time.
Speaker 2: Feinstein.
Speaker 1: Diane Feinstein, he, he was an aide to her when she was mayor.
Story_ID: 14537
Speaker 1: And were, are there any smells that recall--that remind you of childhood besides meatloaf (laughter).
Speaker 2: Popcorn, yeah, you know, that, that means ballpark, you know, cause I, I love, I used to love sports.  I, I miss that feeling.  I miss that feeling that I used to have.  I mean my life would rise and fall on the, you know, if--whether the [Oakland] Oaks won or lost.  And I'd feel really bad or really good when--and, you know, the Oakland A's, I never had that feeling for the Oakland A's.  Of course, and they--I never had that feeling for the [San Fransisco] Giants or--earlier I had that feeling with the Giants when Willie Mays was playing ball.  But I miss that feeling.  I miss that, you know, I miss that caring about, about the team.  I don't care about them anymore.  I cared about, I cared about the [Oakland] Raiders because I used to work for the Raiders.  I didn't work for them exactly.  I, I used to draw on the program, you know, for--and they would give me a trip a year.  And I always, I always traveled with the Raiders.  So that was, that was fun, back in the '60's [1960s].  I used to go to--and I'd always pick a long trip (laughter).  I'd go to New York or go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or go to Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: So you got to travel with the team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I got to know quite a few of the guys, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you got to know?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I got to know [Gene] Upshaw very well.  He was, he was neat guy.  I got to know Al Davis.  In fact, Al Davis made, made a hero out of me one time.  I was in a, it was in, in San Diego and this particular (unclear) it wasn't a very good year for the Raiders.  And I was at a party in San Diego [California], and people said, will you--they were talking about wanting to go to the game.  And I said, well, "Maybe I can get you some tickets, you know, because Raymond Chester, was a friend," was a friend of mine.  He was an end, you know, tight end, and he, I knew he was gonna, Ray--he's not a guy who fools around.  I know, I knew that all the players have tickets.  So I said, well, "If you find out for me where the, where the, where the Raiders are staying, I'll go down, and I'll call and see if Chester can get me some tickets."  So they did.  They found the hotel, said, okay, let's go down there, you know.  All right, we go down there, and as we're walking in, Al Davis and his are walking out.  And Al Davis says, "Morrie Turner, what are you doing in San Diego?" I said, (unclear) so these guys, I didn't know Al Davis knew my name (laughter).  I really didn't.  I knew, but Al Davis is incredible.  He's got this memory.  He remembers everybody.  And I wish I could do that (laughter).  I don't remember me, sometimes I have to reintroduce myself when I'm shaving.  But, well, I'm walking in there, and then the others, and I get back, and I, of course, I got the tickets from, from Raymond.  And they, they were impressed with that too.  And, you know, when I get back, they--but the thing that they, "He knows Al Davis".  No, I don't know Al Davis.  No, I think they said "he's a friend of Al Davis" and that sort of thing.  I'm an acquaintance of Al Davis.  But that was, that was magical.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories, any other memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember, I (laughter) remember when--I don't know how old I was, but this, this keep popping in my head.  And I--this is the only memory I have when we lived on Eighth Street, and I used to stand on the porch and preach like I was a preacher.  And my mother decided that, that I was gonna be a preacher, you know.  And she always felt that, that I would be a preacher.  And I think she was a little bit disappointed that I wasn't.  But I, I--I spoke one, once at Beth Eden [church].  So I went in the pulpit, and so I brought her down there so she could see me, so she was smiling, you got him in the pulpit.  Well, I, I figure what I do, I'm preaching, you know, I'm preaching my way, you know.  So I didn't let her down.  I, I did a book for her, and I, I--two books I did.  The first one was "All God's Children Got Soul", and--but the other one was "God is Groovy", you know.  It was just singled-paneled gags about, about religion.  And I had, I gave her the book, and when I left, my brother came, and she said, you think you can take this book cause she--all she saw was the title, "God is Groovy", and she wasn't, she wouldn't--I mean she (laughter), she said, you can have this book.  And, and he was sitting there reading it, laughing it and reading it to her, that she told him, you bring my book back (laughter).  So she forgave me.
Speaker 1: Did both of your parents live to see you become a cartoonist, to see the "Wee Pals"?
Speaker 2: My mother did, but my father didn't.  No, unfortunately, but I really would have liked him--would have loved for him to--because he didn't, he didn't--I don't think he approved of it.  I think he was, I think he had this feeling that there might be a little, you know, (waving hand), a guy that, and this is a different time, you know.  And that's not very masculine as far as he was concerned.  In fact, (laughter) he used to tell me, I'll give you fifty cents if you beat up your brother Joseph.  So I'd take the fifty cents and beat him up give him his quarter for taking a dive.  And we got so good at that, that when we, when we first moved here, and we went over to Seventh Avenue Park where all the kids were, you know, we went over, now, we're gonna--nobody knows us.  And it was my brother's idea, let's, let's stage a fight.  So we staged this fight, and here come the people, "fight, fight, fight," and everybody surrounded us.  And then we fought for a little while.  Then we got up smiling, and right away, you know everybody--it was the only way to (laughter) to get the attention of people.
Story_ID: 14538
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Cole School.  Cole School.
Speaker 1: In Oakland [California].
Speaker 2: Cole School.  I went to middle school at McClymond and high school at McClymonds.  The final year I went to Berkeley [High School, Berkeley, California].  I was living, I was living in, in--I was living in Berkeley and taking the bus to McClymond, but something happened.  We, I was, I have a good friend, Bob Howard, great sports, good-looking guy, back then, all the girls liked him too.  So I hung out with, I hung out where I could get the residue (laughter).  So, so he said, he wanted to go up to Tech at lunchtime.
Speaker 1: Oakland Tech [Technical High School, Oakland, California].
Speaker 2: I said, well, how we gonna get there? Here's a guy, a guy's got some bicycles, they're closing up the bicycles.  So I should have known better.  And the three of us, riding, three of us going down McArthur Boulevard on our way to, to--
Speaker 1: Oakland Tech.
Speaker 2: Tech, Oakland Tech, thank you, and (laughter), and the police stopped us.  And they said, well, you know, "What are you doing with these bicycles?  Why aren't you in school?"  And, and, of course, the bikes they're closing up, we don't have permission to have these bikes.  So technically, the bicycles are stolen, you know.  So we go back to McClymond and we go to the see the vice principal.  And the vice principal made up their mind that it's my fault, and I'm the, you know, the bad Turners, you know, the tough, tough, bad Turners.  So you--this kid must be, must be responsible.  So I came home and told my mother, and she said, well, you're not going back there--and they'd suspended me.  And I told her that they--said, you're not going back there.  You're going to McClymonds--going to Berkeley High.  I'm glad she did, yeah.  Well, when I first got there, when I first went to the high school, I was, was standing, they were taking roll.  And you got to know, I got, (unclear) my brother busted with, he was quick with, than anybody.  I mean adult or kid or anyone, you know, don't get the, don't get on his bad side.  So I'm in--they're taking roll.  And they get to my name, and the guy says, "Who is Turner?"  Say, "Here."  He said, "Are you any relation to Marion Turner or Joseph Turner?"  I said, "Yes, my brothers."  And the guy said, "Let me tell you one thing," and he read me off.  And everybody's looking, looking, who is this guy?  And what I'd better not do.  I didn't tell my mother that.  Otherwise, she would have, I knew he would have taken me out then.  But, you know, I, I guess I was kind of, you know, pumped up (laughing), you know, yeah.  I didn't earn it.
Story_ID: 14539
Speaker 1: When you were--back to elementary school, I'm sorry, in Cole Elementary School [Oakland, California], what was it like going to school?  You know, leaving home and--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: You know, the thing that really used to, that used to, it used to frighten me to death, (unclear), was rainy day session.  We'd all be in the, in the assembly hall.  And everybody's running like crazy, and we used to--I don't know how old I was, but I remember that as--and that's one of the things that frightened me.  Another thing that frightened me, I mean we were at the, I remember being--they used to have this Christmas show at, what was it called?  At--
Speaker 1: Was it the Paramount, (unclear) Fox?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not sure the building's even there any more, you know.
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: Oh, we had this Christmas show, and my mother, and I'd be walking, and I would, all these bodies--I'd hold my mother's hand all (unclear), these bodies, and I'd, I was--I felt like if I lost that hand, that would be the end of me.  So I knew--I remember that.  And when my kid was that age, I never would him put himin that kind of position.  I always picked him up.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Scary.  And I think of how frightened, how frightened I was.
Speaker 1: Are you still frightened to be in crowds?
Speaker 2: No, no, I just remember that, that situation.  No, I'm not frightened to be in crowds, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, my, okay.
Speaker 2: I've kind of--I've gotten over that.  But you, what you think about, you know, what you're doing to kids, you know.  I mean you don't, you don't intend to make the kid frightened.  You don't think about the kid being, but he's down there, and he could see is kneecaps (laughter), and he, you know--and that's a mass of people, and all he's got there is--he doesn't even see you, he doesn't even see them.  He's just got the contact with this hand.  If he loses that, you're gone.  I never forgot that.
Story_ID: 14540
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: A lousy student, a terrible student.  I didn't get good grades, and I think the problem was, I wasn't interested.  And I didn't get--I didn't even good grade in, in art, and the problem was, I didn't want to do what they wanted, wanted you to do, you know.  I didn't want to draw flowers on a, in a vase.  I wanted fun look, draw funny-looking people, yeah.  I remember getting a, I remember this very well, getting a, getting scolded by a teacher in English form, and they told us to write a story, wanted us to write about a story, a letter asking for a job.  And I decided that my letter was gonna be a punch drunk fighter, and I used all the--the teacher scolded me.  I thought it was pretty funny, you know (laughter).  I thought it was hilarious.  But she, she gave me a bad time.  That was at McClymond [School, Oakland, California], yeah.
Story_ID: 14541
Speaker 1: I know that you studied drawing when you were about ten.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it anybody who taught how to draw or you just took up (unclear) people--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother used to draw, and I, I think I was probably influenced, it started with him.  Now, he liked to draw.  But he, his, his main thing was, was poetry.  He loved poetry.  In fact, I remember he wrote--I had to do a stand up, and I remember the, I remember the first part of the poem still.  'I am a pirate brave and bold; I sail the seas, both hot and cold', and it went on and on and on.  I had to--he, he did that one night, and I had to do it the next day.  And that, and I still remember that.  I mean that part I remember, I knew it.  But, and you know, he wrote poetry right up until his death.  And he, he would write poetry whenever he fell in love, you know.  He was a bachelor, and he kept poems on a lot of these different women.  It was always, every week he wrote in love.  He would show these, this great poetry that he would write about these different women.  And when he died--he lived here, and when he died, I've search all over for these, and he was--stacks and stacks of them.  I have never, I don't know what happened to the poems.  I think he got rid of them, you know.  They were so intimate, you know, and I think maybe he--but the were wonderful.
Speaker 1: This was your brother, Joe, right?
Speaker 2: Joe, yeah, yeah, I'm so sorry I don't have that anymore.  So I started drawing from that.  And then the three, Three Stooges were very popular when I was a kid.  And I could draw the Three Stooges without any problem, I mean they were easy to draw.  And we used to have the, on the books, we'd cover them with heavy stock paper.  Then we would draw on the, or write on them, and everybody wanted me to draw the Three Stooges.  So I would draw the Three Stooges, so I loved--and I started copying the characters I would see in the, in the papers.  And, you know, the Disney characters.  And you know,  just drawing, drawing, drawing.  And I don't know how old I was, but, you know, I, I decided I wanted to be cartoonist.  And I saw a film by a guy named [Bill Holman], about a cartoonist, I can't remember his name.  He used to draw a carton called Smokey Stover.  And this cartoon, he was showing a cartoon and they were showing him drawing it.  Now, I didn't know that they had speeded up the, the film, you know, cause he, you know.  So I decided I'd better learn how to draw fast.  And I draw fast today.  People say, how come you draw so fast, I mean, I don't know, I just got--and, and another thing I did was to draw, write, when I thought I was gonna be a cartoonist.  And my mother said, oh, yeah, you, you're great, you're wonderful.  That's what mothers are supposed to say right.  And I wasn't sure if she knew what she was talking about.  So I wrote the most famous cartoonist that I knew, Milt Caniff who draws, who was drawing, who draws 'Terry and the Pirates' at that time.  And, and I wrote him and asked him to, was I--I sent him some stuff and asked him was I gonna be--was I good enough to become a cartoonist.  He sent me a six-page letter, six-page letter, yeah.  And, yeah, and here's, here's, here's the thing.  When I finally became a cartoonist, I wrote him and told him (unclear) him what had happened and all that, and he became a very good friend of mine, a very good friend of mine.  And he was always asking people how was I doing, you know.  And I went to Palm Springs [California], well, he moved to Palm Springs, and I went to Palm Springs.  He was living in New York when, before he moved to Palm Springs.  I went to Palm Springs to, at the Palm Springs High school [Palm Springs, California], speaking there, and I saw this guy at the, in the, in the--I said, I know that guy.  And I (unclear)--but I'm thinking school, what school have I seen this guy in.  And he's walking up on with this look, Milt Caniff--and my wife was alive then.  So, and that was the last day, and then we spent the afternoon with--at his house with him.  And that was the last day that--he wasn't doing 'Terry and the Pirates' anymore.  And that was the last day of 'Terry and the Pirates'.  So we were at, with him and his wife, Bunny, yeah.  Now, there's another part of this story.  Last year, last year, the National Cartoonist Society awarded me, you know, the National Cartoonist Society is all of the cartoonist in the country, and they awarded me the, The Milt Caniff Lifetime Achievement Award (laughter), so it had come full circle.  So, and it's only, you know, for the Lifetime Achievement Award, it's only been given to nine people.  I was the ninth, ninth person to ever receive that award.  So I'm pretty proud--I didn't tell them that story about Milt and I.  I mean, and we've--because it, you know, it would seem like I made it up (laughter).  It's so, it's so classic, you know, it's so wonderful.
Speaker 1: Do you recall what he said in the letter that he wrote to you, the six-page letter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, explaining how you, how do you do cartoon, how you?  It explained, it explained how to view--in fact, I learned how to--it, it--and then that's how I got the idea of when you go to a movie, for instance, you're not only watching the movie, you're not only watching, but you're watching how it's presented.  See what--because each panel you're, in this letter, he explained to me, you're a director, you're a cameraman.  You're not just a screenwriter.  You're a cameraman, you're a director, and you look, cause each panel has to be different.  And I learned that from him, and I learned, you know, I learned that from him.  And I learned from, from Charles Schulz how to, to catch your eye and to be brief.  I mean you, you write your stuff and think it's really funny, and if it's long, nobody's gonna read it, you know.  So you have, you've got this page and all of these cartoons on the page, everybody doesn't read every, every cartoon.  If it's something that catches your eye, and it's up to you, the cartoonist, to figure that out.  So I learned that from Schultz and from Milt Kaneff, wonderful people.
Speaker 1: So you started drawing in the, like the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you kept it up.  How did your teachers react to this?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, that was--one of the most, yeah, that was one of the things that turned everybody around, my, especially--it turned my dad around a little bit, because the principal saw a picture I had--again, like I tell you, I was crazy about football.  And I had a football scene, and twenty-two (unclear) on each side.  And what took, (unclear) for him was, the principal, that the whole--there were twenty-two people on the picture, and everybody was doing something different, yeah, (laughter).  And they had different numbers.  And he, and he took that picture and he framed it and put it, and put it on his wall in his office.  And mom and dad were very impressed with me at that time.  And then they realized maybe--well, dad realized, my mother was always on my corner, but she, but I think she realized, hey, maybe he really is an artist, you know, a cartoonist.  I figure, I, I consider, I changed that because I don't think--I don't, I don't like to say artist because--not that I'm putting myself down.  I'm lifting myself up because a cartoonist is more than an artist.  He's a writer, you know, and he, he has so many things, and he's a, he's a storyteller.  He has so many things going that he has--it's more than just painting a picture.  I look at that way, and I try to tell kids who, who want to become a cartoonist, you know.
Story_ID: 14542
Speaker 1: What was junior high school like?
Speaker 2: Junior high school, junior high school and high school because it was in the same place, sort of blurred together, you know.  But I was, I was--
Speaker 1: You missed--what kind of, were you so ?
Speaker 2: I loved sports--.
Speaker 1: You loved sports.
Speaker 2: I was, I was very active in sports.
Speaker 1: Did you play on a team?
Speaker 2: Both track team, track team.  I, I wanted to play football, but my mother frowned on that, you know.  But I'm sorry, I never did, but--.
Speaker 1: What was your event in the track?
Speaker 2: Four-forty, yeah, I ran in, I, I loved to sprint, but I wasn't, I wasn't fast enough to run a hundred in two-twenty.  I was, I was probably the third fastest, and you're only the, you know, you only had two in the, in the sprints.  So I, I ran the, the next best thing.  But pretty, we were pretty good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there other, any other activities you took part in when you were in school?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember.  I don't remember, other than my music, you know, and my drums.
Speaker 1: Did you take drum lesson, you just kind of--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No, no, I just picked it up.
Speaker 1: Did you play drums--?
Speaker 2: I picked it up cause--somebody gave me a drum.  You know you do (laughter), sometimes--I would have loved to learn how to play a horn, but I, you know, there was, nothing was available at, at that time.  You know, it--limited.  And I wasn't interested in violin at all, no.
Speaker 1: Did you play drums in the school band?
Speaker 2: No, I only remember, I only remember playing the cymbal, you know, in the, at a, at a, you know, youth band, you know, bing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was this a city-wide band, this--you said a youth?
Speaker 2: Youth band.
Speaker 1: Was it city-wide or was it a (unclear) group or?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, at school.
Speaker 1: Oh, school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at school, school band, and there was a whole percussion, I couldn't get on the drums so I had the, the cymbal.  Somebody else had the tambourine, you know, they us all, all in the percussion section.  You know, you--they tried to make room for everybody, anybody that was interested, yeah.  And that was good.  I think that's what you should do.
Story_ID: 14543
Speaker 1: So when did you, the family move from Oakland to Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Just before the World War II started, it must have been nineteen forty--when did the War start, '41 [1941]?
Speaker 1: Forty one, [1941].
Speaker 2: It must have been '40 [1940]--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: December seventh?
Speaker 2: --'cause we were here when, at Pearl Harbor, yeah.  When was Pearl Harbor, '41 [1941]?
Speaker 1: December 7, 19--yeah, '41 [1941].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you went to Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was Berkeley High School like?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked it.  I liked it.  The girls were prettier (laughter).  That's where I met my wife, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about your wife?  What was her name, maiden name?
Speaker 2: Leatha, Leatha Harvey, yeah.  They lived, they lived in West Oakland.  I didn't know them.  I, I probably, probably knew them selling--cause I used to sell the Oakland Post Inquirer.  Those were the two newspapers in town in those days, the 'Tribune' and the 'Post Inquirer'.  And I used to sell the 'Post Inquirer', and I know I sold on the street where, where they lived, but I--cause she's three years younger than me.  When you, when you're young, three years is, is a world of difference (laughter), yeah.  So I probably wouldn't have known them.  But then they moved to, they moved to Berkeley before I did, and I met them through, I think somebody who lived across the street.  And, you know, girls, girls, girls, you know, me and my brother were, you know, (unclear) got to know, then met her and became fascinated with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said that your fath--the house that you live in now, your father bought this--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: This house, yeah.
Speaker 1: --this house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he bought it from a realtor.  Well, I don't know who owned it, but the guy who was a realtor was the, was a fellow [Pullman] porter who became a realtor, and retired and became a real estate--retired or quit, I'm not sure which, yeah.  And he loaned him, loaned him money to put a down payment, which was incredible.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea how much the house cost?
Speaker 2: Then?
Speaker 1: Then.
Speaker 2: Three thousand dollars, that's all.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I mean that's, (laughter), I would imagine at that time, it was, it was pretty expensive.  That was a lot of money, you know.  But I also remember, our next door neighbors were who were there, were Japanese, you know.  And I remember, I remember very well, I watched them, the people come and take them away.  And, you know, I was, I was a teenager then.  And I, and I just, I, deep down I felt something was wrong with that.  But nobody, nobody said anything, you know.  And your government said that was right, so it must be--in those days you think, it must be right.  But since then I've, you know, I've--.
Speaker 1: Did they, after the war [World War II], did they come back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they came back, but they didn't come back to this house because they took the houses too.  I didn't know that.  I didn't know that.  I don't know who, how they sold it on the open market, but they came back.  I, I remember seeing, she--(laughter), the kids, married, married one of my best friends, yeah.  But I wouldn't know the kid--their kids if they walked up to me.
Story_ID: 14544
Speaker 1: When you were in [McClymond] high school [Oakland, California], were there any teachers that you remember, anybody that influenced you a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't, I don't remember her name and unfortunately, but she used to talk to me a lot about, at and we used to--I remember people used to make fun of her because her hair was, was purple (laughter).  You know, when you do that dye thing, you know, and it was purple.  But she was a, she was a neat lady.  She used to talk to me a lot.  Was her name Lilock?  I'm not sure.  For some reason that names comes to--I think so.
Speaker 1: Was she encouraging you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to be an artist, to be a cartoonist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure she knew what that was.  I just know that she, she saw something in what I was doing then, yeah.  I remember--like I say, I'm, you know, I'm not sure she had any, any inkling of what that was all about.  Not like today, and today people really understand the art of a cartoonist.  You couldn't find out about cartooning anywhere.  I mean there were no books, nothing, zero.  And, and the only thing you had was [Walt] Disney, and I remember once, when was it, asking some quest--you know, inquiring about getting a job at [The Walt] Disney [Company], and, you know, and they actually called.  And I had sent some stuff.  And I made sure they knew who I was, I mean what my race was.  And they kind of eased out of it.  No, and, you know, in those days nobody worked, if you were black, you didn't work with Disney, you know.
Speaker 1: Was this before the--during the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: No, this was after the war because I was married.  And it was after the War, yeah.  I used to try to get jobs for--it was very difficult to get jobs for--they, they were, oh, in Southern California somewhere, they were looking for an illustrator.  And they were--it was a government job.  And I remember applying and, and getting my stuff there.  And they sent somebody up here to, to interview me.  And I just knew that I wasn't get the job, and I didn't because whoever the guy was who came to interview didn't know why he was (laughter), why he was here, I mean why he was here.  He had nothing to do with, you know, with the job at all.  So I was--I had a lot of--I'm not bitter because had I got one of those jobs, I would have retired on the job and never would have (laughter)  probably never would have the cartoons.  So I'm not bitter about it, but I was bringing that up as a matter of fact.  And I remember that we were, was it PG&E [Pacific Gas & Electric Company], yeah, it was PG&E, was asking for somebody to, a cartoonist to fill out their, their team of artists.  So I went over there, and the guy said, oh, you're the only cartoonist that showed up.  Everybody else was artists, said, oh, well, maybe I got a chance.  And I walked in the art department--I was at the head--I just, right away, I knew.  I wasn't gonna get this (laughter) job.  And the funny part about it was, I think ten years, ten years later, they called me and--because I'm doing the comic strip now.  They called me and they wanted me to do a, an energy calendar for them. So I--everybody, I went over there, but everybody that was, was there when I first went were, were gone.  But I, I gave it to them.
Story_ID: 14545
Speaker 1: But when you were in high school, did you take part in any other activities?  What did you do after school?  Did you have a job?
Speaker 2: I had a paper route, yeah.  In fact, I had two paper routes.  I had one for the weekend.  You remember the Pittsburgh Courier and Chicago Defender--we used to sell those.  You know what, I learned a lot from the Pittsburgh Courier.  I learned a lot about--I, I think I, I think the, it made me aware of Black History for one thing.  And they used to go, they used to--a guy, Mali, M-A-L-I, I'm not sure I'm pronouncing his name right, would do a panel cartoon called 'Negro History'.  And he would put in all these different facts, and I would-- it just blew my mind, you know.  And then I would read, there was a cartoonist named Ollie Harrington.  He used to do a character named 'Bootsie', wonderful, wonderful cartoon.  I used to copy that--used to do his stuff all the time.  And then I'd read the sport pages and, about Negro League baseball, and, and there was a whole life, a whole thing I had that used to, introduced me to a way of, a whole way of life.  And I never got to see a Negro League baseball game, but I sure wanted to read these by the time I got back East.
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, did you always want to be a cartoonist?  Did you have any other dreams or did you ever consider anything else?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, I considered writing, yeah, I still, I still write now and then, but not to any great extent.  Sometimes I get the, a need to write, and, and I write then.  But it's creativity, it's what, what I'm talking, what it's--what I think, what I'm all about.  And that's writing.  And so I'm writing when I'm doing the strip.
Story_ID: 14546
Speaker 1: Following high school graduation, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I went in the service, yeah.  And for me, it was a good thing because I, I met a lot of people.  And I, I didn't have to be the Turner brother any more.  I had to--I was on my own.  I had to develop and decided, you know, I had to find me.  And I did find me, I think, and that was good, pretty good.  When I had the chance to drawings, I was in the, oh, I went to--I, I was in Texas and the President said that anybody who wants to become a pilot and take the test, any black person to become a pilot and take the test.  So I took the test, and I passed.  So, (laughter) (unclear) and they took to, sent me to Biloxi, Biloxi, Mississippi. And to tell you how, how little the government had about how, how many they thought was gonna pass the test, they set aside two barracks for the people from all over the country (laughter) to work in.  So when I first got to--oh, first thing, what I did was, I went to New Orleans [Louisiana], and I met, I saw some of my--they sent me on my own.  I didn't know, I had no--had all the information.  I had all my records.  So I stayed in New Orleans for, oh, I think about a week.  I had one, I had a ball in New Orleans, I had some cousins, and, you know.  So, and they, you know, had pretty friends (laughter), so we had a great time.  Then I finally go, go to show up in Biloxi.  And they had no idea I was coming.  I gave them al the stuff on the, I handed them--so I wouldn't have been AWOL because they didn't no idea I was coming.  So I slept on the, I slept on the floor the first few days because there was no place to put me until they could commandeer another, another barrack for the different people who were coming in.  So I stayed there.  I stayed there, I don't know, but there was a lot of people there.  And they, they had to get rid of some of these people.  So what they did was, they set up some testing, a whole testing for days and days.  And on the third day, I, I--you know, each evening we'd out and then we'd stand on, in formation, and they would call names, and move over to one side.  And you didn't know which one--if those were the guys leaving, or these were the guys who were staying.  Finally, I got my name, and I was, I got washed out.  So, but I didn't know--and then from there, they--those guys went from there to Tuskegee, Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama].  And then I went from there to Louisiana, and they made, they made--what did I make?  A guard, an MP squadron or something like that, a little guy like me.  And then I started to, started to using my talents, started to draw, and, and then I started drawing for the company publications.  And then I went back to what was called the 447, all bomber group, all-black bomber group.  And Colonel [Benjamin O.] Davis who was then, C, was our CO.  So, I went to work at (unclear).  I (laughter), when he got there I was in the guard house for going to sleep on guard duty, cause all--at that time, before he got there, all the officers were, were white.  And everybody else except the pilots were black.  And then the pilots were black too, but I mean all, in charge of all of the different divisions were white.  So I was the guard duty and I went--fell asleep on guard duty, and the fellow took me right from there to, to the guardhouse.  And the guy that, the guy who came to--see, this, this is the way my life, my life works, the guy who came to me to, to talk, who was gonna be my, my attorney, wasn't, was the head of all, all of the newspapers and, you know.  So I told him, I, you know--and he got me out of that.  He got me out of that because he said, he didn't really get out of it, he said, it's a, it's a whole new day.  And while I was in there, all new officers, all black officers took over.  So when I went to the court martial, there were all--I had never seen that many black officers in one place in my life, you know, and all ranks.  It was a wonderful feeling, even though I was in trouble.  And he told me ahead of time that I'd, you know, it was all gonna be dismissed, and it was because everybody was gonna get a new shake.  So I told him, he said, you, "When you get out, you come on over and see me."  So I went over to see him, and so I started drawing for--I started a little cartoon called 'Railhead' a little cart--a little soldier that would mess up and (unclear) (laughter).  And so he had a, just, just goof up all the time.
Story_ID: 14547
Speaker 1: You were telling us you were in the service, was it the Air Force or the Army?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the Air Force, but they used to call it--at that time, it was the Army Air Force.  It wasn't a separate unit.  It was, it was part of the Army
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't become--I think in the '50s [1950s] it became the Air Force separate, you know, separate uniform and separate everything.
Speaker 1: I see, so while you were there, you started your first strip--(simultaneous)--?.
Speaker 2: Drawing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your first strip?
Speaker 2: 'Railhead' (unclear), that's what it was named, really, he used to get in a lot of trouble.  He would, and he was a, he was a smartass too, you know.  He would say things to the officers that he had no business saying.  But I would never say anything to officers that I had no business saying.  But I sure wanted to.  But, so I would that--you could do that, you know.  When you're a cartoonist, you get an opportunity to tell people off.  I mean like, if you're at a party something, and somebody says something insulting to you, but you can't think of anything to come back--but later on you think of something, well, you get another chance (laughter), see, you, you can do it all over again in a cartoon.  And then you, you're gonna have your say, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of the strips that you did and what were some of the lines--not lines, but what were some of the incidents that--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: In the Army?
Speaker 1: Yes, when you did Railhead, what were some of the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I, I remember the very first one, with, I think the guy--Officer asked, because (unclear) he was--because I was on guard duty.  I, he did a lot of guard duty cause guard duty was a thorn in my side.  And a guy asked, he asked him where, what would he, what would he do if, if a group of tanks came in, through the, through the door.  He said, I'll take my airplane, my airplanes and, and, and shoot them down.  He said, well--when the guy asked him--this is not quite right, but he where would, where did you get the airplane?  The same place you got the tank.  Well, I mean stuff like, it was, you know, that's really smartass.  And he's telling off the, telling off the officer, who deserved to be told off.  So I would a lot of that in there.
Speaker 1: How long did you write that strip?
Speaker 2: About a year.  Right--I did it right up to the, to my discharge.  I, I was with the 477th when the war [World War II] ended and we were--had to wait and wait and wait to be, to come home.  I think it was about six months after the war was ended that I finally got a chance to come home.
Speaker 1: Why did it take so long?
Speaker 2: Well it, mustering out, slow, slow process, yeah.  Those who came in first, went out first, you know.
Story_ID: 14548
Speaker 1: Okay, and then after you left the service, you came back to Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came back to Oakland.  I was--knew I was gonna be a cartoonist.  Now, I'm really sure I was gonna be a cartoonist.  But it didn't happen.  It didn't happen.  I was, as I told you, a lot of--just didn't happen for me.  So I went to work at--first I went to work in the Oakland Army Base and then Alameda Air Station, a messenger over there.  Oh, no, I went to work at (unclear) was in military insurance, and then, and then I finally went to work for the Oakland Police Department, (unclear) Police Corps.  And I stayed there fifteen years.  I enjoyed that work, but I was still, I was freelancing cartoons all the time.  I was constantly drawing and building up my--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Portfolio.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah--well, not portfolio, customers, customers, you know.  I was doing house organs and trade journals, you know, the monthly magazines.  Trade journals about hardware stores and I did (unclear) dental, for the dental, and the law journals, all over, always doing cartoons and building, building up on--and then I got, I joined Northern California Cartoonist and Gag Writers Association in San Francisco [California].  That's where I started meeting, meeting with other cartoonists.  And then we'd compare notes and compare--we talked about and, you know, you'd be able to learn, learn how to--what it's all about.  I mean how to--there's usually a method to--contributing stuff to a, to an editor.  There's a method, what to do about a letter and how to, how to keep records.  All these things we have to learn, and we have to--and nobody tells you that, well, (unclear) when you're with other cartoonists and you just pick up the stuff, how they do it, or what works best for you.  And techniques, supplies, and you know, what kind of pens they use, all that.  And although all those things are very important to, to a cartoonist.  If you don't know anything, you--and that's where I met Charles [M.] Schultz.  He was, he was a speaker there once, and I like, I've all--I've always liked his cartoons.  I was, I was always a fan of his cartoons.  And then when he, he became--I became a fan of him, you know.  I liked him.  We got along very well.  And then that's where I got the idea.  I said, well, what happened first was, cartoonist being what they are, they think the--we, we cartoonist, we think we're funny, even when we're not funny, you know.  When the guys (unclear) , Peanuts, and the guy said, I don't want to start a cartoon and call it, the Cashew Nut, and what is that cartoon they used to call, what is that nut, they used to call nigger toes, you remember that one?  You don't.  Well, there was a--brazil nut, brazil nut, yeah, they used to call that nigger toes.  And that was, I know the guys were talking about different cartoons, and I said, oh, boy, what am I gonna do if they--somebody says that?  And we, and after I thought about it, it became funny while I was thinking about it; I started to laughing.  And then from that, I got the idea, you know, I'm gonna do a black Peanuts and sell it to black newspapers.  You know, I always wanted to become a, I always wanted--that's the first thing I wanted to do.  As a kid selling the, the black newspaper, I wanted to be part of that.  I wanted to be part of that scene.  So I thought about, that's what I'm gonna do.  So I did it, and I sold it to 'Chicago Defender', and now, in the meantime, while I'm do-selling it, prior to all this, I'm complaining to cartoonists that I know that you're not drawing the world.  You're not drawing--all cartoons had, they were just white, white, white characters, white, no matter what you're doing, it had to be white.  And I said, you know, why don't you integrate your strips.  Now, here I'm talking to these people, telling them they aren't write the strip, and here I am with an all-black strip, see.  So if they're wrong, then I'm wrong too, right?  So I said, well, if I'm asking them to integrate their strip, I ought to integrate my own.  So I started to--that's what I did.  Smartest thing I ever did in my life.
Speaker 1: When did this happen?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five, okay--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, before that, before 1965 because, probably '63 [1963] or '64 [1964] I signed a syndicate contract in 1965.  Then they saw, then they saw the strip--well, they didn't actually see the strip.  A guy told me--it's really weird the way it happened.  A guy told me at, at the 'Defender', he says, you're gonna go out and try to sell it to--the strip to metropolitan daily newspapers.  Well, I didn't think that was a good idea.  I didn't think they were gonna do it.  It was--would consider it, but he kept insisting, insisting, so then when the 'Berkeley Gazette' [Berkely, California] was going.  So I said to keep this guy happy, I'm gonna go do it.  So I went to the 'Berkeley Gazette' and showed it to them.  And he said, well, "I'm not sure.  I'll have to get back to you", and he gave me my stuff back, just as I thought he would.  In the meantime, Lou Little, who had his syndicate, was meeting with, in Washington, D.C. at the Washington Post, and the editor there, a guy who became famous, and I can't call his name, said, what this, what we really need here is a--what we really is a integrated comic strip.  And he, he remembered it.  The next stop Louie makes, makes is to Berkeley, and he's talking to the guy I had, I had just seen, and he happens to mention that.  And the guy says, well, I just saw one.  He said, oh, yeah, where?  He said, well, you know, I was also drawing for the local 'Post Newspaper'--he said, well, I know he draws cartoons for the 'Post'.  So he goes down to the 'Post' so he can find out who I am and where I am and gets my phone number.  And he calls me.  And he said, "I'm Lou Little, and I'm a cartoonist syndicate, and I'm calling you from the Post office.  Now, he said, 'Post' office, meaning the [Washington Post] newspaper office.  I heard post office, meaning where you deposit mail.  So I'm wondering what kind of guy can this be?  (laughter)  Who can this guy be calling me from the post office?  So I told him I was busy, and I would--actually, I was in bed cause he called in the morning.  And so he said, ""I'll wait.  So he waited till about 1:00 o'clock when I told him he could see me.  And he came over, signed me to a contract, right then and there.
Speaker 1: And what was the cartoon that you--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The Binky Fellows, it was Dinky Fellows on the--I was doing for the 'The Chicago Defender'.
Story_ID: 14549
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about 'Dinky Fellows'?  What were some of the characters--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I was using Nipper, who was me, as you know.  And--I have to tell you how I found out that was me.  I was, you know, I was talking to my mother, and she was trying to tell something about one of the characters.  And she was, her eyes were, were failing her.  She was about ninety years and she was, she used to use a little to magnify the, for the pictures.  And she was trying to tell me what she, what, the character she was talking about.  And she said, "You know the one, the one that's you."  And I, and suddenly I did know who she was talking about.  And that was the first I knew that, that that was the guy.  But I got to tell you, from that point on, that that kid got a lot more, got a lot smarter, and got the best gags and everything.  You know, he was (laughter), he was running the show.  And, and Sybil, Sybil Wrights, spelled W-R-I-G-H-T, but Sybil Wrights from the, takeoff from the civil rights days. That was, that image of my, my late wife [Leatha]; Randy, my son; Diz, is my alter ego.  He is not me, he's what I'd like to be sometimes.  Mikki, Mikki was born, Mikki was born the day my granddaughter was born--the very, the very night she born because my son called and said she was born. And I said "What's her name?"  "Michelle," I said, "you'll probably call her Mikki."  And I said, I'll spell it the way Nikki Giovanni spells her name.  So that's how she was born.  And Alfred was a friend of mine in elementary school, junior, junior high school and high school.  We were very good friends all that period.  And I saw him, he worked--I saw him out the window one day.  He was working on this street, you know,  PG&E or one of those.  And it's incredible, you know, but it changed a lot.  (laughter) We stayed friends a little while, but we drifted off cause you're not the same people any more, you know.  That's too bad.
Story_ID: 14550
Speaker 1: What was the first strip that you sold?
Speaker 2: Well, first panel.
Speaker 1: First panel.
Speaker 2: (Laughter), that was, that was, I was a baker's helper, it was about, you know, bakers.  And, and the drawing was this baker had finished, finished his wedding cake and the pictures of the bride and groom are on the wedding cake, and standing behind them on the cake was Pop, with a shotgun.  So (laughter), that was, that was--and the second one was--.
Speaker 1: And how much money did you make?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what everybody asks.  Everybody asks when they saw the, saw that--when they saw the cartoon.  What did would get for that?  Well, that's not important, that's not important.  I got $5 for that.  And my next one was, that second one was 'Charlie Jones Laugh Book', which I got $20 for it.  And two people in a public swimming pool, and the guy saying to him go ahead, everybody else does.  So he was (laughter), yeah, I thought it was pretty funny too (laughter), yeah, without being, you know--it's risqu without being risqu, yeah.  And that's what 'Charlie Jones Laugh Book' was all about.  And I sold one to 'Playboy' too, yeah, that was--yeah, I don't want to talk about that one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, what about 'Better Homes and Gardens'?
Speaker 2: Yes, how did you--yeah, yeah, that one, that was almost a mistake.  I, I sent them a, I sent them--you know, you, you record all your stuff, and I sent them a cartoon.  Then when they told me what cartoon they bought, and I looked in my--I said, this can't be right.  This is motoring, about automobiles, repairing automo--there're certain cartoons you send for certain magazines.  Well, it was right because it just happened, it just fit a certain article that they were doing about repairing automobiles, home repair.  And it just fit right into that--so that, that helps.
Story_ID: 14551
Speaker 1: Did you have any formal training in art, did you take any art lessons or drawings?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I just, I read a lot, I--you read, you know, people start writing about the business and writing about what they do.  I studied and tried, and, and one of the things I used to do is, and I did this really early on, I would see--and we used to have sports cartoons.  And I used to see--I didn't know how, how, what they were doing, and they would--how they would reach this, so I'd call them and say, you know, I don't know what you're doing.  I don't know how.  So maybe they'd invite me down, show me how--yeah, people--if you will ask, everybody will, will--people, people call me and ask me things, and if you can help them, why not?  I mean what's the big secret, you know.  And the only way you're gonna find out is with somebody telling you.  People don't know how to--people are surprised to see how big the cartoon is (laughter), you know.  And they don't think, they were thinking in their mind, you can shrink the cartoon down.  But people don't know that.  They have no idea how these things work.  Oh, I didn't tell you, I won, won--talking about my, my association with Charles Schultz, I, I won, yeah, you saw that, huh?  It's Snoopy, the 'Snoopy Award'.  You also see how I called I, I (laughter)--that was all white.  There was a fire here, and I told, what's--Charles [Schultz], we call him Sparky.  And he died (laughter) when I told him that Snoopy is a brother now (laughter).  I tried to clean him, but I can't.
Speaker 1: He's smoked--got smoke on him.
Speaker 2: --so I'm pretty proud of that one too.
Story_ID: 14552
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your trip to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, that was, that was, it was fun.  It was fun because I was with Phil King, who is now my best friend in the business.  He made the presentation that, that--when I won that award.  And Jack Tippett, who is no longer with us, God, I can't think of them--you got the list of those.
Speaker 1: I know there's six, there were six of you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Six cartoonists.
Speaker 2: And when we first got there, when we first (unclear) Phil King had come in from Arizona and a person, a Native American had heard about where he was going, and he bought him, bought a Patsey Tear for each of us, a small stone, and I became very attached to that Patsey Tear because it's supposed to bring you luck.  But I didn't know it would bring you luck, and doing the stuff that we were--the things that we were getting into, I started to (unclear) and wouldn't take a chance.  If it's good and will bring you luck, I'll try it.  So, I mean we were--anywhere we went, we would go by, by air.  And then they (unclear) by helicopter, gun ships, and we'd come flying in over the, wherever we're going, and he would pinwheel to keep people from shooting us out of the air.  Yeah, (laughter), and we, we were in a place called Bombe Tuett (ph.) where we went, called Bombe Tuett during the (unclear).  There was a big move, movement from the South, and we couldn't get out of there.  So I went to my hooch, a guy took me into my hooch, and I said, well, I'm just gonna drink here.  And he, he helped me bring the--I said, if they, if they take over, they're gonna get useless drunk, and they'll just throw me back.  So, and the last thing I heard that guy saying, he said, "I got to leave, I got to fly."  And, and when I woke up the next morning, I was still intact.  And I thought about that guy, and it really worried me that I had done this, you know.  But I walked over to the mess hall to get some breakfast, and here he is, "hey, how you doing this morning?" He was flying what they call a fat flight, you know.  These guys fly when the Americans are shooting, and they would, the fat guy would be flying in these little Piper Cubs and check out the, out the dead and count the dead and injured.  What a job, what a miserable, miserable ass (unclear) job.  But we had a lot of things happen to us on that (unclear).  We got real, real, very, very close.  Three of us were, were anti-war, and three were pro-war.  And nobody changed.  We were just, saw things that made us more anti-war, and they saw things that made them more pro-war.  It's interesting.
Speaker 1: So what was the purpose of this trip that--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: USO.  We, we were entertaining the troops.  That's when I, you know, that's when I found out I was fast because we were, we were going--I didn't I was a fast cartoonist, cause I had no way of, cause I never was around cartoonist drawing around them--so we were, we were in the hospital drawing caricatures of, of guys in the jail--in the beds.  And I'm drawing, I'm drawing, and I'm going, and I'm giving them stuff, giving them the picture, and I always add a--cause I don't draw, I don't draw a caricature the way they do because the way most people draw caricatures, it's insulting, you know.  And if you do that, if I do that with a black person, if I exaggerate the lips and the nose, you know, I'll get myself killed (laughter), you know.  So I, I do--I do a semi-illustration and then make the humor in the drawing, in the body.  I do that at schools too, and it's, it's fun because it's challenging to me, you know, to, to come up with something, you know, to match the kid, match his personality.  Well, I did the same thing in--and while I was drawing, I, I started to realize it was quiet, and those guys were standing there looking at me (laughter) cause I was going so fast.
Speaker 1: The other artists or the servicemen?
Speaker 2: No, I was drawing so--I was drawing the servicemen so fast.  I had a--I went by one guy, and they had, the priest was standing by him, and the CO was standing by a colonel, and I'm-- was walking by, and they said, aren't you gonna draw, whatever his name was.  I (unclear), and he had this, a little colored (unclear), extended beyond his chest.  And I wasn't gonna do it because obviously this guy's in deep trouble.  He said, come on draw him.  So I worked on (unclear), and I drew him.  And I remember what I drew.  I drew and I put a medal on his--I put Soul Brother Hero, and I couldn't find his name, and I went to walk away, and he grabbed me by the hand.  And he pulled me back, and he had to tell me what happened.  (Emotion), he was, he told me they had, had gone up, they'd cover the--and, yeah.  And he was telling me step-by-step what happened, and I had to stand there and listen to him, you know.  I thought I had gotten over it (unclear) it's almost twenty years.  But anyway I got beyond that, and they told me the next we were gonna have a day off.  And the guy said, why don't you go and see how he's doing.  And I said, no.  I am not going.  They said, why?  I said, if anything happened to him, you would have to send me home.  So I didn't go back, and I'm sorry I--but that was an experience.  But that was a high point.  Well, it wasn't no high point, that was--I mean that was, that's the one that touched me the most.  The part that bothered me almost as much is when we were in Danang [Vietnam] at the hospital, and they wanted to show us how wonderful this hospital was.  And they were bringing in the wounded from helicopters, and they had six operating tables on this side and six operating tables.  I've never seen an operation in my life.  And here it was twelve of them, I mean blood everywhere.  And I said, you'd better get me out of here and (unclear) (laughter).  I'm not gonna be able to take this.  And a doctor told me that--they had a little, took me to his hooch, sat me down and had a drink with me and said that, he admitted, he had never seen this much--he had been a doctor for twenty years, and he had never seen this much blood in his life either.  So he could, he could imagine what, how difficult it was for us, you know.  So we had, we had quite an experience, quite an experience.
Story_ID: 14553
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you dance?  You like to dance?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, I love to dance.
Speaker 1: You love to dance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they used to call me, my nickname in the service was 'Bugs'.  And that was because people would just pick a name by what you do.  So people called me 'Jitterbug', you know, I used to jitterbug a lot.  And it just got--from there, it went from jitterbug to Bugs.  And there are probably guys who, probably guys who've been in this area, who don't know, don't know who Bugs is, I mean would like to find out, would like to contact me.  In fact, I'm sure.  We had all kinds of nicknames.  And we (laughter), one guy was White Boy cause he was so light skinned--blue eyes.  And, of course, we had Black Boy too.  And we had Virgie, I don't know what, what that denoted.  Tree, of course, he was tall, bigger than everybody, had all kinds of names like that, Gorilla, you know, and you don't know who they are.  I mean you remember the name, you remember those nicknames because they used them all the time, and you get a, you get a picture.  I imagine it's the same with those nicknames, Bugs (unclear) they probably think of me.  I, some of the freelance cartoons I, I--in the early days I'd write Bugs just to see if there would any response.  But there never was, especially if I was doing something for a black publication like 'Ebony'.
Story_ID: 14554
Speaker 1: I was the first cartoonist.  I did the first cartoons in 'Ebony', did you know that?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When was this?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure when it was.  That was before, that was before 'Wee Pals' (unclear), before 1965.  They didn't use cartoons.  I just happened to send them something.  Well, first there was their sister publication which was Negro Digest.  Then it became Black World, and I used to draw cartoons for them.  And then I'd do some special stuff that couldn't, could only be used in Ebony, and they, and they used it.  Then they started the cartoon page.  So I'm, I'm kind of proud of that too, you know.
Story_ID: 14555
Speaker 1: You talked about, last time about some of the characters that you developed--Randy was you, and they were in 'Dinky Fellows', is that right, is that where it started?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then did they evolve into another strip?
Speaker 2: Well, no, the same strip, they changed the name (laughter), the syndicate didn't like the name 'Dinky Fellow'.  And I invited them--cause I couldn't think of any other name, and they came up with the name 'Wee Pals'.  I don't know who, who exactly did it, but I didn't want that at first, but I, I soon got used to it.  And then I heard that Charles Schultz didn't like Peanuts.  He didn't, that wasn't his name, somebody else.  He had something called Dinky in small--yeah, it's ironic, you know.  And we weren't stealing from each other, but it was two people thinking about the same thing.
Speaker 1: So, you started 'Dinky', 'Dinky Fellows' which became 'Wee Pals'--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and was it very popular at first?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  What happened, I, I--in fact, I tried to talk them out of it cause I, I personally didn't think that Metropolitan Daily Newspaper' wasn't gonna take, take what I was giving.  And it was true.  Then, and we had the Oakland Tribune, and that was mainly because I lived here.  They had the Philadelphia Bulletin--well, we had--and we had the Los Angeles Times.  We had a, we had some good papers, but we only had six.  And, and then a dramatic thing happened.  Martin--Dr. Martin Luther King was assassinated.  And suddenly, just suddenly, and a month later, we only had three papers.  And two months later, I had sixty papers, you know.  And this was, this was dramatic.  But it wasn't, it wasn't really a--I mean you, you liked getting newspapers, but it wasn't a happy occasion for me.  I mean I thought this is, this is terrible. But, and then I thought, I thought about that, and I thought what Dr. King himself had said, he--about tragedy.  He said, this nation grieves but for three days.  He actually said that, and that's true.  So I thought about that.  I said, well, maybe I'll be in these new papers three days, maybe three weeks, maybe three months, and, but as it happened, I, I'm still there.
Speaker 1: Now, that you're so well known, why do you think 'Wee Pals' is so popular?  Have people talked to you about why it's so successful?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to, I used to get a lot of mail, a lot of mail.  And I think it was because it was different, I mean because it was inclusive.  It was, it's about everybody, and it was about tolerance.  It was not, it was, it wasn't mean, it's not mean, and it's--and I think people can relate to that.  It was, it was one of a kind.  I mean I (laughter), I was the only person that had a black character in the strip, and not only did I have a black character, I had a Native American character, I had a, I had a Jewish character and Latino character, right across the board.  And I had Kate in a wheelchair which I had the fight the syndicate to get her in there.  I had, I once had a deaf kid, and the only reason I don't use that deaf kid is because I'd have to explain that she's deaf.  And I don't have that much time to explain.  And, and I also had, once had a blind kid, but they were--the syndicate had a little difficulty with that.  And I can understand that too because and blind, one of the things about a blind kid is he wears dark glasses.  Well Diz wears dark glasses too.  So it would, there would always be a confusion and so I just forget about it.
Story_ID: 14556
Speaker 1: After the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], it--the stories about, you said, inclusion and integration, and at that time, right after the, his assassination, we had the riots, and it was a lot of Black Power.  Did you get any feedback from people that might have--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I used to get, oh, yeah, I got of negative, a lot of negative letters, you know.  One letter, one guy used to write me from the Detroit area.  And he would sing his name with a capital, Mr. Whiteman, one word, Whiteman, with a capital 'w'.  But he never complained, he would never take me to task about my strip.  He would always--you know, in those days when, when you had the newspapers that always identified the suspect by race, and he would clip these things out and send them to me.  And he would never say anything about the--but he would ask me to read these things over and suggest that I--after I finish with them, send them to Ebony magazine.  It was the strangest--and he was, his, his writing was--he had lined paper, but he couldn't keep on the line.  So I never would--real worried about him.  But, but as long as he wrote the syndicate and the syndicate sent it to me, he didn't know where I was.  So, but those are the things that you, you're up against.  I had, I had--one of the first, the very first strip--that's it right up there, the very first strip with--it has, showed Nipper carrying a Confederate flag, and he, he's marching.  And Randy, who's my son, and Oliver who is my classmate are watching him.  And so as they look at this confederate flag, I always said, obviously, American history is not a subject of the kindergarten.  Well, that was the gag.  That was the--and he's wearing, as you can see, he's wearing a confederate hat.  And a reader saw this, and he wrote my syndicate and he said--that was Lou Little's syndicate at that time, he said, "No right man in his right mind would wear a confederate hat.  And I suggest that your cartoonist get to know a few black people. " Well, you know, that gives you some idea how, what their thinking was, and when they're looking at a cartoon.  So everybody at the syndicate laughed and I said, well, "Let me write him."  And I did write him.  I said, "I know two black people, my mother and my father."  And I never heard from him after that, and so I don't, I don't know how he, how he took that.
Story_ID: 14557
Speaker 1: How did you start putting the Soul Circle in?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's very interesting because when you're doing a Sunday page, all newspapers have different sizes.  So you have to develop a news, a new comic strip so you can have a drop out panel.  But anyway, it's, you're doing the strip and you have to have three panels at, that the editors can just drop it out.  Well, I couldn't do it.  I couldn't, I just couldn't master that.  So I decided to make my drop out panel a separate entity.  And then, now I got a separate entity.  I didn't know what--what am I gonna do with that?  So I would have three gags, well, this was, this would drive me nuts.  That's a lot of work.  And here I've, you're writing a gag.  You're writing six gags a week, you got a seventh one for Sunday.  Now, you're adding three more on top of that.  Well, that's, that's, it's hard work.  I said, I got to find another way to do this.  So--and then I thought about it.  And then February came along.  And February--and at that, and at that time, it was Black History Week which, which started Lincoln's birthday and concluded on March--I wanted to say (laughter), I wanted to say William Marshall but he played, he played Frederick Douglass, Frederick Douglass.  He played Frederick Douglass in the movie so I see William Douglas (unclear).  So on Frederick Douglass' birthday.  So it was, but it was a week, and I said, well, maybe I'll do some black history.  I'm an advocate of black history.  So I decided I would do black history.  And the response was so, so wonderful, I said, well, I'll keep doing it.  And then I thought about this, I said, well, how long can I do this?  I mean how long will, will black history last.  I mean I'm going--then I suddenly realized, you know, history is constantly being made, so you don't have to worry about that.  The only thing I worried about is, because I'm working on thirteen weeks in advance, if you're doing someone that's alive, that person's life may change dramatically.  In, in, in fact, I've had that happen to me.  I did, did one about a General, who shall be nameless, who I said he was, had two stars, two-star General.  And I got a letter, you know, from him.  I said, oh, he probably wants to, probably wants the original when--no, I he didn't want the original.  He wanted to tell me he had three stars (laughter).  So, I mean that's the kind of thing you run up against.  You know, you run up against--I'm, I did something about Harriet Tubman, I said Harriet Tubman was, was buried in full military honors, you know, in Ohio.  And I got a letter from state New York, a cemetery, that said she's there.  So, well, I had to go back and double check where I got this information from.  And the place I got the information from I'd sent this letter, copies of the letter on, on to that publication so that they could check it, but they never did, you know.
Story_ID: 14558
Speaker 1: You start your panels when you're doing a strip, you have to start them so far in advance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirteen weeks in advance, thirteen weeks on Sunday because, well, I had to send it away, first of all.  And then they have to check.  And then because it's Sunday, a color is involved.  So when I make a drawing, I make, I, I do the drawing in black and white.  And then I make a Xerox copy of, of the drawing itself.  And then I paint the xerox copy.  Then I take--I have a chart of the numbers, numbers of the, of the colors and then I put in these numbers so that they have this guide to follow.  So that's a lot of, that's a lot of advance.  And then, you know, when you're selling it to, to New York, which I do.  It was, you know, and there was a lot of changes that have to be made, that they have to have that time.  And then they have to mail it to the newspapers in (unclear).  So they'll need, they need all that, they need the thirteen weeks.  And I'm going six weeks on the dailies which is not quite as difficult, you know.
Speaker 1: So, could you describe the process that you go through once you get an idea--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I'm, I'm constantly writing ideas down.  I'm writing ideas down.  I don't use the idea that I'm writing down, but you got to over, overload you with ideas.  And then you work on those ideas and hone them, clarify them, shape them up.  And you think about how you gonna, how you're gonna approach that idea.  Now, when you've got the idea, and you try to get to more ideas from that one idea.  In other words, you hope, you're trying to get a series to make it--if you can get a series, you'll take care of seven days or even one day if you can, and--but usually you can't.  But, and that, that's the way the process works.  And then I get up in the morning, and I say, whatever (laughter).  And I start my work and my routine, and I set the, the stage.  And I start--I write all of, all the material down, and then I come back--in pencil, because I don't letter it myself.  I have another, I have someone, I have a guy letters for me.  He, he's always much--like he told me, most people don't know the difference in lettering, but I do.  So I--and then, especially, on the 'Soul Corner' [comic strip], he can get so much more lettering in that 'Soul Corner'.  So that means I can say that much more about, about the person.  So, then I, I, like back in the studio right now, I have, I have three soul corners, which he will, which he will letter eventually.  I, I want to show you, there's (unclear) one in particular I want to show you before we leave here today.  And then he will, he will ink it, and then get it back to me.  I'll finish drawing the characters because the only thing I've drawn is the person whose being feature.  Of course, if I don't get that right, I don't have anything.  I would rather--if I did the cartoon, then come, come do the portrait of the person and don't get it right, well, I'm in, I'm in trouble or I have to go over and paste something over it.  So I just wait until I get the, the drawing right, and he can pick his, his lettering.  Then I can put my drawing wherever, and that's--wherever there's room because in 'Soul Corner' what's being said is more important than the, than the characters and the picture of the person is more important than the cartoons.  So I just take what's left.  And that's the process.  I got a--you know, I just keep, keep--and right now, I'm in, where?  I'm in June, no--yeah, June.  So it only gets tough when, when you get close to Christmas, about a month out of Christmas.  You know, you start thinking about Christmas.  And you start doing Christmas stuff.  And then when you get all of the Christmas stuff out of the way, by the time Christmas comes, the time Christmas actually happens here, it's, it's behind me, and I'm--I don't know what everybody's celebrating about (chuckle).
Story_ID: 14559
Speaker 1: You've written books and you've illustrated books.  Could you tell us--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --some of the other things you've done?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've done, oh, I've done--I think the count is twenty-seven.  I'm not certain about--books, I've done a lot of different books on different subjects; anti-drugs.  I did one on AIDS.  And on, for the--and these, these are the unusual things I've done, and I've done one for the, for the disabled community in, in Oakland, and what's, to show them in a fun way, what's available and, and what's not, you know.  And there were some, some readers, some school readers for--and right now, I'm doing, oh, my, my book on 'Black Women Throughout History'.  In fact, I've got--I'm very close to finishing that, three pages.  In fact, they're already done in pencil, just the three pages.  Everything else is finished.  And I'm doing the 'Life of Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr]'--I'm doing it over again.  I did, I did it in a film which was underwritten by Bank of America.  And I like doing things like that.  I did a, I did--and it, because it gives you a different approach.  I did a, I did a film, an animated film on what they call 'Who You Think Should Belong to the Club' on affirmative action.  That was back in the old days for Kaiser Industry, which was a, which was a fun, fun--because you, it's, it's a whole new, it's a whole theme.  And I love tackling news themes, you know.  Like the [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] theme.  The Martin Luther King is, an artist can tell you this, but only an artist knows this, how, how difficult he is to try.  If you don't get the jaw, you don't have him.  I mean you could draw everything else perfect, and you mess up on the jaw, you hear people say, who is that? (laughter).  And you, you know, he's a very difficult person to draw, handsome man, but difficult.  And you have to be very careful and look at it.  Oh, and when I when I did the film of Dr. Martin Luther King, I was--I did a hundred and seventy drawings, in full color on the, on the life of Dr. Martin Luther King.  I'm trying to think of what I called it.  I can't think of it right now.  Well anyway, I drew it.  I, I wrote, I had, I was taking pictures--how it started, I saw Coretta Scott King with Ronald Reagan, of all people, signing--he was signing the document making Martin Luther King's birthday a national holiday.  And I say of all people, that it should be Ronald Reagan, and I, and I just had to--it was a scene that I just had to draw.  I do this a lot when people die, you know.  I, I have to draw them.  I have to do something.  I have to get involved.  And I got involved, and I drew this, and I, and then I saw the next day where she and kids--I drew them.  And I kept--then I--I was on a (tear?).  So I says, you know, I, I'm gonna make a book, you know.  I ought to do a book.  I said, I don't have enough pictures, you know, I said, so I called Ebony.  I said, give me all the pictures you have on Dr. Martin Luther King.  They said, we can't do that (laughter).  I said, give me Xeroxes,  I don't care what you give me.  So everything I got I began to, I began to draw.  However, a strange thing happened, I had a picture, a picture of Martin Luther King, coming out of--saying goodbye to people in his church, you know.  And in the foreground was this black lady, dressed up to the nines, and then I drew her, and I drew the picture.  I painted it, and, and I got through, and I looked at this picture.  And I looked at that woman, and it was my mother.  And I looked at the drawing--I had a copy, this woman didn't look anything like it.  I said, I said, I'm not sure.  I, I am not sure about this.  So I took it, and I came to, brought it, came over to my brother's house, and I showed him.  I said, "Do you see anybody there you know?"  He said, "Yeah, that's mama."  So I'm, you know, he wasn't prompted.  So I said, something's gonna happen on this film.  Something's gonna happen.
Story_ID: 14560
Speaker 1: And then the second thing happened was, I, I used, I was--everywhere I went, I was taking it with me, I mean on trips, you know, I'm going to schools.  It's Black History Month, and I went to--I had some schools in Stockton [California] and while I'm in the hotel room, I'm working on it.  And I had a friend at the University of Pacific [Stockton,California].  He said, you ought to come on, you ought to come and see, I can't think of her name.  It was a, I thought it was a singer, but the name was [Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] eldest daughter, I can't think of her name.
Speaker 2: Yolanda, Yolanda.
Speaker 1: Yolanda.  He said, you ought to come here, Yolanda is--and so I, I'm thinking, I never heard this, this singer before (laughter).  He says, well, we got a lot of food.  We're gonna have a reception.  Food, I'll be there.  So it turns out to be [Dr.] Martin Luther King's older--eldest daughter.  So and they said, and at the reception somebody said, draw her, draw her.  So I drew her, and she--and then while we were draw--we're drawing, I always talk to the person I'm drawing.  So, yeah, she--I don't know what, she said something that maybe reminded me of what I was doing.  I said, you know, I'm doing the life of your, of your dad.  She said, that's, she said, I'd like to see.  I don't know if she was being just courteous.  I said, well, I got it in the trunk of my car.  She said, well, go get it.  So I went and got it, and she looked, looked, and she looked at me, and she said, you know more about my father than I do.  And I said, that's number two.  And I was so sure, but then I had all these, all these drawings.  I said, I can't, and oh, you remember they used to have slide shows in the schools.  Well, they stopped doing that.  So I said, well, I can't do that.  So, and then I got too many pictures for a book, so we're gonna have to make a film out of it.  So I had drawn this thing for Kaiser [Permanente], so I went over there, and the guy had moved to, to Bank of America.  And I called him, I said, you know, could I come talk to you.  He said, yeah, come on over.  So I got--Hal Lawrence, who was conductor of the Oakland Symphony Orchestra [Oakland, California], who knows a lot of video stuff, and you're my director now.  We can do this.  So we went over, and we went over there, and I told him, showed what I wanted.  And he simply said, "How much do you need?"  And then, "let's go eat."  And we went to--yeah, and he said, no, he said, "I got one thing, just one thing I want you to do is to give the film to any school teacher, any school in Oakland that asks for it, very simple."  So it was (cool?), and I also gave some to Dr. King's widow [Coretta Scott King] and, and I'm still showing that film around, yeah.  So, now, I'm transposing it.  I don't know why I didn't think of that before.  I'm shortening, shortening the, the approach.  I'm just taking the high points.  But it's hard for me to, (laughter) to eliminate the--of course, right now, I'm working on the speech, the 'I Have a Dream' piece.  I'm not gonna do the final speech, which is amazing.  You know, I, I showed that film to, to--I was in St. Louis [Missouri] at a library a few years ago, and there's one point, you remember that, that, 'I've been to the mountaintop', that tears me up.  I'm, it tears me up.  So and having, the, the lights are dark, and it got to that part, and I'm, you know, looked over to the other side, you know, and there it comes, you know.  So I'm watching, and I said, boy, I'd better myself straight before the lights come on.  And the lights come on, and all these kids came in from different schools by bus, and the lights on, all of them were crying, all of them, yeah.  So I was kind of pleased, kind of pleased because they weren't, you know, didn't hold back and they--and they, they knew who he was.  A lot of kids don't know who Martin Luther King is, you know.  It's, and as frightening as that may sound, you know--.
Speaker 2: Yes, very frightening.
Story_ID: 14561
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add that I haven't mentioned or we haven't covered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can, my days as--White House Conference for Children in 1970, those were an experience in being-- Fred Rogers, 'Mr. Roger's Neighborhood', he was chairman of the media--Forum on the Media and I was the vice chair for him.  And being exposed to him taught me a lot about--it helped shape my own thinking.  I can't tell you exactly what that, what that was.  The first time in my life, I was walking with a man, holding his hand down the, down the hallway, and never thought about it 'til later.  I said, "I'm holding a man's hand, and we're walking down there, it's okay," you know.  This guy, it's kind of--I feel something wonderful about this guy.  And he was a wonderful man.  And I learned, I don't know what I learned from him, but--I mean I can't identify in words what I learned from him, but I liked him.  I think he helped, helped shape who I am, you know, helps me to look at things a little--and sometimes I'd say, I wonder how he would look at it, you know what I mean and--'cause he was so, so great about that.  He never got--I remember, I, I came to, to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to go on his show, and he wouldn't talk to me.  And he kept avoiding me, he kept avoiding me, and I said, what--'cause he did two or three shows at, at once.  And he kept avoiding me, what the hell, what's the matter with this man, you know.  And when I finally got to see him, I was walking through the door, and we were on the set, you know.  And that's what he wanted because it was so--it flowed, it was wonderful.  It was, and it was just two old friends, just rapping, you know.  And then somebody yelled about how the, how--in those days, you had the big things in your pocket, what do you call it?
Speaker 1: The batteries, the microphone?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the packet, and, with all the wires coming out of it.  And mine wasn't working, and he was so angry.  And I saw it in his face, but I didn't see it. And, and he was a pianist, a classical pianist, and he just went to the piano and he played, and he played and he played and he, and he must have played about fifteen minutes.  And then he turned and he said, "Okay, let's do it again," just like that.  I mean that, that was a, a wonderful lesson.  It was a great lesson.  I mean you find, you find what it is that will soothe you.  I mean art takes care of me, and I'm, but I was doing it before, without knowing it.  Like I said, when, when somebody dies or it's a--or somebody's really ill, I end up drawing that person, you know.  I used to tell, oh--I can't think of his name.  He used to do editorial cartoons for the Oakland Tribune.  I think he's great in death, cause, you know, he does some of his greatest work when, when he's in memorials for somebody.  And he gave, he gave me a picture, when Jesse Owens died, he gave me the picture that he, he'd--I had to have it being a--I loved Jesse Owens, I mean being a guy who liked sports, I mean track, in particular.  And being alive when Jesse Owens did what he did when, 1936 Olympics in Germany.  That was one great, I mean for black people that was incredible.  Because not only did Jesse Owens in the hundred meter and two hundred meters and the, the broad jump--the long jump, they called it broad jump then, but they also--Archie Williams from Berkeley, University of California, on the 400 meters, John Woodruff, also black, from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], won the 800 meters, and on the high jump, I mean it was all black people (laughter), but Henry called them the black, the American's black, oh, I forgot what the word is--auxiliary, auxiliary, that's what, the word he used, yeah.  So that was great, that was great.
Story_ID: 14562
Speaker 1: Is there another book you'd like to write?
Speaker 2: I'd like to write another book.  I'd like to, I'd like to, I'd like to do another television show.  You know, I didn't--when I was doing television, I didn't know the first thing about it.  I mean (laughter), it was my first, so it was over before I even learned.  I, I did about a year and before I even learned what it was about, you know.  And now I know what it's about.  Interestingly, enough, that this group of people, they call themselves, oh, boy, angel--oh, I can't think of it, a group of, a group of women in Los Angeles [California] that were in the animation industry, and they're very interested and, and they came to me.  First, I talked to, one of them talked to me about doing a voice for my show.  I wasn't doing the show anymore.  So I would--well, we became friends on the phone.  I had never met her until recently, until she decided to do this show about me, biography.  And she wants to do, she--they want to do this show, and this is one way to create more interest.  Sure, fine.  So I would like, I would like them to be successful, not only for them, but for me too.  I'd like to see, I'd like to--there're a lot of idea I'd like to incorporate in a film.  I would bring back the kids, those kids that I had to get rid of, like the blind kid, like the deaf kid and like the--and I didn't have the kid in the wheelchair when I was doing television.  That all came much later, and I--that would give me a lot of things to work with.  And there're a lot of books I want to do.  I mean I'm not, none that comes to mind, but soon as I finish--oh, yeah, I do have one book I'm doing.  I forgot all about it.  I'm doing one on black inventors and scientists.  It's amazing, you--it's amazing about the--and I think that, again, that's something that we, you know, don't know.  And for me to do it week-by-week, it's, it's not enough.  I think kids should have, have a whole book of it to read.  Now what, I don't want to do a, I don't want to go to a publisher.  I want to go to, I want to get--like I did with the film, I want to get an underwriter so we can give the book away.  That's what I would like to do, you know.  I think that's the way to go.
Story_ID: 14563
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done, that if you could do it over again, you might do it differently?  Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty lucky that way.  And I'm pretty lucky, I don't think there's--no, no.  My, my marriage was good, and my, you know--and didn't any of that, 'cause the Alzheimer's, you know, she died that way.  It was an unhappy ending.  It was kind of funny though, I mean--I know that sounds strange.  But she--some of the things she said were just so, so funny.  I used to--when I, I remember going to visit her one time, and the nurse said, you know, "Guess who's here, look who's here.  Who is it?"  And she looks at me, and she says, "I don't know,"  she says, "he comes here so seldom." (laughter).  And she was serious, she was serious.  And once I bought her--I mean once I brought her--she was in the early part of her hospitalization, they let me out.  So I took her to dinner, to, to lunch.  And she had to go to the bathroom.  I brought her to go to the bathroom.  And now, my brother, Buster, I always had a--he always had a key cause I was still, whenever I'm gone, he always checks out, on my  house.  So we came in, and we just happened to come in when he was coming out.  She was coming out of to the bathroom. And he says to her, (laughter), he says, "It's me, Leatha, it's me."  And he says, "Do you know who I am?"  And she looks at him and said, "You don't know who you are?" (laughter) I mean this, this is a person who's supposedly sick.  I mean she's sick, and she doesn't know.  And I went into the--and once I was going and she had, she was, she was losing ability to walk.  And they forget how to do these things.  And she's, with all these wheelchairs, and she's kicking the wheels.  And I said, "What are you doing?"  She said, "I think I'm gonna get a new one." (laughter).  You got to laugh, you got to, I mean what--so she, she gave me all those--I, I cling to those moments in my life, yeah.
Story_ID: 14564
Speaker 1: What are your hope or concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: What are my hopes for the African American--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, your concerns?  Do you have any concerns?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have concerns that we're going backwards.  It scares the hell out of me that we're going backwards.  And I don't want to sound political, but this, this present administration scares the hell out of me.  And, and I don't know what's wrong with [then National Security Advisor] Condoleezza Rice.  I call her the Dragon Lady.  You know who the Dragon Lady in 'Terry and the Pirates', good-looking woman, but treacherous (laughter).  So I have my troubles, I have my troubles and, and I don't mind saying so.  I don't, I don't, I don't know how to--I don't want to express that into, in my strip cause my strip is about tolerance.  And I suppose that would be intolerant (laughter), if I got on that, that--that would be very intolerant if I got to--yeah.
Speaker 1: I know you go to a lot of schools, and you work with a lot of youth groups?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about today's children?  Do you have hopes for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, when I go to school, I come away feeling better behind, than I did when I went in because they're, they're so wonderful.  I'm going to Claremont [California] this next weekend, and I'm expecting to have a good time there.  I've been going to schools for, for quite some time now.  And I, I don't know.  It's, it's--I use it.  I use it.  I think that helps me.  I use it because now I know about the language, I know what, about the slang.  I know what, what--they're helping me more than I'm helping them I think because I, I'm listening to what they're--I'm looking how they would dress.  I wouldn't dare (laughter) dress my kids the way they dress, but the way they approach, (unclear) their slang and their concerns.  You know, they're, they're more adult than I was at that, that same age.
Speaker 1: You've been working with the Girls and Boys Clubs--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I've been over twenty years.
Speaker 1: What do you do with them?
Speaker 2: Well, lately, I haven't done much at all, if anything, but right, but right now, I'm, I am doing something.  Right now, I'm doing something. They're opening a new Boys Club, and I'm gonna do some drawings for the, for the walls, some paneling.  Yeah, I, I just remembered.  I'd better get on it.  (Laughter) I just forgot all about that, yeah.  So that's helpful, yeah.
Story_ID: 14565
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, does anything stand out, any event or any experience stand out more than others?  Something you've done?
Speaker 2: You know, yeah, I think having a whole lot of fun when I first got married, you know, and when we were struggling, trying to make, trying to, making things meet.  You know, I don't know why that's, why that's so much fun. Because I think when you make, you know, you have, you enjoy it so much more.  And, of course, when I, when I won the award in San Francisco [California] when they made me feel like a rock star.  I know, I know what a rock star, people--I was hugging everybody because people--I didn't know, I knew the people.  They would come by and they would come by and they'd smile at you, but I didn't know if they knew me, and so I, I couldn't remember their names, I'd just hug 'em (laughter).  That was, that was a night that was--a night and a day because the next, the next day, they had, they had the same thing out at the [Charles M.] Schultz Museum [and Research Center] in Santa Rosa [California].  And his widow had a picture of me and Sparky, and I got one here, on the wall, had a big one on the wall saying, congratulations, inside of the, inside of the museum.  So that was--and everyone was, had, taking their picture with me, you know, underneath that picture.  That was a day too.
Story_ID: 14566
Speaker 1: What kind of values are important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess hard work is--but I never, I never looked at what I do as work.  I never said , I got to go to work.  I enjoy what I do, you know.  I have, I can hardly wait to get in there and start to, start to draw and fascinate myself.  I get a big kick out of creating stuff, you know.  And it surprises the hell out of me sometime.  And sometimes, I don't even remember what I've done.  You know, I, I do a lot of card, personal cards for people at the--it's a habit I got in that was, sometimes, I wish I would, have never had started because if you miss out people--and you send the people a card from, that you got out of the store, they're hurt (laughter).  So I'm sorry I got into that.  But people get such a kick out of that.  It's a wonderful.  I'm glad I started it.  Sometimes I wish that was, I wish that was paid (laughter).  I wish that was, I wish I could--and then it's challenging.  It's so very challenging that--oh, and what I was gonna mention was that once I've done it, I don't even remember.  Sometimes when people would be talking about it, I would have no idea what they're talking about.  I would like to say,  let me see it (laughter) so I could see what I did, what are you, just what you're talking about.  And I don't know why that is.  And once you, once I've done it (swoosh sound), it's gone.
Story_ID: 14567
Speaker 1: Was there anything that your parents taught you that you, that has stayed with you all through your life?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter), I would like for my dad to--I'm just sorry that my dad didn't--because my dad thought I was laziest kid.  I loved my dad, you know.  I always loved my dad, and he said, "You're gonna sleep your life away."  And that was only the--I would have loved for him to see--I wasn't sleeping, I was in there thinking (laughing).  I was creating ideas (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 14568
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: --That's interesting, yeah.  I want to be remembered, period.  I want them to say that he was cool while he was there.  He made a contribution.  He did something.  He helped, helped make changes.  And I think, you know, I think I did make--I think I helped make changes on the comic pages of America.  I'm sure, if I've done nothing else in my life, in my lifetime, I think I got to pat myself on the back for that.  Not that I set out to do it, but that, that was an end result of it.  And I think I, I think I changed some organizations like the National Cartoonist Society without, without being aware that I was changing it.  And I'm sure there's other things that I probably have changed, you know.  I'd like to think I've changed the thinking of educators toward, in using and learning how to use the cartoon as a tool.  I would, it was one time I used to teach at, and I wanted to invite teachers--I was teaching at Wayne [ref. to Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan?].  I had a cartoon class at Wayne.  I wanted teachers to come because I wanted teachers, I wanted to show teachers some simple ways of taking a piece of chalk and using the blackboard to get the attention of those kids, that's simply--younger kids, in a simple way, teach them--but then only a few ever tried it, cause I, I would think that (unclear) there were--see, I, when I'm leaning in drawing for kids, I don't see the kids.  I see the kid that I'm drawing, but I did see them once.  I saw them when they did a television, a television news, and I was doing it in Des Moines, Iowa.  And so I got the chance to see the kids, and they are glued to the, to what's on the, that board, not to me, not to the (unclear) but what's on that board.  So if you can transfer that, if you're teaching, I thought, wow, what a way to teach.  So I was--and that's when I got the idea to, to try to teach teachers to use the blackboard, you know.
Story_ID: 14569
Speaker 1: Is there any lesson you've learned from life that you'd like to pass on to them, any advice you have for them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't run from anything and be ready to solve, be ready to solve the problem, not run from it, you know.  And if you're, if somebody blocks you this way, go around them or go over them, under them (laughter) but get past them, you know.  And you can, just figure it out, you know.  Nobody can stop you if you won't be stopped, you know.
Story_ID: 14570
Speaker 1: That's, that's my, my mother and my, my dad in front of, in front of this house, I think, yeah.  And that's--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What year, if you remember?
Speaker 1: I'm not certain.  That would, I would, I would gather that's in the, oh, the '50's [1950s], '50's [1950s] or '40's [1940s], more like the '50's [1950s].
Story_ID: 14571
Speaker 1: That's my, my brothers in myself.  That's when I'm--that's me on the left.  So I look I'm about twelve years old.  So that would have to be in the '30's [1930s].
Story_ID: 14572
Speaker 1: Cole Elementary School [Oakland California], my kindergarten class.  Not sure where I am on that one.
Story_ID: 14573
Speaker 1: That's me in the military in the, during World War II, the Air force, Army Air Force.
Story_ID: 14574
Speaker 1: My wife myself on the lawn of this house.
Speaker 2: Were you newlyweds?
Speaker 1: Close to it.
Speaker 2: So that would have been about what year or what decade or?
Speaker 1: In the '40's [1940s], late '40's [1940s].
Story_ID: 14575
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my graduation picture, graduation from Berkeley High School [Berkeley, California].
Story_ID: 14576
Speaker 1: That's a promotion photograph, probably for a book.  I'm not sure what that was for.
Speaker 2: That's the Wee Pals.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the Wee Pals characters in the background.
Story_ID: 14577
Speaker 1: That was Morrie Turner Day or 'Wee Pals Day' at city of Oakland [California].  I think that was 1966, '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, and some children are dressed in the Wee Pals characters?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the characters, yeah.  Those were, those were made by the, by the city for--no, by the county for an exhibit, Alameda County [California] exhibit at the, at the [California] state fair.
Story_ID: 14578
Speaker 1: Dick Gregory, that's Dick Gregory.
Speaker 2: The actor, Dick Gregory.
Speaker 1: And where and when was this taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken in the '60's [1960s].
Speaker 1: And what was the occasion if you recall?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was--he was appearing at the Hungry Eye in San Francisco [California], and he just came over for a visit.  A guy asked him.  I didn't know, I didn't who--I knew who he was, I just--we had never met.  And a friend of mine was over there and said, invite him over and he came.
Story_ID: 14579
Speaker 1: That's Bill Keane.
Speaker 2: Bill Keane.
Speaker 1: Yeah, him and his wife.  That's the night I got the award.
Speaker 2: What year would that have been?
Speaker 1: That's 19--last year.
Speaker 2: 2003.
Speaker 1: '03 [2003], yeah.
Story_ID: 14580
Speaker 1: I had, see I had the book.  That was a Washington, D.C.--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: --television show.  And I had done the book on 'Happy Birthday America'.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you remember the other two people who are in the photograph?
Speaker 1: No, I sure don't.  They were people from the television.
Story_ID: 14581
Speaker 1: These are the kids that did the voices for my animated television show.  As you can see, all the kids are the same ethnic background as the kid that they're speaking for.
